 Winter Garten.
After a hasty toilet and a more hurried meal, I went out, and, too
impatient to walk, I hailed a droschky, and drove through the wide,
cheery streets of Berlin. It was a balmy June evening. The pavements
were thronged. Through the vast open fronts of the cafes one saw
agglutinated masses of people just cleft here and there by white-
jacketed waiters darting to and fro with high-poised trays of beer and
coffee. Save these and the folks in theatres all Berlin was in the
streets, taking the air. A sense of gaiety pervaded the place,
organised and recognised, as though it were as much part of a
Berliner's duty to himself, the Fatherland, and the Almighty to be gay
when the labours of the day are over as to be serious during business
hours. He goes through it with a grave face and enjoys himself
prodigiously. Your Latin when he fills the street with jest and
laughter obeys the ebullience of his temperament; your Teuton always
seems to be conscientiously obeying a book of regulations.

I soon arrived at the Winter Garten and secured a stall near the
stage. The vast building was packed with a smoking and perspiring
multitude. In shape it was like a long tunnel or a long, narrow
railway station, an impression intensified by a monotonous barrel
roof. This was, however, painted blue and decorated with myriads of
golden stars. Along one side ran a gallery where those who liked to
watch the performance and eat a six-course dinner at the same time
could do so in elaborate comfort. In the centre of the opposite side
was the stage, and below it, grouped in a semi-circle, the orchestra.
Beneath the starry roof hung long wisps of smoke clouds.

The performance had only just begun and Lola's turn was seventh on the
list. I reflected that greater deliberation in my movements would have
suited the maturity of my years, besides enabling me to eat a more
digestible dinner. I had come with the unreasoning impatience of a
boy, fully conscious that I was too early, yet desperately anxious not
to be too late. I laughed at myself indulgently and patted the boy in
me on the head. Meanwhile, I gave myself up with mild interest to the
entertainment provided. It was the same as that at any music-hall,
winter garden, or variety theatre the world over. The same brawny
gentlemen in tights made human pyramids out of themselves and played
football with the little boys and minced with their aggravating steps
down to the footlights; the same red-nosed clown tried to emulate his
dashing companion on the horizontal bars, pulling himself up, to the
eternal delight of the audience, by the seat of his baggy breeches,
and hanging his hat on the smooth steel upright; the same massive lady
with the deep chest sang sentimental ballads; the same China-man
produced warrens of rabbits and flocks of pigeons from impossible
receptacles; the same half-dozen scantily clad damsels sang the same
inane chorus in the same flat baby voices and danced the same old
dance. Mankind in the bulk is very young; it is very easily amused
and, like a child, clamours for the oft-repeated tale.

The curtain went down on the last turn before Lola's. I felt a curious
suspense, and half wished that I had not come to see the performance.
I shrank from finding her a million miles away from me, a new, remote
creature, impersonal as those who had already appeared on the stage.
Mingled with this was a fear lest she might not please this vast
audience. Failure, I felt, would be as humiliating to me as to her.
Agatha, I remembered, confessed to the same feeling with regard to
myself when I made my first speech in the House of Commons. But then I
had an incontrovertible array of facts and arguments, drawn up by an
infallible secretary and welded into cunning verbiage by myself, which
I learned off by heart. And the House, as I knew it would, had been
half asleep. I couldn't fail. But Lola had to please three thousand
wide-awake Berlin citizens, who had paid their money for
entertainment, with no other equipment than her own personality and
the tricks of a set of wretched irresponsible cats.

The orchestra struck up the act music. The curtains parted, and
revealed the brightly polished miniature gymnasium I had seen at
Anastasius's cattery; the row of pussies at the back, each on a velvet
stand, some white, some tabby, some long-furred, some short-furred,
all sitting with their forepaws doubled demurely under their chests,
wagging their tails comically, and blinking with feline indifference
at the footlights; a cage in a corner in which I descried the
ferocious wild tomcat; and, busily putting the last touches to the guy
ropes, the pupil and assistant Quast, neatly attired in a close
fitting bottle-green uniform with brass buttons. Almost immediately
Lola appeared, in a shimmering gold evening gown, and with a necklet
of barbaric gold round her neck. I had never seen her so
magnificently, so commandingly beautiful. I was conscious of a ripple
of admiration running through the huge assembly--and it was a queer
sensation, half pride, half angry jealousy. My immediate neighbors
were emphatic in their praise. Applause greeted her. She smiled
acknowledgments and, flicking the little toy whip which she carried in
her hand, she began the act. First of all, the cats jumped from their
stands, right-turned like a military line, and walked in procession
round the stage. At a halt and a signal each pussy put its front paws
on its front neighbour and the march began again. Then Lola did
something with voice and whip, and each cat dropped on its paws, and
as if by magic there appeared a space between every animal.

At a further word the last cat jumped over the one in front and over
the one in front of that and so on until, having cleared the first
cat, it leaped on to its stand where it began to lick itself placidly.
Meanwhile, the penultimate cat had begun the same evolution, and then
the ante-penultimate cat, until all the cats had cleared the front one
and had taken their positions on their stands. The last cat, left
alone, looked round, yawned in the face of the audience, and, turning
tail, regained its stand with the air of unutterable boredom. The
audience, delighted, applauded vehemently. I raised my hands as I
clapped them, trying vainly and foolishly to catch Lola's eye.

At a tap of her whip a white angora and a sleek tabby jumped from the
stands and took up their positions one at each end of a miniature
tight-rope. Lola stuck a tiny Japanese umbrella in the collar of each
and sent them forth on their perilous journey. When they met in the
middle, they spat and caterwauled and argued spitefully. The audience
shrieked. Then by a miracle the cats cleared each other and pursued
their sedate and cautious ways to their respective ends of the rope.
The next act was a team of a dozen rats drawing a tiled chariot driven
by a stolid coal-black cat with green, expressionless eyes, down an
aisle formed by the other cats who sat in solemn contemplation on
their tails. There was no doubt of Lola's success. The tricks were as
marvellous in themselves as their execution was flawless. During the
applause I noticed her eagerly scanning the sea of faces. Her eyes
seemed to be turned in my direction. I waved my handkerchief, and
instinct told me that at last she recognised the point of pink and the
flutter of white as me.

Then the stage was cleared of the gentle cats and the wire cage
containing Hephaestus was pushed forward by Quast. He showed off the
ferocious beast's quality by making it dash itself against the wires,
arch its huge back, and shoot out venomous claws. Lola commanded him
by sign to open the cage. He approached in simulated terror,
Hephaestus uttering blood-curdling howls, and every time he touched
the handle of the door Hephaestus sprang at him like a tiger with the
tomcat's hateful hiss. At last, amid the laughter of the audience (for
this was prearranged business), Quast suddenly refused to obey his
mistress any more, and went and sat on the floor in the corner of the
stage. Then Lola, with a glance of contempt at him for his poltroonery
and a glance of confidence at the audience, opened the cage door and
dragged the gigantic and malevolent brute out by the scruff of its
neck and held it up like a rabbit, as she had done in Anastasius's
cattery.

Suddenly her iron grip seemed to relax; she made one or two
ineffectual efforts to retain it and the brute dropped to the ground.
She looked at it for a second disconcerted as if she had lost her
nerve, and then, in a horrible flash, the beast sprang at her face.
She uttered piercing screams. The blood spurted from the ghastly
claws. Quick as lightning Quast leapt forward and dragged it off. Lola
clapped both hands to her eyes, and reeled and tottered to the wings,
where I saw a man's two arms receive her. The last thing I saw was
Quast kneeling on the beast on the floor mastering him by some
professional clutch. Then there rang out a sharp whistle and the
curtain went down with a run.

I rose, sick with horror, barely conscious of the gasping excitement
that prevailed around me, and blindly groped my path through the
crowded rows of folk towards the door. I had only proceeded half-way
when a sudden silence made me turn, and I saw a man addressing the
audience from the stage. Apparently it was the manager. He regretted
to have to inform the audience that Madame Papadopoulos would not be
able to conclude her most interesting performance that evening as she
had unfortunately received injuries of a very grave nature. Then he
signalled to the orchestra, who crashed into a loud and vulgar march
with clanging brass and thundering drum. It sounded so cynically and
hideously inhuman that I trampled recklessly over people in my mad
rush to the exit.

I found the stage-door, where a knot of the performers were assembled,
talking of the horrible accident. I pushed my way shiveringly through
them, and tried to rush into the building, but was checked by a burly
porter. I explained incoherently in my rusty German. I came for news
of Madame Papadopoulos. I was her /Verlobter/ I declared, with a gush
of inspiration. Whether he believed that I was her affianced I know
not, but he bade me wait, and disappeared with my card. I became at
once the object of the curiosity of the loungers. I heard them
whispering together as they pointed me out and pitying me. The cat had
torn her face away said one woman. I put my hands over my ears so as
not to hear. Presently the porter returned with a stout person in
authority, who drew me into the stage-doorkeeper's box.

"You are a friend of Frau Papadopoulos?"

"Friend!" I cried. "She is to be my wife. I am in a state of horror
and despair. Tell me what has happened."

Seeing my condition, he laid aside his official manner and became
human. It was a dreadful accident, said he. The beast had apparently
got its claws in near her eyes; but what were her exact injuries he
could not tell, as her face was all over blood and she had fainted
with the pain. The doctor was with her. He had telephoned for an
ambulance. I was to be quite certain that she would receive every
possible attention. He would give my card to the doctor. Meanwhile I
was quite at liberty to remain in the box till the ambulance came. I
thanked him.

"In the meantime," said I, "if you can let me have a word with
Fraulein Dawkins, her maid, should she be in the theatre, or Quast her
attendant, I should be grateful."

He promised and withdrew. The doorkeeper gave me a wooden chair, and
there I sat for an unconscionable time, faint and dizzy with suspense.
The chance words I had heard in the crowd, the manager's remark about
the claws, the memory of the savage spring at the beloved face made me
feel sick. Every now and then, as some doors leading to the stage
swung open, I could hear the orchestra and the laughter and applause
of the audience. Both Dawkins and Quast visited me. The former was in
a helpless state of tears and hand-wringing. As she knew no word of
German she could understand nothing that the doctors or others said.
Madame was unconscious. Her head was tightly bandaged. That was all
the definite information she had.

"Did Madame know I was in front to-night?" I asked.

"Oh, yes, sir! I think she had a letter from you. She was so pleased,
poor dear Madame. She told me that you would see the best performance
she had ever given."

Whereupon she broke down and was useless for further examination. Then
Quast came. He could not understand how the accident had occurred.
Hephaestus had never before tried to attack her. She had absolute
mastery over him, and he usually behaved with her as gently as any of
the other cats. With himself it was quite different. He was accustomed
to Hephaestus springing at him; but then he beat him hard with a great
stick until he was so sore that he could neither stand up nor lie
down.

"I have always implored Madame to carry something heavier than that
silly little whip, and now it's all over. She will never be able to
control him again. Hephaestus will have to be killed, and I will be
desolate. Ach, what a misfortune!"

He began to weep.

"Good God!" I cried; "you don't mean to say that you're sorry for the
brute?"

"One can't help being fond of him. We have been for five years
inseparable companions!"

I had no sympathy to fling away on him at that moment.

"How do you account for his spring at Madame to-night? That's all I
want to know."

"She must have been thinking of something else when she grabbed him.
For she missed her grip. Then he fell and was frightened, and she must
have lost her nerve. Hephaestus knew it, and sprang. That is always
the case when wild animals turn. All accidents happen like that."

His words filled me with a new and sickening dread.

/"She must have been thinking of something else."/ Of what else but of
my presence there? That stupid, selfish wave of the handkerchief! I
sat gnawing my hands and cursing myself.

The ambulance arrived. Men hurried past my box. I waited again in
agony of mind. At last the porter came and cleared the passage and
doorway of loungers, and I heard the tread of footsteps and gruff
directions. The manager and a man in a frock-coat and black tie, whom
I recognised as the doctor, came down the passage, followed by two
great men carrying between them a stretcher covered by a sheet on
which lay all that I loved in life. Dawkins followed, weeping, and
then came several theatre folk. I went outside and saw the stretcher
put into the ambulance-van, and then I made myself known to the
doctor.

"She has received very great injuries--chiefly the right cheek and
eye. So much so that she needs an oculist's care at once. I have
telephoned to Dr. Steinholz, of No. 4, Thiergarten, one of our ablest
oculists, to receive her now into his clinique. If you care to do so,
you are welcome to accompany me."

I drove through the gay, flaring streets of Berlin like a man in a
phantasmagoria of horror.



CHAPTER XXIV

The first time they allowed me to see her was after many days of
nerve-racking anxiety. I had indeed called at the clinique two or
three times a day for news, and I had written short letters of comfort
and received weirdly-spelt messages taken down from Lola's dictation
by a nurse with an imperfect knowledge of English. These kept the
heart in me; for the doctor's reports were invariably grave--possible
loss of sight in the injured eye and permanent disfigurement their
most hopeful prognostications. I lived, too, in a nervous agony of
remorse. For whatever happened I held myself responsible. At first
they thought her life was in danger. I passed nightmare days. Then the
alarming symptoms subsided, and it was a question of the saving of the
eye and the decent healing of the cheek torn deep by the claws of the
accursed brute. When Quast informed me of its summary execution I felt
the primitive savage arise in me, and I upbraided Quast for not having
invited me to gloat over its expiring throes. How the days passed I
know not. I wandered about the streets, looking into the windows of
the great shops, buying flowers and fruit for Lola in eccentric
quantities. Or sitting in beerhouses reading the financial pages of a
German paper held upside down. I could not return to London. Still
less could I investigate the German philanthropic methods of rescuing
fallen women. I wrote to Campion a brief account of what had happened
and besought him to set a deputy to work on the regeneration of the
Judds.

At last they brought me to where Lola lay, in a darkened room, with
her head tightly bandaged. A dark mass spread over the pillow which I
knew was her glorious hair. I could scarcely see the unbandaged half
of her face. She still suffered acute pain, and I was warned that my
visit could only be of brief duration, and that nothing but the
simplest matters could be discussed. I sat down on a chair by the left
side of the bed. Her wonderful nervous hand clung round mine as we
talked.

The first thing she said to me, in a weak voice, like the faint echo
of her deep tones, was:

"I'm going to lose all my good looks, Simon, and you won't care to
look at me any more."

She said it so simply, so tenderly, without a hint of reproach in it,
that I almost shouted out my horrible remorse; but I remembered my
injunctions and refrained. I strove to comfort her, telling her
mythical tales of surgical reassurances. She shook her head sadly.

"It was like you to stay in Berlin, Simon," she said, after a while.
"Although they wouldn't let me see you, yet I knew you were within
call. You can't conceive what a comfort it has been."

"How could I leave you, dear," said I, "with the thought of you
throbbing in my head night and day?"

"How did you find me?"

"Through Conto and Blag. I tried all other means, you may be sure. But
now I've found you I shan't let you go again."

This was not the time for elaborate explanations. She asked for none.
When one is very ill one takes the most unlikely happenings as
commonplace occurrences. It seemed enough to her that I was by her
side. We talked of her nurses, who were kind; of the skill of Dr.
Steinholz, who brought into his clinique the rigid discipline of a
man-of-war.

"He wouldn't even let me have your flowers," she said. "And even if he
had I shouldn't have been able to see them in this dark hole."

She questioned me as to my doings. I told her of my move to Barbara's
Building.

"And I'm keeping you from all that splendid work," she said weakly.
"You must go back at once, Simon. I shall get along nicely now, and I
shall be happy now that I've seen you again."

I kissed her fingers. "You have to learn a lesson, my dear, which will
do you an enormous amount of good."

"What is that?"

"The glorious duty of selfishness."

Then the minute hand of the clock marked the end of the interview, and
the nurse appeared on the click and turned me out.

After that I saw her daily; gradually our interviews lengthened, and
as she recovered strength our talks wandered from the little incidents
and interests of the sick-room to the general topics of our lives. I
told her of all that had happened to me since her flight. And I told
her that I wanted her and her only of all women.

"Why--oh, why, did you do such a foolish thing?" I asked.

"I did it for your good."

"My dear, have you ever heard the story of the tender-hearted
elephant? No? It was told in a wonderful book published years ago and
called 'The Fables of George Washington AEsop.' This is it. There was
once an elephant who accidentally trod on the mother of a brood of
newly-hatched chickens. Her tender heart filled with remorse for what
she had done, and, overflowing with pity for the fluffy orphans, she
wept bitterly, and addressed them thus: 'Poor little motherless
things, doomed to face the rough world without a parent's care, I
myself will be a mother to you.' Whereupon, gathering them under her
with maternal fondness, she sat down on the whole brood."

The unbandaged half of her face lit up with a wan smile. "Did I do
that?"

"I didn't conceive it possible that you could love me except for the
outside things."

"You might have waited and seen," said I in mild reproof.

She sighed. "You'll never understand. Do you remember my saying once
that you reminded me of an English Duke?"

"Yes."

"You made fun of me; but you must have known what I meant. You see,
Simon, you didn't seem to care a hang for me in that way--until quite
lately. You were goodness and kindness itself, and I felt that you
would stick by me as a friend through thick and thin; but I had given
up hoping for anything else. And I knew there was some one only
waiting for you, a real refined lady. So when you kissed me, I didn't
dare believe it. And I had made you kiss me. I told you so, and I was
as ashamed as if I had suddenly turned into a loose woman. And when
Miss Faversham came, I knew it would be best for you to marry her, for
all the flattering things she said to me, I knew--"

"My dear," I interrupted, "you didn't know at all. I loved you ever
since I saw you first lying like a wonderful panther in your chair at
Cadogan Gardens. You wove yourself into all my thoughts and around all
my actions. One of these days I'll show you a kind of diary I used to
keep, and you'll see how I abused you behind your back."

Her face--or the dear half of it that was visible--fell. "Oh, why?"

"For making me turn aside from the nice little smooth path to the
grave which I had marked out for myself. I regarded myself as a
genteel semi-corpse, and didn't want to be disturbed."

"And I disturbed you?"

"Until I danced with fury and called down on your dear head
maledictions which for fulness and snap would have made a mediaeval
Pope squirm with envy."

She pressed my hand. "You are making fun again. I thought you were
serious."

"I am. I'm telling you exactly what happened. Then, when I was rapidly
approaching the other world, it didn't matter. At last I died and came
to life again; but it took me a long time to come really to life. I
was like a tree in spring which has one bud which obstinately refuses
to burst into blossom. At last it did burst, and all the love that had
been working in my heart came to my lips; and, incidentally, my dear,
to yours."

This was at the early stages of her recovery, when one could only
speak of gentle things. She told me of her simple Odyssey--a period of
waiting in Paris, an engagement at Vienna and Budapest, and then
Berlin. Her agents had booked a week in Dresden, and a fortnight in
Homburg, and she would have to pay the forfeit for breach of contract.

"I'm sorry for Anastasius's sake," she said. "The poor little mite
wrote me rapturous letters when he heard I was out with the cats. He
gave me a long special message for each, which I was to whisper in its
ear."

Poor little Anastasius Papadopoulos! She showed me his letters,
written in a great round, flourishing, sanguine hand. He seemed to be
happy enough at the Maison de Sante. He had formed, he said, a school
for the cats of the establishment, for which the authorities were very
grateful, and he heralded the completion of his gigantic combinations
with regard to the discovery of the assassin of the horse Sultan. Lola
and I never spoke of him without pain; for in spite of his crazy and
bombastic oddities, he had qualities that were lovable.

"And now," said Lola, "I must tell him that Hephaestus has been killed
and the rest are again idling under the care of the faithful Quast. It
seemed a pity to kill the poor beast."

"I wish to Heaven," said I, "that he had been strangled at birth."

"You never liked him." She smiled wanly. "But he is scarcely to be
blamed. I grew unaccountably nervous and lost control. All savage
animals are like that." And, seeing that I was about to protest
vehemently, she smiled again. "Remember, I'm a lion-tamer's daughter,
and brought up from childhood to regard these things as part of the
show. There must always come a second's failure of concentration. Lots
of tamers meet their deaths sooner or later for the same reason--just
a sudden loss of magnetism. The beast gets frightened and springs."

Exactly what Quast had told me. Exactly what I myself had divined at
the sickening moment. I bowed my head and laid the back of her cool
hand against it, and groaned out my remorse. If I had not been there!
If I had not distracted her attention! She would not listen to my
self-reproach. It had nothing to do with me. She had simply missed her
grip and lost her head. She forbade me to mention the subject again.
The misery of thinking that I held myself to blame was unbearable. I
said no more, realising the acute distress of her generous soul, but
in my heart I made a deep vow of reparation.

It was, however, with no such chivalrous feelings, but out of the
simple longing to fulfil my life that I asked her definitely, for the
first time, to marry me as soon as she could get about the world
again. I put before her with what delicacy I could that if she had
foolish ideas of my being above her in station, she was above me in
worldly fortune, and thus we both had to make some sacrifices to our
pride. I said that my work was found--that our lives could be
regulated as she wished.

She listened, without saying a word, until I had finished. Then she
took my hand.

"I'm grateful," she said, "and I'm proud. And I know that I love you
beyond all things on earth. But I won't give you an answer till I'm up
and about on my feet again."

"Why?" I insisted.

"Don't ask. And don't mention the matter again. You must be good to
me, because I'm ill, and do what I say."

She smiled and fondled my hand, and cajoled a reluctant promise from
me.

Then came days in which, for no obvious reason, Lola received me with
anxious frightened diffidence, and spoke with constraint. The
cheerfulness which she had hitherto exhibited gave place to dull
depression. She urged me continually to leave Berlin, where, as she
said, I was wasting my time, and return to my work in London.

"I shall be all right, Simon, perfectly all right, and as soon as I
can travel, I'll come straight to London."

"I'm not going to let you slip through my fingers again," I would say
laughingly.

"But I promise you, I'll swear to you I'll come back! Only I can't
bear to think of you idling around a woman's sick-bed, when you have
such glorious things to do at home. That's a man's work, Simon. This
isn't."

"But it is a man's work," I would declare, "to devote himself to the
woman he loves and not to leave her helpless, a stranger in a strange
land."

"I wish you would go, Simon. I do wish you would go!" she would say
wearily. "It's the only favour I've ever asked you in my life."

Man-like, I looked within myself to find the reason for these earnest
requests. In casting off my jester's suit had I also divested myself
of the power to be a decently interesting companion? Had I become
merely a dull, tactless, egotistical bore? Was I, in simple, naked,
horrid fact, getting on an invalid's delicate nerves? I was scared of
the new picture of myself thus presented. I became self-conscious and
made particular efforts to bring a little gaiety into our talk; but
though she smiled with her lips, the cloud, whatever it was, hung
heavily on her mind, and at the first opportunity she came back to the
ceaseless argument.

In despair I took her nurse into my confidence.

"She is right," said the nurse. "You are doing her more harm than
good. You had better go away and write to her daily from London."

"But why--but why?" I clamoured. "Can't you give me any reason?"

The nurse glanced at me with a touch of feminine scorn.

"The bandages will soon be removed."

"Well?" said I.

"The sight of one eye may be gone."

"I know," said I. "She is reconciled to it. She has the courage and
resignation of a saint."

"She has also the very common and natural fears of a woman."

"For Heaven's sake," I cried, "tell me plainly what you mean."

"We don't quite know what disfigurement will result," said the nurse
bluntly. "It is certain to be very great, and the dread of your seeing
her is making her ill and retarding her recovery. So if you have any
regard for her, pack up your things and go away."

"But," I remonstrated, "I'm bound to see her sooner or later."

The nurse lost patience. "Ach! Can't you get it into your head that it
is essential it should be later, when she is strong enough to stand
the strain and has realised the worst and made her little
preparations?"

I accepted the rebuke meekly. The situation, when explained, was
comprehensible to the meanest masculine intelligence.

"I will go," said I.

When I announced this determination to Lola she breathed a deep sigh
of relief.

"I shall be so much happier," she said.

Then she raised both her arms and drew my head down until our lips
met. "Dear," she whispered, still holding me, "if I hadn't run away
from you before I should run away now; but it would be silly to do it
twice. So I'll come to London as soon as the doctor will let me. But
if you find you don't and can't possibly love me I shan't feel hurt
with you. I've had some months, I know, of your love, and that will
last me all my life; and I know that whatever happens you'll be my
very dear and devoted friend."

"I shall be your lover always!" I swore.

She shook her head and released me. A great pity welled up in my
heart, for I know now why she had forbidden me to speak of marriage,
and in some dim way I got to the depth of her woman's nature. I
realised, as far as a man can, how the sudden blasting of a woman's
beauty must revolutionise not only her own attitude towards the world,
but her conception of the world's attitude towards her. Only a few
weeks before she had gone about proudly conscious of her superb
magnificence. It was the triumphant weapon in her woman's armoury, to
use when she so chose. It had illuminated a man's journey (I knew and
felt it now) through the Valley of the Shadow. It had held his senses
captive. It had brought him to her feet. It was a charm that she could
always offer to his eyes. It was her glory and her pride to enhance it
for his delectation. Her beauty was herself. That gone, she had
nothing but a worthless soul to offer, and what woman would dream of
offering a man her soul if she had no casket in which to enshrine it?
If I had presented this other aspect of the case to Lola, she would
have cried out, with perfect sincerity:

"My soul! You get things like mine anywhere for twopence a dozen."

It was the blasting of her beauty that was the infinite matter. All
that I loved would be gone. She would have nothing left to give. The
splendour of the day had ceased, and now was coming the long, long,
dreary night, to meet which with dignity she was nerving her brave
heart.

The tears were not far from my eyes when I said again softly:

"Your lover always, dear."

"Make no promises," she said, "except one."

"And that is?"

"That you will write me often until I come home."

"Every day."

So we parted, and I returned to London and to my duties at Barbara's
Building. I wrote daily, and her dictated answers gave me knowledge of
her progress. To my immense relief, I heard that the oculist's skill
had saved her eyesight; but it could not obliterate the traces of the
cruel claws.

The days, although fuller with work and interests, appeared long until
she came. I saw but little of the outside world. Dale, my sister
Agatha, Sir Joshua Oldfield, and Campion were the only friends I met.
Dale was ingenuously sympathetic when he head of the calamity.

"What's going to happen?" he asked, after he had exhausted his
vocabulary of abuse on cats, Providence and Anastasius Papadopoulos.
"What's the poor dear going to do?"

"If I am going to have any voice in the matter," said I, "she is going
to marry me."

He wrung me by the hand enthusiastically and declared that I was the
splendidest fellow that ever lived. Then he sighed.

"I am going about like a sheep without a leader. For Heaven's sake,
come back into politics. Form a hilarious little party of your own--
anything--so long as you're back and take me with you."

"Come to Barbara's Building," said I.

But he made a wry face, and said that he did not think Maisie would
like it. I laughed and put my hand on his shoulder.

"My son, you have a leader already, and she has already tied a blue
riband round your woolly neck, and she is pulling you wherever she
wants to go. And it's all to the infinite advantage of your eternal
soul."

Whereupon he grinned and departed to the sheepfold.

At last Lola came. She begged me not to meet her at the station, but
to go round after dinner to Cadogan Gardens.

Dawkins opened the door for me and showed me into the familiar
drawing-room. The long summer day was nearing its end, and only a dim
twilight came through the open windows. Lola was standing rigid on the
hearthrug, her hand shielding the whole of the right side of her face.
With the free hand she checked my impetuous advance.

"Stop and look!" she said, and then dropped the shielding hand, and
stood before me with twitching lips and death in her eyes. I saw in a
flash the devastation that had been wrought; but, thank God, I pierced
beneath it to the anguish in her heart. The pity--the awful, poignant
pity--of it smote me. Everything that was man in me surged towards
her. What she saw in my eyes I know not; but in hers dawned a sudden
wonder. There was no recoil of shock, such as she had steeled herself
to encounter. I sprang forward and clasped her in my arms. Her
stiffened frame gradually relaxed and our lips met, and in that kiss
all fears and doubts were dissolved for ever.

Some hours later she said: "If you are blind enough to care for a
maimed thing like me, I can't help it. I shall never understand it to
my dying day," she added with a long sigh.

"And you will marry me?"

"I suppose I've got to," she replied. And with the old pantherine
twist of her body she slid from her easy-chair to the ground and
buried her face on my knees.



And that is the end of my story. We were quietly married three weeks
afterwards. Agatha, wishing to humour a maniac for whom she retained
an unreasonable affection, came to the wedding and treated Lola as
only a sweet lady could. But my doings passed her understanding. As
for Jane, my other sister, she cast me from her. People who did these
things, she maintained, must bear the consequences. I bore them
bravely. It is only now that my name is beginning to be noised abroad
as that of one who speaks with some knowledge on certain social
questions that Jane holds out the olive branch of fraternal peace.
After a brief honeymoon Lola insisted on joining me in Barbara's
Building. A set of rooms next to mine was vacant, and Campion, who
welcomed a new worker, had the two sets thrown into what house-agents
term a commodious flat. She is now Lady Superior of the Institution.
The title is Campion's, and for some odd feminine reason Lola is
delighted with it.

Yes, this is the end of the story which I began (it seems in a
previous incarnation) at Murglebed-on-Sea.

The maiming of Lola's beauty has been the last jest which the Arch-
Jester has practised on me. I fancy he thought that this final scurvy
trick would wipe Simon de Gex for ever out of the ranks of his rivals.
But I flatter myself that, having snapped my fingers in his face, the
last laugh has been on my side. He has withdrawn discomfited from the
conflict and left me master of the ground. Love conquers all, even the
Arch-Jester.

There are some who still point to me as one who has deliberately
ruined a brilliant career, who pity me as one who has gone under, who
speak with shrugged shoulders and uplifted eyebrows at my unfortunate
marriage and my obscure and cranky occupation. The world, they say,
was at my feet. So it was. But what the pitying critics lack the grace
to understand is that better than to have it under one's feet is to
have it, or that of it which matters, at one's heart.

I sit in this tiny hotel by the sea and reflect that it is over three
years since I awoke from death and assumed a new avatar. And since my
marriage, what have been the happenings?

Dale has just been elected for the Fensham Division of Westmoreland,
and he has already begun the line of sturdy young Kynnersleys, of
which I had eumoirous dreams long ago. Quast and the cats have passed
into alien hands. Anastasius Papadopoulos is dead. He died three
months ago of angina pectoris, and Lola was with him at the end.
Eleanor Faversham has married a Colonial bishop. Campion, too, has
married--and married the last woman in the world to whom one would
have thought of mating him--a frivolous butterfly of a creature who
drags him to dinner-parties and Ascot and suppers at the Savoy, and
holds Barbara's Building and all it connotes in vixenish detestation.
He roars out the agony of his philanthropic spirit to Lola and myself,
who administer consolation and the cold mutton that he loves. The
story of his marriage is a little lunatic drama all to itself and I
will tell it some day. But now I can only rough-sketch the facts. He
works when he can at the beloved creation of his life and fortune; but
the brain that would be inadequate to the self-protecting needs of a
ferret controls the action of this masterful enthusiast, and his one
awful despair in life is to touch a heart that might beat in the bosom
of a vicious and calculating haddock. I only mention this to explain
how it has come to pass that Lola and I are now all-powerful in
Barbara's Building. It has become the child of our adoption and we
love it with a deep and almost fanatic affection. Before Lola my
influence and personality fade into nothingness. She is the power, the
terror, the adoration of Lambeth. If she chose she could control the
Parliamentary vote of the borough. Her great, direct, large-hearted
personality carries all before it. And with it there is something of
the uncanny. A feat of hers in the early days is by way of becoming
legendary.

A woman, on the books of the Building, was about to bring a hopeless
human fragment into a grey world. Lola went to see what aid the
Building could provide. In front of the door lounged the husband, a
hulking porter in a Bermondsey factory. Glowering at his feet lay a
vicious mongrel dog--bull-terrier, Irish-terrier, mastiff--so did Lola
with her trained eye distinguish the strains. When she asked for his
wife in travail the chivalrous gentleman took his pipe from his mouth,
spat, and after the manner of his kind referred to the disfigurement
of her face in terms impossible to transcribe. She paid no attention.

"I'm coming upstairs to see your wife."

"If you pass that door, s'welp me Gawd, I'll set the dog on yer."

She paused. He urged the dog, who bristled and growled and showed his
teeth. Lola picked the animal up, as she would have picked up a sofa
cushion, and threw him across the street. She went to where he had
fallen, ordered him to his feet, and the dog licked her hand. She came
back with a laugh.

"I'll do the same to you if you don't let me in!"

She pushed the hulking brute aside. He resisted and laid hands on her.
By some extraordinary tamer's art of which she had in vain tried to
explain to me the secret, and with no apparent effort, she glided away
from him and sent him cowering and subdued some feet beyond the lintel
of the door. The street, which was watching, went into a roar of
laughter and applause. Lola mounted the stairs and attended to the
business in hand. When she came down the man was still standing at the
threshold smoking an obfusticated pipe. He blinked at her as if she
had been a human dynamo.

"Come round to Barbara's Building at six o'clock and tell me how she
is."

He came on the stroke of six.

The fame of Lola spread through the borough, and now she can walk
feared, honoured, unmolested by night or by day through the streets of
horror and crime, which neither I nor any other man--no matter how
courageous--dare enter at certain hours without the magical protection
of a policeman.

Sunshine has come at last, both into this little backwater of the
world by the sea and into my own life, and it is time I should end
this futile record.

Yesterday as we lay on the sands, watching the waves idly lap the
shore, Lola brought herself nearer to me with a rhythmic movement as
no other creature form of woman is capable of, and looked into my
eyes. And she whispered something to me which led to an infinite
murmuring of foolish things. I put my arms round her and kissed her on
the lips and on her cheek--whether the beautiful or the maimed I knew
not--and she sank into a long, long silence. At last she said:

"What are you thinking of?"

I said, "I'm thinking that not a single human being on the face of the
earth has a sense of humour."

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"Simply this," said I, "that what has occurred billions of billions of
millions of times on the earth we are now regarding as the only thing
that ever happened."

"Well," said Lola, "so it is--for us--the only thing that ever
happened."

And the astounding woman was right.








This Etext was produced for Project Gutenberg by Lynn Hill
hill_lynn@hotmail.com

Dedicated to Miriam Kilmer, who generously
loaned the book to be produced for PG.





THE ESKIMO TWINS

by Lucy Fitch Perkins




INTRODUCTION - THE ESKIMO TWINS

I.    THE TWINS GO COASTING

II.   KOOLEE DIVIDES THE MEAT

III.  THE TWINS GO FISHING

IV.   THE SNOW HOUSE

V.    THE FEAST

VI.   THE REINDEER HUNT

VII.  WHAT HAPPENED WHEN MENIE AND KOKO WENT HUNTING BY THEMSELVES

VIII. THE WOMAN-BOATS

IX.   THE VOYAGE

X.    THE SUMMER DAY

SUGGESTIONS TO TEACHERS




THE ESKIMO TWINS


This is the true story of Menie and Monnie and their two little
dogs, Nip and Tup.

Menie and Monnie are twins, and they live far away in the North,
near the very edge.

They are five years old.

Menie is the boy, and Monnie is the girl. But you cannot tell
which is Menie and which is Monnie, - not even if you look ever
so hard at their pictures!

That is because they dress alike.

When they are a little way off even their own mother can't always
tell. And if she can't, who can?

Sometimes the twins almost get mixed up about it themselves. And
then it is very hard to know which is Nip and which is Tup,
because the little dogs are twins too.

Nobody was surprised that the little dogs were twins, because
dogs often are.

But everybody in the whole village where Menie
and Monnie live was simply astonished to see twin
babies!

They had never known of any before in their whole lives.

Old Akla, the Angakok, or Medicine Man of the village, shook his
head when he heard about them. He said, "Such a thing never
happened here before. Seals and human beings never have twins!
There's magic in this."

The name of the twins' father was Kesshoo. If you say it fast it
sounds just like a sneeze.

Their mother's name was Koolee. Kesshoo and Koolee, and Menie and
Monnie, and Nip and Tup, all live together in the cold Arctic
winter in a little stone hut, called an "igloo."

In the summer they live in a tent, which they call a "tupik." The
winters are very long and cold, and what do you think! They have
one night there that is four whole months long!

For four long months, while we are having Thanksgiving, and
Christmas, and even Lincoln's Birthday, the twins never once see
the sun!

But at last one day in early spring the sun comes up again out of
the sea, looks at the world for a little while, and then goes out
of sight again. Each day he stays for a longer time until after a
while he doesn't go out of sight at all!

Then there are four long months of daylight when there is never
any bedtime. Menie and Monnie just go to sleep whenever they feel
sleepy.

Although many Eskimos think twins bring bad luck, Kesshoo and
Koolee were very glad to have two babies.

They would have liked it better still if Monnie had been a boy,
too, because boys grow up to hunt and fish and help get food for
the family.

But Kesshoo was the best hunter and the best kyak man in the
whole village. So he said to Koolee, "I suppose there must be
girls in the world. It is no worse for us than for others."

So because Kesshoo was a brave fisherman and strong hunter, and
because Koolee was clever in making clothing and shoes out of the
skins of the animals which he brought home, the twins had the
very best time that little Eskimo children can have.

And that is quite a good time, as you will see if you read all
about it in this book.


I.  THE TWINS GO COASTING

THE TWINS GO COASTING

I.

One spring morning, very early, while the moon still shone and
every one else in the village was asleep, Menie and Monnie crept
out of the dark entrance of their little stone house by the sea.

The entrance to their little stone house was long and low like a
tunnel. The Twins were short and fat. But even if they were short
they could not stand up straight in the tunnel.

So they crawled out on all fours. Nip and Tup came with them. Nip
and Tup were on all fours, too, but they had run that way all
their lives, so they could go much faster than the twins. They
got out first.

Then they ran round in circles in the snow and barked at the
moon. When Menie and Monnie came out of the hole, Tup jumped up
to lick Monnie's face. He bumped her so hard that she fell right
into the snowbank by the entrance.

Monnie didn't mind a bit. She just put her two fat arms around
Tup, and they rolled over together in the snow.

Monnie had on her fur suit, with fur hood and mittens, and it was
hard to tell which was Monnie and which was Tup as they tumbled
in the snow together.

Pretty soon Monnie picked herself up and shook off the snow. Then
Tup shook himself, too. Menie was rolling over and over down the
slope in front of the little stone house. His head was between
his knees and his hands held his ankles, so he rolled just like a
ball.

Nip was running round and round him and barking with all his
might. They made strange shadows on the snow in the moonlight.

Monnie called to Menie. Menie straightened himself out at the
bottom of the slope, picked himself up and ran back to her.

"What shall we play?" said Monnie.

"Let's get Koko, and go to the Big Rock and slide downhill," said
Menie.

"All right," said Monnie. "You run and get your sled."

Menie had a little sled which his father had made for him out of
driftwood. No other boy in the village had one. Menie's father
had searched the beach for many miles to find driftwood to make
this sled.

The Eskimos have no wood but driftwood, and it is so precious
that it is hardly ever used for anything but big dog sledges or
spears, or other things which the men must have.

Most of the boys had sleds cut from blocks of ice. Menie's sled
was behind the igloo. He ran to get it, and then the twins and
the pups -all four- started for Koko's house.

Koko's house was clear at the other end of the village. But that
was not far away, for there were only five igloos in the whole
town.

First there was the igloo where the twins lived. Next was the
home of Akla, the Angakok, and his two wives. Then there were two
igloos where several families lived together. Last of all was the
one where Koko and his father and mother and baby brother lived.

Koko was six. He was the twins' best friend.


II.

The air was very still. There was not a sound anywhere except the
barking of the pups, the voices of Menie and Monnie, and the
creaking sound of the snow under their feet as they ran.

The round moon was sailing through the deep blue sky and shining
so bright it seemed almost as light as day.

There was one window in each igloo right over the tunnel
entrance, and these windows shone with a dull yellow light.

In front of the village lay the sea. It was covered with ice far
out from shore. Beyond the ice was the dark water out of which
the sun would rise by and by.

There was nothing else to be seen in all the twins' world. There
were no trees, no bushes even; nothing but the white earth, the
shadows of the rocks and the snow-covered igloos, the bright
windows, and the moon shining over all.


III.

Menie and Monnie soon reached Koko's igloo. Menie and Nip got
there first. Monnie came puffing along with Tup just a moment
after.

Then the twins dropped on their hands and knees in front of
Koko's hut, and stuck their heads into the tunnel. Nip and Tup
stuck their heads in, too.

They all four listened. There was not a sound to be heard except
loud snores! The snores came rattling through the tunnel with
such a frightful noise that the twins were almost scared.

"They sleep out loud, don't they?" whispered Monnie.

"Let's wake them up," Menie whispered back.

Then the twins began to bark. "Ki-yi, ki-yi, ki-yi, ki-yi," just
like little dogs!

Nip and Tup began to yelp, too. The snores and the yelps met in
the middle of the tunnel and the two together made such a
dreadful sound that Koko woke up at once. When he heard four
barks he knew right away that it must be the twins and the little
dogs.

So he stuck his head into the other end of the tunnel and called,
"Keep still. You'll wake the baby! I'll be there in a minute."

Very soon Koko popped out of the black hole. He was dressed in a
fur suit and mittens just like the twins.


IV.

The three children went along together toward the Big Rock.
Monnie rode on the sled, and Menie and Koko pulled it. The Big
Rock was very straight up and down on one side, and long and
slanting on the other. The twins were going to coast down the
slanting side.

They climbed to the top, and Menie had the first ride. He coasted
down on his stomach with his little reindeer-skin kamiks (shoes)
waving in the air.

Next Koko had a turn. What do you think he did? He stood straight
up on the sled with the leather cord in his hand, and slid down
that way! But then, you see, he was six.

When Monnie's turn came she wanted to go down that way, too. But
Menie said, "No. You'd fall off and bump your nose! You have
hardly any nose as it is, and you'd better save it!"

"I have as much nose as you have, anyway," said Monnie.

"Mine is bigger! I'm a boy!" said Menie.

Koko measured their noses with his finger.

"They are just exactly alike," he said.

Monnie turned hers up at Menie and said, "What did I tell you?"

Menie never said another word about noses. He just changed the
subject. He said, "Let's all slide down at once."

Koko and Menie sat down on the sled. Monnie sat on Menie. Then
they gave a few hitches to the sled and off they went.

Whiz! How they flew!

The pups came running after them. In some places where it was
very slippery the pups coasted, too! But they did not mean to.
They did not like it. The sled was almost at the end of the slide
when it struck a piece of ice. It flew around sideways and
spilled all the children in the snow.

Just then Nip and Tup came sliding along behind them. They
couldn't stop, so there they all were in a heap together, with
the dogs on top!

Menie rolled over and sat up in the snow. He was holding on to
the end of his nose. "Iyi, iyi!" he howled, "I bumped my nose on
a piece of ice!"

Monnie sat up in the snow, too. She pointed her fur mitten at
Menie's nose and laughed. "Don't you know you haven't much nose?"
she said. "You ought to be more careful of it!"

Koko kicked his feet in the air and laughed at Menie, and the
little dogs barked. Menie thought he'd better laugh, too. He had
just let go of his nose to begin when all of a sudden the little
dogs stopped barking and stood very still!

Their hair stood up on their necks and they began to growl!

"Hark, the dogs see something," said Menie.

Monnie and Koko stopped laughing and listened. They could not
hear anything. They could not see anything. Still Nip and Tup
growled. The twins and Koko. were children of brave hunters, so,
although they were scared, they crept very quietly to the side of
the Big Rock and peeped over.

Just that minute there was a dreadful growl! "Woof!" It was very
loud, and very near, and down on the beach a shadow was moving!
It was the shadow of a great white BEAR!

He was looking for fish and was cross because everything was
frozen, and he could not find any on the beach.

The moment they saw him, the twins and Koko turned and ran for
home as fast as ever their short legs could go! They did not even
stop to get the precious sled. They just ran and ran.

Nip and Tup ran, too, with their ears back and their little tails
stuck straight out behind them!

If they had looked back, they would have seen the bear stand up
on his hind legs and look after them, then get down on all fours
and start toward the Big Rock on a run.

But neither the children nor the little dogs looked back! They
just ran with all their might until they reached the twins'
igloo. Then they all dived into the tunnel like frightened
rabbits.

V.

When they came up in the one little room of the igloo at the
other end of the tunnel Kesshoo and Koolee were just crawling out
of the warm fur covers of their bed. Menie and Monnie and Koko
and the little dogs all began to talk at once.

The moment the twins' father and mother heard the word -bear-
they jumped off the sleeping-bench and began to put on their
clothes.

They both wore fur trousers and long kamiks, with coats of fur,
so they looked almost as much alike in their clothes as the twins
did in theirs.

The mother always wore her hair in a topknot on top of her head,
tied with a leather thong. But now she wanted to make the bear
think she was a man, too, so she pulled it down and let it hang
about her face, just as her husband did.

In two minutes they were ready. Then the father reached for his
lance, the mother took her knife, and they all crawled out of the
tunnel.

The father went first, then the mother, then the three children
and the pups. At the opening of the tunnel the father stopped,
and looked all around to see if the bear were near.

The dogs in the village knew by this time that some strange
animal was about, and the moment Kesshoo came out into the
moonlight and started for the Big Rock, all the dogs ran, too,
howling like a pack of wolves.

Kesshoo shouted back to his wife, "There really is a bear! I see
him by the Big Rock; call the others."

So she sent Monnie into the igloo of the Angakok, and Menie and
Koko into the next huts. She herself screamed, "A bear! A bear!"
into the tunnel of Koko's hut.

The people in the houses had heard the dogs bark and were already
awake. Soon they came pouring out of their tunnels armed with
knives and lances. The women had all let down their hair, just as
the twins' mother did. Each one carried her knife.

They all ran toward the Big Rock, too. Far ahead they could see
the bear, and the dogs bounding along, and Kesshoo running with
his lance in his hand.

Then they saw the dogs spring upon the bear. The bear stood up on
his hind legs and tried to catch the dogs and crush them in his
arms. But the dogs were too nimble. The bear could not catch
them.

When Kesshoo came near, the bear gave a great roar, and started
for him. The brave Kesshoo stood still with his lance in his
hand, until the bear got quite near. Then he ran at the bear and
plunged the lance into his side. The lance pierced the bear's
heart. He groaned, fell to the ground, rolled over, and was
still.

Then how everybody ran! Koko's mother had her baby in her hood,
where Eskimo mothers always carry their babies. She could not run
so fast as the others. The Angakok was fat, so he could not keep
up, but he waddled along as fast as he could.

"Hurry, hurry," he called to his wives. "Bespeak one of his hind
legs for me."

Menie and Monnie and Koko had such short legs they could not go
very fast either, so they ran along with the Angakok, and Koko's
mother, and Nip and Tup.

When they reached the bear they found all the other people
crowded around it. Each one stuck his fingers in the bear's blood
and then sucked his fingers. This was because they wanted all
bears to know how they longed to kill them. As each one tasted
the blood he called out the part of the bear he would like to
have.

The wives of the Angakok cried, "Give a hind leg to the Angakok."

"The kidneys for Koko," cried Koko's mother when she stuck in her
finger. "That will make him a great bear-hunter when he is big."

"And I will have the skin for the twins' bed," said their mother.

Kesshoo promised each one the part he asked for. An Eskimo never
keeps the game he kills for himself alone. Every one in the
village has a share.

The bear was very large. He was so large that though all the
women pulled together they could not drag the body back to the
village. The men laughed at them, but they did not help them.

So Koolee ran back for their sledge and harnesses for the dogs.
Koko and Menie helped her catch the dogs and hitch them to the
sledge.

It took some time to catch them for the dogs did not want to
work. They all ran away, and Tooky, the leader of the team,
pretended to be sick! Tooky was the mother of Nip and Tup, and
she was a very clever dog. While Koolee and Koko and Menie were
getting the sledge and dog-team ready, the rest of the women set
to work with their queer crooked knives to take off the bear's
skin. The moon set, and the sky was red with the colors of the
dawn before this was done.

At last the meat was cut in pieces and Kesshoo and Koko's father
held the dogs while the women heaped it on the sledge. The dogs
wanted the meat. They jumped and howled and tried to get away.

When everything was ready, Koolee cracked the whip at the dogs.
Tooky ran ahead to her place as leader, the other dogs began to
pull, and the whole procession started back to the village,
leaving a great red stain on the clean white snow where the bear
had been killed.

Last of all came the twins and Koko. They had loaded the bear's
skin on Menie's sled.

"It's a woman's work to pull the meat home. We men just do the
hunting and fishing," Menie said to Koko. They had heard the men
say that.

"Yes, we found the bear," Koko answered. "Monnie can pull the
skin home."

And though Monnie had found the bear just as much as they had,
she didn't say a word. She just pulled away on the sled, and they
all reached the igloo together just as the round red sun came up
out of the sea, and threw long blue shadows far across the fields
of snow.


II.  KOOLEE DIVIDES THE MEAT

KOOLEE DIVIDES THE MEAT

I.

The first thing that was done after they got the sledge back to
the village was to feed the dogs. The dogs were very hungry; they
had smelled the fresh meat for a long time without so much as a
bite of it, and they had had nothing to eat for two whole days.
They jumped about and howled again and got their harnesses
dreadfully tangled.

Kesshoo unharnessed them and gave them some bones, and while they
were crunching them and quarreling among themselves, Koolee
crawled into the igloo and brought out a bowl. The bowl was made
of a hollowed-out stone, and it had water in it.

"This is for a charm," said Koolee. "If you each take a sip of
water from this bowl my son will always have good luck in spying
bears!"

She passed the bowl around, and each person took a sip of the
water. When Menie's turn came he took a big, big mouthful,
because he wanted to be very brave, indeed, and find a bear every
week. But he was in too much of a hurry. The water went down his
"Sunday-throat" and choked him! He coughed and strangled and his
face. grew red. Koolee thumped him on the back.

"That's a poor beginning for a great bear-hunter," she said.

Everybody laughed at Menie. Menie hated to be laughed at. He went
away and found Nip and Tup. They wouldn't laugh at him, he knew.
He thought he liked dogs better than people anyway.

Nip and Tup were trying to get their noses into the circle with
the other dogs, but the big dogs snapped at them and drove them
away, so Menie got some scraps and fed them.

Meanwhile Koolee stood by the sledge and divided the meat among
her neighbors. First she gave one of the hind legs to the wives
of the Angakok, because he always had to have the best of
everything. She gave the kidneys to Koko's mother. To each one
she gave just the part she had asked for. When each woman had
been given her share, Kesshoo took what was left and put it on
the storehouse.

The storehouse wasn't really a house at all. It was just a great
stone platform standing up on legs, like a giant's table. The
meat was placed on the top of it, so the dogs could not reach it,
no matter how high they jumped.


II.

When the rest of the meat was taken care of, Koolee took the
bear's head and carried it into the igloo.

All the people followed her. Then Koolee did a queer thing. She
placed the head on a bench, with the nose pointing toward the Big
Rock, because the bear had come from that direction. Then she
stopped up the nostrils with moss and grease. She greased the
bear's mouth, too.

"Bears like grease," she said. "And if I stop up his nose like
that bears will never be able to smell anything. Then the hunters
can get near and kill them before they know it." You see Koolee
was a great believer in signs and in magic. All the other people
were too.

She called to the twins, "Come here, Menie and Monnie."

The twins had come in with the others, but they were so short
they were out of sight in the crowd. They crawled under the
elbows of the grown people and stood beside Koolee.

"Look, children," she said to them, "your grandfather, who is
dead, sent you this bear. He wants you to send him something. In
five days the bear's spirit will go to the land where your
grandfather's spirit lives. What would you like to have the
bear's spirit take to your grandfather for a gift?"

"I'll send him the little fish that father carved for me out of
bone," said Menie. He squirmed through the crowd and got it from
a corner of his bed and brought it to his mother. She put it on
the bear's head.

Monnie gave her a leather string with a lucky stone tied to it.
Koolee put that on the bear's head too.

Then she said, "There! In five days' time the bear's spirit will
give the shadows of these things to your grandfather. Then we can
eat the head, but not until we are sure the bear's spirit has
reached the home of the Dead."

"That is well," the Angakok said to the twins, when Koolee had
finished. "Your grandfather will be pleased with your presents, I
know. Your grandfather was a just man. I knew him well. He always
paid great respect to me. Whenever he brought a bear home he
gave me not only a hind leg, but the liver as well! I should not
be surprised if he sent the bear this way, knowing how fond I am
of bear's liver."

The Angakok placed his hand on his stomach and rolled up his
eyes. "But times are not what they once were," he went on.
"People care now only for their own stomachs! They would rather
have the liver themselves than give it to the Angakok! They will
be sorry when it is too late."

He shook his head and heaved a great
sigh. Koolee looked at Kesshoo. She was
very anxious. Kesshoo went out at once
to the storehouse. He climbed to the top
and got the liver.

By this time all the people had crawled out of the igloo again,
and were ready to carry home their meat. Kesshoo ran to the
Angakok and gave him the bear's liver. The Angakok handed it to
one of his wives to carry. The other one already had the bear's
leg. He said to Kesshoo, "You are a just man, like your father. I
know the secrets of the sun, moon, and stars. You know your duty!
You shall have your reward." He looked very solemn and waddled
away toward his igloo with the two wives behind him carrying the
meat. All the rest of the people followed after him and went into
their own igloos.


III.  THE TWINS GO FISHING

THE TWINS GO FISHING

I.

When the people had all gone away, Menie and Monnie sat down on
the side of the sledge. Nip and Tup were busy burying bones in the
snow. The other dogs had eaten all they wanted to and were now
lying down asleep in the sun, with their noses on their paws.

Everything was still and cold. It was so still you could almost
hear the silence, and so bright that the twins had to squint
their eyes. In the air there was a faint smell of cooking meat.

Menie sniffed. "I'm so hungry I could eat my boots," he said.

"There are better things to eat than boots," Monnie answered.
"What would you like best of everything in the world if you could
have it?"

"A nice piece of blubber from a walrus or some reindeer tallow,"
said Menie.

"Oh, no," Monnie cried. "That isn't half as good as reindeer's
stomach, or fishes' eyes! Um-m how I love fishes' eyes! I tell
you, Menie, let's get something to eat and then go fishing,
before the sun goes down!"

"All right," said Menie. "Let's see if Mother won't give us a
piece of bear's fat! That is almost as good as blubber or fishes'
eyes."


II.

They dived into the igloo. Their mother was standing beside the
oil lamp, putting strands of dried moss into the oil. This lamp
was their only stove and their only light. It didn't look much
like our stoves. It was just a piece of soapstone, shaped
something like a clamshell. It was all lowed out so it would
hold the oil. All along the shallow side of the pan there were
little tendrils of dried moss, like threads. These were the
wicks.

Over the fire pan there was a rack, and from the rack a stone pan
hung down over the lamp flame. It was tied by leather thongs to
the rack. In the pan a piece of bear's meat was simmering. The
fire was not big enough to cook it very well, but there was a
little steam rising from it, and it made a very good smell for
hungry noses.

"We're hungry enough to eat our boots," Menie said to his mother.

"You must never eat your boots; you have but one pair!" his
mother answered. She pinched Menie's cheek and laughed at him.

Then she cut two chunks of fat from a piece of bear's meat which
lay on the bench. She gave one to each of the twins. "Eat this,
and soon you can have some cooked meat," she said. "It isn't
quite done yet."

"We don't want to wait for the cooked meat," cried Monnie. "We
want to go fishing before the sun is gone. Give us more fat and
we'll eat it outside."

"You may go fishing if your father will go with you and cut holes
for you in the ice," said her mother.

Koolee cut off two more pieces of fat. The twins took a piece in
each hand. Then their mother reached down their own little
fishing rods, which were stuck in the walls of the igloo. The
twins had bear's meat in both hands. They didn't see how they
could manage the fishing rods too.

But Menie thought of a way. "I'll show you how," he said to
Monnie. He held one chunk of meat in his teeth! In his left hand
he held the fishing rod, in his right he carried the other piece
of meat!

Monnie did exactly what Menie did, and then they crawled down
into the tunnel.


III.

The twins had some trouble getting out of the tunnel because both
their hands were full. And besides the fishing rods kept getting
between their legs. When they got outside they both took great
bites of the bear's fat.

Kesshoo was hanging the dogs' harnesses up on a tall pole, where
the dogs could not get them. The pole was eight feet long, and it
was made of the tusk of a narwhal. The harnesses were made of
walrus thongs and the dogs would eat them if they had a chance.
That was the reason Kesshoo hung them out of reach. The twins ran
to their father at once. They began to tell him that they wanted
to go fishing right away before the sun went down but their
mouths were so full they couldn't get the words out!

"Mm-m-m-m," Menie began, chewing with all his might!

Then Monnie did a shocking thing! She swallowed her meat whole,
she was in such hurry! It made a great lump going down her
throat! It almost choked her. But she shut her eyes, jerked her
head forward, and got it down!

"Will you make two holes in the ice for us to fish through?" she
said. She got the words out first! Then she took another bite of
meat.

"Have you got your lines ready, and anything for bait?" asked
their father.

By this time Menie had swallowed his mouthful too. He said, "We
can take a piece of bear's meat for bait. The lines and hooks are
ready."

Kesshoo looked at the lines. The rods were very short. They were
made of driftwood with a piece of bone bound to the end by tough
thongs.

There was a hole in the end of the bone, and through this hole
the line was threaded. The line was made of braided reindeer
thongs. On the end of the line was a hook carved out of bone.

"Your lines are all right," said Kesshoo. "Come along."

He led the way down to the beach. The twins came tumbling after
him, and I am sorry to tell you they gobbled their meat all the
way! After the twins came Nip and Tup. The ice was very thick.
Kesshoo and the twins and the pups walked out on it quite a
distance from the shore.

Kesshoo cut two round holes in the ice. One was for Menie and one
for Monnie. The holes were not big enough for them to fall into.

By this time the twins had eaten all their meat except some small
pieces which they saved for bait. They each put a piece of meat
on the hook. Then they squatted down on their heels and dropped
the hooks into the holes.

Kesshoo went back to the village, and left them there. "Don't
stay out too long," he called back to them.


IV.

The twins sat perfectly still for a long time. Nip sat beside
Menie, and Tup sat beside Monnie. It grew colder and colder. The
sun began to drop down toward the sea again. At last it rested
like a great round red wheel right on the Edge of the World!

Slowly, slowly it sank until only a little bit of the red rim
showed; then that too was gone. Great splashes of red color came
up in the sky over the place where it had been.

Still the twins sat patiently by their holes. It grew darker and
darker. The colors faded. The stars began to twinkle, but the
twins did not move. Nip and Tup ran races on the ice, and rolled
over each other and barked.

At last -all of a sudden- there was a fearful jerk on Monnie's
line! It took her by surprise. The little rod flew right out of
her hands! Monnie flung herself on her stomach on the ice and
caught the rod just as it was going down the hole! She held on
hard and pulled like everything.

"I believe I've caught a whale," she panted.

But she never let go! She got herself right side up on the ice,
somehow, and pulled and pulled on her line.

"Let me pull him in!" cried Menie. He tried to take her rod.

"Get away," screamed Monnie. "I'll pull in my own fish."

Menie danced up and down with excitement, still holding his own
rod. The pups danced and barked too. Monnie never looked at any
of them. She kept her eyes fixed on the hole and pulled.

At last she shrieked, "I've got him, I've got him!" And up
through the hole came a great big codfish!

My! how he did flop around on the ice! Nip and Tup were scared.
They ran for home at the first flop.

"Let's go home now," said Monnie. "I want to show my fine big
fish to Mother."

But Menie said, "Wait a little longer till I catch one! I'll give
you one eye out of my fish if you will."

Monnie waited. She put another piece of meat on her hook and
dropped it again into the hole. After a while she said, "You can
keep your old eye if you get it. It's so dark the fish can't see
to get themselves caught anyway. I'm cold. I'm going home."

Menie got up very slowly and pulled up his line.

As they turned toward the shore, Monnie cried out, "Look, look!
The sky is on fire!" It looked like it, truly!

Great white streamers were flashing from the Edge of the World,
clear up into the sky! They danced like flames. Sometimes they
shot long banners of blue or green fire up to the very stars.
Overhead the sky shone red as blood. The stars seemed blotted
out.

The twins had seen many wonderful things in the sky, but never
such color as this. Their eyes grew as round and big and popping
as those of Monnie's codfish, while they watched the long banners
join themselves into a great waving curtain of color that hung
clear across the heavens.

"What is it? Oh, what is it?" they gasped. They were too
astonished to move, and they were a good deal frightened, too.
They never knew the sky could act like that.

Monnie felt her black hair rise under her little fur hood. She
seized Menie's coat. "Do you suppose the world is going to be
burned up?" she said.

Just then they heard a voice calling, "Menie, Monnie, where are
you?"

"Here we are," they answered. Their teeth were chattering with
cold and fright, and they ran up the slope and flung themselves
into their mother's arms.

"Oh, Mother, what is the matter with the sky?" they gasped.

Then Koolee looked up too. The long streamers were still flinging
themselves up toward the red dome overhead.

We call this the "aurora," or "northern lights," and know that
electricity causes it, but the twins' mother couldn't know that.
She told them just what had been told her when she was a little
girl.

She said, "That is the dance of the Spirits of the Dead! Haven't
you ever seen it before?"

"Not like this," said the twins. "This is so big, and so red!"

"The sky is not often so bright," said Koolee. "Some say it is
the spirits of little children dancing and playing together in
the sky! They will not hurt you. You need not be afraid. See how
they dance in a ring all around the Edge of the World! They look
as if they were having fun."

"It goes around the Edge of the World just like the flames around
our lamp," said Menie. "Maybe it's the Giants' lamp!"

Menie and Monnie believed in Giants. So did their mother. They
thought the Giants lived in the middle of the Great White World,
where the snow never melts.

The thought of the Giants scared them all. The twins gave the
fish to their mother, and then they all three scuttled up the
snowy slope toward the bright window of their igloo just as fast
as they could go. When they got inside they found some hot bear's
meat waiting for them, and Monnie had both the eyes from her fish
to eat. But she gave one to Menie.

When they were warmed and fed, they pulled off their little fur
suits, crawled into the piles of warm skins on the sleeping
bench, and in two minutes were sound asleep.


IV.

THE SNOW HOUSE

THE SNOW HOUSE

I.

It is very hard to tell what day it is, or what hour in the day,
in a place where the days and nights are all mixed up, and where
there are no clocks.

Menie and Monnie had never seen a clock in their whole lives. If
they had they would have thought it was alive, and perhaps would
have been afraid of it.

But people everywhere in the world get sleepy, so the Eskimos
sometimes count their time by "sleeps." Instead of saying five
days ago, they say "five sleeps" ago.

The night after the bear was killed it began to snow. The wind
howled around the igloo and piled the snow over it in huge
drifts.

The dogs were buried under it and had to be dug out, all but Nip
and Tup. They stayed inside with the twins and slept in their
bed.

The twins and their father and mother were glad to stay in the
warm hut.

At last the snow stopped, the air cleared, and the twins and
Kesshoo went out. Koolee stayed in the igloo.

She sat on her sleeping bench upon a pile of soft furs. A bear's
skin was stretched up on the wall behind her. She had a cozy nest
to work in.

The lamp stood on the bench beside her. She was making a
beautiful new suit for Menie. It was made of fawn-skin as soft as
velvet, and the hood and sleeves were trimmed with white rabbit's
fur.

Her thimble was made of ivory, and her needle too. Her thread was
a fine strip of hide. There was a bunch of such thread beside
her.

Soon Kesshoo came in, bringing with him a dried fish and a piece
of bear's meat, from the storehouse.

Koolee looked up from her sewing. "Isn't it five sleeps since you
killed the bear?" she said.

Kesshoo counted on his fingers. "Yes," he said, "it is five
sleeps."

"Then it is time to eat the bear's head," said Koolee. "His
spirit is now with our fathers."

"Why not have a feast?" said Kesshoo. "There hasn't been any
fresh meat in the village since the bear was killed, and I don't
believe the rest have had anything to eat but dried fish. We have
plenty of bear's meat still."

Koolee hopped down off the bench and put some more moss into the
lamp.

"You bring in the meat," she said, "and tell the twins to go to
all the igloos and invite the people to come at sunset."

"All right," Kesshoo answered, and he went out at once to the
storehouse to get the meat.


II.

When he came out of the tunnel, Kesshoo found the twins trying to
make a snow house for the dogs. They weren't getting on very
well.

Kesshoo could make wonderful snow houses. He had made a beautiful
one when the first heavy snows of winter had come, and the family
had lived in it while Koolee finished building the stone igloo.
The twins had watched him make it. It seemed so easy they were
sure they could do it too. Kesshoo said, "If you will run to all
the igloos and tell the people to come at sunset to eat the
bear's head, I will help you build the snow house for the dogs."

Menie and Monnie couldn't run. Nobody could. The snow was too
deep. They went in every step above their knees. But they
ploughed along and gave their message at each igloo.

Everybody was very glad to come, and Koko said, "I'll come right
now and stay if you want me to."

"Come along," said the twins.

They went back to their own house, kicking the snow to make a
path. Koko went with them. The snow was just the right kind for a
snow house. It packed well and made good blocks.

While the twins were away giving the invitations, Kesshoo carried
great pieces of bear's meat into the house.

Koolee put in the cooking pan all the meat it would hold, and
kept the blaze bright in the lamp underneath to cook it.

Then Kesshoo took his long ivory knife and went out to help the
twins with the snow house, as he had promised.

"See, this is the way," he said to them.

He took an unbroken patch of snow where no one had stepped. He
made a wide sweep of his arm and marked a circle in the snow with
his knife.

The circle was just as big as he meant the house to be. Then he
cut out blocks of snow from the space inside the circle. He
placed these big blocks of snow around the circle on the line he
had marked with his knife.

When he got the first row done Menie said, "I can do that! Let me
try."

He took the knife and cut out a block. It wasn't nice and even
like his father's blocks.

"That will never do," his father said. "Your house will tumble
down unless your blocks are true."

He made the sides of the block straight by cutting off some of
the snow.

"Now all the other blocks in this row must be just like this
one," he said. Koko tried next. His block was almost right the
first time. But then, as I have told you before, Koko was six.

Monnie tried the next one. I am sorry to say hers wouldn't do at
all. It was dreadfully crooked. They took turns. Menie cut a new
block while Koko placed the last one on the snow wall.

Kesshoo had to put on the top blocks to make the roof. Neither
Koko nor Menie could do it right, though they tried and tried. It
is a very hard thing to do. When the blocks were all laid up and
the dome finished, Kesshoo said, "Now, Monnie can help pack it
with snow."

Monnie got the snow shovel. The snow shovel was made of three
flat pieces of wood sewed together with leather thongs. It had an
edge of horn sewed on with thongs, too.

Monnie threw loose snow on the snow house and spatted it down
with the back of the shovel.

While she was doing this, Menie and Koko built a tunnel entrance
for the dogs just like the big one on the stone house.

They worked so hard they were warm as toast, though it was as
cold as our coldest winter weather; and when it was all finished
Menie ran clear over it just to show how strong and well built it
was.


III.

When the snow house was all ready, Menie called the three big
dogs. Tooky was the leader, and the three dogs together were
Kesshoo's sledge team. Tooky was a hunting dog too.

When Menie called the dogs, the dogs thought they were going to
be harnessed, so they hid behind the igloo arid pretended they
didn't hear. Koko and Menie followed them, but the moment they
got near, the dogs bounded away. They went round to the front of
the igloo and ran into the tunnel.

Koolee was just turning the meat in the pan with a pointed stick.
There was a piece of bear's meat lying on the bench.

The dogs smelled the meat. They stuck their heads into the room,
and when Koolee's back was turned, Tooky stole the meat!

Just then Koolee turned around. She saw Tooky. She shrieked, "Oh,
my meat, my meat!" and whacked Tooky across the nose with the
snow stick!

But Tooky was bound to have the meat. She ran out of the tunnel
with it in her mouth, just as Menie and Koko got round to the
front of the igloo once more.

"I-yi! I-yii" they screamed, "Tooky's got the meat!" Kesshoo
caught up his dog-whip and came running from the storehouse.

The other two dogs wanted the meat too. They flew at Tooky and
snarled and fought with her to get it.

Then Koolee's head appeared in the tunnel hole! Tooky was
crouching in the snow in front of the tunnel, trying to fight off
the other two dogs and guard the meat at the same time.

She wasn't doing a thing with her tail, but she was very busy
with all the rest of her. Her tail was pointed right toward the
tunnel.

The moment she saw it Koolee seized the tail with both hands and
jerked it like everything! Tooky was so surprised she yelped. And
when she opened her mouth to yelp, of course she dropped the
meat.

Just at that instant Kesshoo's whip lash came singing about the
ears of all three dogs.

"Snap, snap," it went. They jumped to get out of the way of the
lash.

Then Koolee leaped forward and snatched the meat from under their
noses, and scuttled back with it into the tunnel before you could
say Jack Robinson.

It is dangerous to snatch meat away from hungry dogs. If Kesshoo
hadn't been slashing at them with his whip, and if Menie and Koko
hadn't been screaming at them with all their might, so the dogs
were nearly distracted, Koolee might have been badly bitten.

Just then Monnie came up with some dried fish. She threw one of
the fish over in front of the snow house.

The dogs saw it and leaped for it. Then she threw another into
the snow hut itself. They went after that. She fed them all with
dried fish until they were so full they curled up in the snow
house and went to sleep.


V.  THE FEAST

THE FEAST

The moment the sun had gone out of sight all the people in the
village came pouring out of their tunnels on their way to the
feast at Kesshoo's house.

Kesshoo's house was so small that it seemed as if all the people
could not possibly get into it.

But the Eskimos are used to crowding into very small spaces,
indeed. Sometimes a man and his wife and all his children will
live in a space about the size of a big double bed.

First the Angakok came out of his igloo, looking fatter than
ever. The Angakok always found plenty to eat somehow. Both his
wives were thin. Their faces looked like baked apples all brown
and wrinkled.

When they reached Kesshoo's house, the Angakok went into the
tunnel first.

Now I can't tell you whether he had grown fatter during the five
days, or whether the entrance had grown smaller, but this much I
know: the Angakok got stuck! He couldn't get himself into the
room no matter how much he tried! He squirmed and wriggled and
twisted, until his face was very red and he looked as if he would
burst, but there he stayed.

Other people had crawled into the tunnel after him. His two wives
were just behind. Everybody got stuck, of course, because no one
could move until the Angakok did. He was just like a cork in the
neck of a bottle.

Kesshoo and Koolee and the twins and Nip and Tup were all in the
igloo. When they saw the Angakok's face come through the hole
they thought, of course, the rest of him would come too. But it
didn't, and the Angakok was mad about it.

"Why don't they build igloos the way they used to?" he growled.
"Every year the tunnels get smaller and smaller! Am I to remain
here forever?" he went on. "Why doesn't somebody help me?"

Kesshoo and Koolee seized him under his arms. They pulled and
pulled. The two wives pushed him from behind.

"I-yi! I-yi!" screamed the Angakok. "You will scrape my skin
off!"

He kicked out behind with his feet. His wives backed hastily, to
get out of the way. That made them bump into Koko's mother who
was just behind them. Her baby was in her hood, and when she
backed, the baby's head was bumped on the roof of the tunnel.

The baby began to roar. In the tunnel it sounded like a clap of
thunder. The wives of the Angakok and Koko's mother all began to
talk at once, and with that and the baby's crying I suppose there
never was a tunnel that held so much noise. It all came into the
igloo, and it sounded quite frightful. The twins crept into the
farthest corner of the sleeping bench and watched their father
and mother and the Angakok, with their eyes almost popping out of
their heads.

Nip and Tup thought they would help a little, so they jumped off
the bench; and barked at the Angakok. You see, they didn't know
he was a great medicine man. They thought maybe he ought not to
be there at all.

Nip even snapped at the Angakok's ear!

That made the Angakok more angry than ever. He reached into the
room, seized Nip with one hand and flung him up on to the
sleeping bench. Nip lit on top of Menie. Nip was very much
surprised, and so was Menie.

Now, whether the jerk he gave in throwing Nip did it or not, I
cannot say, but at that instant Kesshoo and Koolee both gave a
great pull in front. At the same moment the two wives gave a
great push behind, and the next moment after that, there was the
Angakok, still red, and still angry, sitting on the edge of the
sleeping bench in the best place near the fire!

Then his two wives came crawling through. The Angakok looked at
them as if he thought they had made him stick in the tunnel, and
had done it on purpose, too. The wives scuttled up on to the
sleeping bench, and got into the farthest corner of it as fast as
they could.

The women and children always sat back on the bench at a feast.

When Koko's mother came in, the baby was still crying. She
climbed up on to the bed with him, and Menie and Monnie showed
him the pups and that made the baby laugh again.

As fast as they came in, the women and children packed themselves
away on the sleeping bench. The men sat along the edge of it with
their feet on the floor.


II.

The smell of food soon made everybody cheerful. When at last they
were all crowded into the room, Koolee placed the bear's head and
other pans of meat on the floor.

Then she crawled back on to the bench with the other women.

The Angakok was the first one to help himself. He reached down
and took a large chunk of meat. He held it up to his mouth and
took hold of the end with his teeth. Then he sawed off a huge
mouthful with his knife.

It looked as if he would surely cut off the end of his nose too,
but he didn't.

When the men had all helped themselves, pieces of meat were
handed out to the women and children.

Soon they were all eating as if their lives depended on it. And
now I think of it, their lives did depend on it, to be sure! I
will not speak about their table manners. In fact, they hadn't
any to speak of! They had nothing to eat with the meat -not even
salt- but it was a great feast to them for all that, and they ate
and ate until every scrap was gone.

The Angakok grew better natured every minute. By the time he had
eaten all he could hold he was really quite happy and benevolent!
He clasped his hands over his stomach and smiled on everybody.

The women chattered in their corner of the sleeping-bench, and
Koolee showed Koko's mother the new fur suit trimmed with white
rabbit's skin that she was making for Menie. And Koko's mother
said she really must make one for Koko just like it.

The twins and Koko talked about a trap to catch hares which they
meant to made as soon as the long days began again, and the baby
went to sleep on a pile of furs in the corner. Menie fed the pups
with some of his own meat, and gave them each a bone. Nip and Tup
buried their bones under the baby and then went to sleep too.


III.

After a while the Angakok turned his face to the wall, as he
always did when he meant to tell a story or sing a song. Then he
said, "Listen, my children!" He called everybody -even the grown
up people- his children! Everybody listened. They always listened
when the Angakok spoke.

The Angakok knew the secrets of the sun, moon, and stars. He had
told them so many times! The people believed it, and it may be
that the Angakok really believed it himself, though I have some
doubt about that.

"Listen, my children," said the Angakok, "and I will tell you
wonderful things.

"There is a world beneath the sea! You catch glimpses of that
world yourselves in calm summer weather, when the water is still,
and you know that I speak the truth!

"Then you can see the shadows of rocks and islands and glaciers
in the smooth water. Far below you see blue sky and white clouds.
That is the calm world in which the Spirits of the Dead live. I
have visited that underworld, many times, I have talked there
with the spirits of your ancestors."

The Angakok paused and looked around to see if every one was
paying attention. Then he went on with his story.

"Do you remember how two springs ago there were so few walruses
and seals along the coast that you nearly died for lack of food
and oil?" he said. "My children, it was I who brought the seals
and walruses back to you! Without my efforts you might all have
starved!

"I will tell you of the perils of a fearful journey which I
undertook for your sakes. Then you will see what you owe to the
skill and faithfulness of your Angakok!"

All the people looked very solemn, and nodded their heads. The
Angakok went on.

"You must know that in the depths of the underworld, far beyond
the beautiful abode of the Spirits of the Dead, lives the Old
Woman of the Sea!

"There she sits forever and forever beside a monstrous lamp.
Underneath the lamp is a great saucer to catch the oil which
drips from it.

"In that saucer there are whole flocks of sea-birds swimming
about! All the animals that live in the sea -the whales and
walruses, the codfish and the seals- swarm in the saucer of the
Old Woman of the Sea. That is where they all come from. Sometimes
the Old Woman of the Sea keeps all the creatures in the saucer.
Then there are no seal or fish or walrus along our coasts, and
there is hunger among the innuit (human beings).

"At the time of my journey she had kept all the creatures for so
long a time in her saucer that you and many others were nearly
dead for lack of food."

"It was then that I prepared myself for the perils of this
journey to the underworld. I called my Tornak, or guiding spirit,
to lead my steps. Without his Tornak an Angakok can do nothing.
The Tornak came at once in answer to my call. He took me by the
hand, and we plunged down into the water. First we passed through
the beautiful World of Spirits, where it is always summer. This
part of the way was quite pleasant, but on the farther side of
that world we came to a fearful abyss. It could be crossed only
on a large slippery wheel, as slippery as ice."

"I mounted this wheel and was whirled across the chasm. No sooner
had I reached the other side than new terrors came upon me. I had
to pass by great cauldrons of boiling oil, in which seals were
swimming about."

"A misstep would have sent me plunging into the boiling oil, and
you would have lost your Angakok forever!"

The thought of this was so dreadful that the Angakok paused and
wiped his eyes. Then he went on again with his story.

"However, with great courage I kept upon my way until at last I
saw the Old Woman's house! A deep gulf lay between us and her
dwelling, and outside it stood a great dog with bloody jaws. This
dog guards the entrance, and he sleeps only for a single moment,
once in a very great while."

"For six days I and my Tornak waited there for the dog to sleep.
At last on the seventh day he closed his eyes! Instantly the
Tornak seized my hand and drew me across the bridge which spanned
the chasm. This bridge was as narrow as a single thread."

"When we were safely across the bridge we passed the sleeping dog
and boldly entered the Old Woman's house. The Old Woman is
terrible to look upon! Her hand is the size of a large walrus,
and her teeth like the rocks along the coast!" The Angakok
dropped his voice to a whisper.

"However, when she looked upon me she trembled!" he said. "She
saw at once that I possessed great power, and was a great
Angakok. I spoke to her flattering words. Then I told her of the
hunger of my children!"

"I begged that she would send the seal and walrus and sea-birds
to our coast at once. But she had no mind to yield to my
requests. Then I stormed and threatened." The Angakok's voice
grew louder. "The walls shook with the thunder of my voice! At
last I seized her by the hair! I tipped over the saucer with my
foot! My great power prevailed against the mighty sorceress!"

"The seal and walrus swam away. The birds flew into the air and
were gone. I had conquered the Old Woman of the Sea! My children
were saved!" The Angakok was silent for a moment. Then he spoke
again in a natural voice.

"When I opened my eyes in my own igloo again," he said, "the
famine was already over. Flocks of sea-birds were flying
overhead. The sea swarmed with fish, and with walrus and seal.
Every one along the whole coast was happy. Ask yourselves -is it
not so?"

The Angakok seemed very much pleased with himself, and he looked
about, as if he expected every one else to be pleased with him
too. All the people were filled with wonder at his great power.
They began to talk among themselves.

"Yes, I remember the famine well," said Koko's father. "I was
away up the coast that season. Several died in our village for
lack of food."

Other men remembered things about other times when food had been
scarce.

"It is lucky," they said to each other, "that here we have a
great Angakok who understands all the secrets of the World and
who can save us from such dreadful things."


IV.

At last Kesshoo said, "Will you tell us, great Angakok, how you
make these wonderful journeys?"

"Do you really wish to know?" asked the Angakok. "If you do, I
will summon my guiding spirits to tell you, but they will speak
only in the darkness."

Kesshoo took the lamp at once and put it out in the tunnel. Then
he placed a thick musk-ox hide over the entrance, so that not a
single ray of light came into the room. The darkness could almost
be felt. Everybody sat very still and listened.

Soon a heavy body was heard to strike the floor with a dull thud,
and a strange voice said, "Who calls me?"

Another voice said, "You are called, mighty spirits, to tell
these children of the labors of their Angakok."

Then began all sorts of strange noises, as of different persons
speaking. All the voices sounded much like the Angakok's, and
they all said what a great medicine man the Angakok was, and how
every one in the village must be sure to do what he told them to!

At last the Angakok himself spoke, in his own voice. "I will tell
you how I make these strange journeys," he said.

"My body is now lying on the floor at your feet. Now I begin to
rise. You cannot see me. You cannot touch me. Now I am floating
about your heads, now I am touching the roof! I can go wherever I
please! Nothing can stop me! I know the secret places of the sun,
moon, and stars. I can fly through the roof and go at once to the
moon, if I wish to."

Then the voice was still. Nobody moved or spoke.

Monnie had gone to sleep in the corner of the bed, but Koko and
Menie were still awake. They had listened to every word about the
Old Woman of the Sea, and how the Angakok traveled to the moon.

You know I told you before that Koko was six. He wanted to know
all about things. So he spoke right out in the dark, when every
one else was still.

He said, "Mother, if the Angakok can go anywhere he wants to, why
couldn't he get out of the tunnel?"

Koko's mother tried to hush him up. "Sh, sh," she said, and put
her hand over his mouth. At least she thought she did, but she
made a mistake in the dark and put her hand over Menie's mouth
instead!

Menie tried to say, "I never said a word," but he could only make
queer sounds, because Koko's mother's hand was tight on his
mouth.

Of course Koko didn't know his mother was trying to keep him
still, so he said again, "Why is it, mother?"

Koko's mother heard Koko's voice speaking just as plainly as ever
though she was sure she had her hand over his mouth! She was
frightened.

"Magic! magic!" she screamed. "Bring the light! Koko is
bewitched! I have my hand over his mouth, yet you hear that he
talks as plainly as ever!"

Koko tried to say, "Your hand isn't over my mouth," and Menie
tried to say, "It's over mine!" but he could only say, "M-m-m,"
because she held on so tight!

Koko's mother was making so much noise herself that she wouldn't
have heard what either one said anyway. The baby woke up and
whimpered. Nip and Tup woke up and barked like everything.

Kesshoo got the light from the tunnel as quickly as he could, and
set it on the bench. Then every one saw what was the matter! They
all laughed -all but Menie and the Angakok. The Angakok said to
Koko's father, "You'd better look after that boy. He is
disrespectful to me. That is a bad beginning!"

Koko's father was ashamed of him. He said, "Koko is so small!"

But the Angakok said, "Koko is six. He is old enough to know
better."


V.

Everybody was so glad to see the light again that they all began
to talk at once.

Some one said to Kesshoo, "Tell us about the long journey to the
south you took once long ago."

Then everybody else listened, while Kesshoo told about how once
he had taken his dog sledge with a load of musk ox and seal skins
on it far down the coast and how at last he had come to a little
settlement where the houses were all made of wood, if they
would believe it!

He told them that in the bay before the village there was a boat
as big as the Big Rock itself. It had queer white wings, and the
wind blew on these wings and made the boat go!

Kesshoo had been out in a kyak to see it. He had even paddled all
round it. The men on the great boat had fair hair, and one of
them, the chief man of all, had bought some of Kesshoo's skins
and one of his dogs. The man was a great chief. His name was
Nansen.

This great chief had told Kesshoo that he was going to take a
sledge and go straight into the inland country where the Giants
live! He said he was going to cross the great ice! No man had
ever done that since the world began.

Kesshoo thought probably the great chief had been eaten by the
Giants, but he did not know surely, because he had never been
back there since to find out. And to be sure, if he had been
eaten by Giants, no one ever would know about it anyway.

Then Kesshoo showed them all a great knife that the white chief
had given him, in exchange for a sealskin, and two steel needles
that he had sent to Koolee. Koolee kept the needles in a little
ivory case all by themselves.

She always carried the case in her kamik, so it would not be
lost. She could do wonderful sewing with the needles. Koolee was
very proud of her sewing. No one else in the whole village could
sew so well, because they had not such good needles to do it
with. Koolee used them only for her very finest work.

At last the Angakok said, "It is time to go home." He called to
his wives. They climbed down off the bench.

That started the others. One after another they put on their
upper garments, which they had taken off in the warm igloo, said
good bye, and popped down into the tunnel. Last of all came the
Angakok's turn.

Then Kesshoo and Koolee and the Angakok's wives all began to look
very anxious. The Angakok looked a little worried himself. If he
had stuck coming in, what would happen now after he had eaten so
much!

He got down on his hands and knees, and. looked at the hole. He
had taken off his thick fur coat when he came in. Now he took off
his undercoat, and his thick fur trousers! He gave them to his
wives.

Then he stretched himself out just as long as he possibly could
and slowly hitched himself down into the tunnel, groaning all the
way.

Kesshoo and Koolee and the wives waited until his feet
disappeared, and they heard him scraping along through the
tunnel. Then they breathed a great sigh of relief, and the two
wives popped down after him.

The last Kesshoo and Koolee heard of the Angakok, was a kind of
muffled roar when a piece of ice fell from the top of the tunnel
on to his bare back.

Menie and Monnie and the pups were already sound asleep in their
corner of the bench when their father and mother fixed the lamp
for the night and crawled in among the fur robes beside them.


VI.  THE REINDEER HUNT

THE REINDEER HUNT

I.

The day after the feast it was still very cold, but there were
signs of spring in the air. When Menie went out to feed the dogs,
he saw a flock of ravens flying north, and Koko saw some sea
birds on the same day.

Two days after that, when the twins and Koko were all three
playing together on the Big Rock, they saw a huge iceberg float
lazily by.

It had broken away from a glacier, farther north, and was
drifting slowly toward the Southern Sea. It gleamed in the sun
like a great ice palace.

One morning the air was thick with fog. When Kesshoo saw the fog
he said, "This would be a great day to hunt reindeer."

"Oh, let me go with you!" cried Menie.

Monnie knew better than to ask. She knew very well she would
never be allowed to go.

Kesshoo thought a little before he answered. Then he said, "If
Koko's father will go, too, you and Koko may both go with us. You
are pretty small to go hunting, but boys cannot begin too early
to learn."

Menie was wild with joy. He rushed to Koko's house and told him
and his father what Kesshoo had said.

When he had finished, Koko's father said at once, "Tell Kesshoo
we will go."

It was not long before they were ready to start. Kesshoo had his
great bow, and arrows, and a spear. He also had his bird dart.
Koko's father had his bow and spear and dart, too. Menie had his
little bow and arrows.

Kesshoo put a harness on Tooky and tied the end of Tooky's
harness trace around Menie's waist. Koko's father had brought his
best dog, too, and Koko was fastened to the end of that dog's
harness in the same way.

Then the four hunters started on their journey - Menie and Koko
driving the dogs in front of them.

Monnie stood on the Big Rock and watched them until they were out
of sight in the fog. Nip and Tup were with her. They wanted to go
as much as Monnie did and she had hard work to keep them from
following after the hunters.


II.

Kesshoo knew very well where to look for the reindeer. He led the
way up a steep gorge where the first green moss appeared in the
spring. They all four walked quietly along for several miles.

When they got nearly to the head of the gorge, Kesshoo stopped.
He said to the boys, "You must not make any noise yourselves, and
you must not let the dogs bark. If you do there will be no
reindeer today."

The boys kept very still, indeed. The dogs were good hunting
dogs. They knew better than to bark.

They walked on a little farther. Then Kesshoo came very near the
others and spoke in a low voice. He said, "We are coming to a
spot where there are likely to be reindeer. The wind is from the
south. If we keep on in this direction, the reindeer will smell
us. We must go round in such a way that the wind will carry the
scent from them to us, not from us to them."

They turned to the right and went round to the north. They had
gone only a short distance in this direction, when they found
fresh reindeer tracks in the snow. The dogs began to sniff and
strain at their harnesses.

"They smell the game," whispered Kesshoo. "Hold on tight! Don't
let them run."

Menie and Koko held the dogs back as hard as they could. Kesshoo
and Koko's father crept forward with their bows in their hands.
The fog was so thick they could not see very far before them.

They had gone only a short distance, when out of the fog loomed
two great gray shadows. Instantly the two men dropped on their
knees and took careful aim.

The reindeer did not see them. They did not know that anything
was near until they felt the sting of the hunters' arrows. One
reindeer dropped to the earth. The other was not killed. He flung
his head in the air and galloped away, and they could hear the
thud, thud, of his hoofs long after he had disappeared in the
fog.

The moment the dogs heard the singing sound of the arrows, they
bounded forward. Koko and Menie were not strong enough to hold
them back, and they could not run fast enough to keep up with
them. So they just bumped along behind the dogs! Some of the time
they slid through the snow.

The snow was rough and hard, and it hurt a good deal to be
dragged through it as if they were sledges, but Eskimo boys are
used to bumps, and they knew if they cried they might scare the
game, so they never even whimpered.

It was lucky for them that they had not far to go. When they came
bumping along, Kesshoo and Koko's father laughed at them.

"Don't be in such a hurry," they called. "There's plenty of time!"

They unbound the traces from Menie and Koko and hitched the dogs
to the body of the reindeer. Then they all started back to the
village with Koko's father driving the dogs.

Soon the fog lifted and the sky grew clear.

Monnie was playing with her doll in the igloo, when she heard
Tooky bark. She knew it was Tooky at once. She and Koolee both
plunged into the tunnel like mice down a mouse hole. Nip and Tup
were ahead of them.

Outside they found Koko's mother and the baby. Koolee called to
her, and she called to the wives of the Angakok, who were
scraping a bear's skin in the snow.

The Angakok's wives, and Koko's mother and her baby, and Koolee,
and Monnie, and Nip and Tup all ran to meet the hunters, and you
never saw two prouder boys than Koko and Menie when they showed
the reindeer to their mothers.

The mothers were proud of their young hunters, too. Koolee said,
"Soon we shall have another man in our family."

When they were quite near the village again, they met the
Angakok. He had been trying to catch up with them and he was out
of breath from running. He looked at them sternly.

"Why didn't you call me?" he panted.

His wives looked frightened and didn't say a word. Nobody else
said anything. The Angakok glared at them all for a moment. Then
he poked the reindeer with his fingers to see if it was fat and
said to the men, "Which portion am I to have?"

"Would you like the liver?" asked Kesshoo. He remembered about
the bear's liver, you see.

But the Angakok looked offended. "Who will have the stomach?" he
said. "You know very well that the stomach is the best part of a
reindeer."

"Take the stomach, by all means, then," said Kesshoo, politely.

Koolee and Monnie looked very much disappointed. They wanted the
stomach dreadfully.

But the Angakok answered, "Since you urge me, I will take the
stomach. I had a dream last night, and in the dream I was told by
my Tornak that today I should feed upon a reindeer's stomach,
given me by one of my grateful children. When you think how I
suffered to bring food to you, I am sure you will wish to provide
me with whatever it seems best that I should have."

He stood by while Kesshoo and Koko's father skinned the reindeer
and cut it in pieces. Then he took the stomach and disappeared
into his igloo - with his face all wreathed in smiles.



VII.  WHAT HAPPENED WHEN MENIE AND KOKO WENT HUNTING BY
THEMSELVES

WHAT HAPPENED WHEN MENIE AND KOKO WENT HUNTING BY THEMSELVES

I.

It was very lucky for the twins that their father was such a
brave and skillful kyak man. You will see the reason why, when I
tell you the story of the day Menie and Koko went hunting alone
on the ice.

One April morning Kesshoo was working on his kyak to make sure
that it was in perfect order for the spring walrus hunting. Koko
and Menie watched him for a long time. Monnie was with Koolee in
the hut.

By and by Koko said to Menie, "Let's go out on the ice and hunt
for sealholes."

"All right," said Menie. "You take your bow and arrows and I'll
take my spear. Maybe we shall see some little auks."

Koko had a little bow made of deer's horns, and some bone arrows,
and Menie had a small spear which his father had made for him out
of driftwood.

"I'll tell you!" said Menie. "Let's go hunting just the way
father does! You do the shooting and I'll do the spearing! Won't
everybody be surprised to see us bring home a great load of game?
I shall give everything I get to my mother."

"I'm going to hunt birds and seal holes too," Koko answered.

Kesshoo was very busy fixing the fastening of his harpoon, and he
did not hear what they said.

The two boys went to their homes for their weapons, and then ran
out on the ice. Nobody knew where they were. Of course, Nip and
Tup went along.


II.

All the way over the ice they looked for seal holes. It takes
sharp eyes to find them, for seal holes are very small.

You see, the mother seals try to find the safest place they can
to hide their babies, and this is the way they do it:

As soon as the ice begins to freeze in the autumn, the seals gnaw
holes in it to reach the air, and they keep these holes open all
winter. It freezes so fast in that cold country that they have to
be busy almost every minute all through the winter breaking away
the ice there. They get their sleep in snatches of a minute or so
at a time, and between their naps they clear the ice from their
breathing holes.

There is usually a deep layer of snow over the ice. Each mother
seal hollows out a little igloo under the snow, around her
breathing hole, and leaves a tiny hole in the top of it, so her
baby can have plenty of fresh air and be hidden from sight at the
same time.

The mother seal leaves the baby in the snow house, and she
herself dives through the hole and swims away. Every few minutes
she comes back to breathe, and to see that her baby is safe.

It was the tiny hole in the top of the seal's snow house that
Menie and Koko hoped to find.

The days had grown quite long by this time and there was fog in
the air. Once in a while there would be a loud crackling noise.

"The ice is beginning to break," Koko said. "Don't you hear it
pop? My father says he thinks the warm weather will begin early
this year."

They had gone some distance out on the ice, when suddenly Menie
said, "Look! Look there!" He pointed toward the north. There not
far from shore was a flock of sea-birds, resting on the ice.

"Just let me get a shot at them!" cried Koko. "You stay here and
hold on to the dogs! Nip and Tup haven't any sense at all about
game! They'll only scare them."


III.

Koko ran swiftly and quietly towards the birds. Menie sat on the
ice and watched him and held Nip and Tup, one under each arm.
When Koko got quite near the birds, he took careful aim and let
fly an arrow at them.

It didn't hit any of the birds, but it frightened them. They flew
up into the air and away to the north and alighted farther on.
Koko followed them.

All at once Menie heard a queer little sound. It went "Plop-plop-
plop," and it sounded very near. Nip and Tup sniffed, and began
to growl and nose around on the ice.

Menie knew what the queer noise meant, for his father had told
him all about seal hunting. It meant that a seal hole was near,
and that a seal had come up to breathe. It was the seal that made
the "plopping" noise.

Menie tried to keep the dogs still, but they wouldn't be kept
still. They ran round with their noses on the snow, giving little
anxious whines, and short, sharp barks.

The "plop-plop" stopped. The seal had gone down under the ice,
but Menie meant to find the hole. He went out quite near the open
water in his search. At last, just beyond a hummock of ice, he
saw it! He crept carefully up to it.

He lay down on his stomach and peeped into the hole to see what
it was like. He could not see a thing!

Then he stuck his lance down. His lance touched something soft
that wiggled! Menie stood up. He was so excited that he trembled.
He knew he had found a seal hole with a live seal in the snow
house!

With all his strength he struck his lance down through the snow.
The snow house fell in and Menie fell with it, but he kept hold
of his lance. The end of the lance was buried in the snow, but it
was moving. Menie knew by this that he had stuck it into the
seal!

He lay still and kept fast hold of his lance, and pressed down on
it with all his might.

Nip and Tup were crazy with excitement. They jumped round and
barked and tried to dig a hole in the snow with their forefeet.

At last the spear stopped wiggling. Then Menie carefully dug the
snow away. There lay a little white seal! It was too young to
swim away with its mother. That was why such a small boy as Menie
had been able to kill it.

He dragged it out on the ice. He was so excited and so busy he
did not notice how near he was to the open water.


IV.

All of a sudden there was a loud cracking noise, and Menie felt
the ice moving under him! He looked back. There was a tiny strip
of blue water between him and the shore!

The strip grew wider while he looked at it! Menie knew that he
was adrift on an ice raft, and he was terribly frightened. Nip
and Tup cuddled close to him and whined with fear.

Menie understood perfectly well that he might be carried far out
to sea and never come back any more. He put his hands to his
mouth and yelled with all his might!

Koko was still following the birds, and did not hear Menie's
cries. Menie could see him running up the beach after the birds,
and he could see his father working over his kyak near his home.

He even saw Monnie come out of the tunnel and go to watch her
father at his work. They seemed very far away, and every moment
the distance between them and the raft grew greater.

Menie screamed again and again. At the third scream he saw his
father straighten up, shade his eyes with his hand, and look out
to sea.

"Oh," Menie thought. "What if he shouldn't see me!" He shouted
louder than ever! He waved his arms! He even pinched the tails of
Nip and Tup and made them bark. Then he saw his father wave his
hand and dive into the tunnel.

In another instant he was out again and pulling on his skin coat.
Then he took the kyak on his shoulders and ran with it to the
beach. Monnie and Koolee came running after him.

They were doing the screaming now! Every one in the village heard
the screams and came running down to the beach, too.

When Menie saw his father coming with the kyak, he wasn't afraid
any more, for he was sure his father would save him. He wasn't
even afraid about the cakes of ice that were floating in the
water, though there is nothing more dangerous than to go out in a
kyak among ice floes. One bump from a floating cake of ice is
enough to upset any boat, and I don't like to think of what might
happen if a kyak should get between two big cakes of ice.

Kesshoo ran with his kyak as far as he could on the ice. Then he
got in and fitted the bottom of his skin jacket over the kyak
hole and carefully slid himself into the open water.

Once in the water, how his paddle flew!

It seemed to Menie as if his father would never reach him! He sat
very still on the ice pan with the dead seal beside him, and Nip
and Tup huddled up against him.

At last Kesshoo came near enough so he could make Menie hear
everything he said. "Menie," he cried, "if you do exactly what I
tell you to, I can save you.

"I will throw you my harpoon. You must drive it way down into the
ice. Then by the harpoon line I will tow your ice pan back toward
shore. When we get to the big ice I will find a place for you to
land.

"You must be ready, and when I give the word jump from your ice
raft on to the solid ice."

Then Kesshoo threw his harpoon, and Menie drove it into the ice
with all his might. Slowly Kesshoo drew the line taut, turned his
kyak round, and started for the shore. The journey out had been
dangerous, but the journey back was much more so, for Kesshoo
could not dodge the floating ice nearly so well. He had to pick
his way carefully through the clearest water he could find. Very
cautiously they moved toward shore.


V.

They were getting quite near the place where the ice had broken
with Menie, when suddenly, right near them, they saw the head and
great, round eyes of a seal! It was the seal mother.

She had come back to find her breathing hole and her baby.

The moment Kesshoo saw her he seized. his dart, which lay in its
place on top of his kyak, and threw it with all his might at the
seal.

The seal dived down into the sea, but a bladder full of air was
attached to the line on the dart, and this bladder floated on the
water, so Kesshoo could tell by watching it just where the seal
was.

Kesshoo knew he had struck the seal, and although he was already
towing the ice raft, he was determined to bring home the big
seal, too!

He called to Menie. "Sit still and wait until I come for you."

Then he quickly cut the harpoon line by which he was towing the
ice raft, and set it adrift again. As soon as he was free he
paddled away after the bladder, which was now bobbing along over
the water at some little distance from the boat.

Menie sat perfectly still and watched his father. Kesshoo reached
the bladder and began to pull on the line, but just at that
moment the big seal turned round and swam right under the kyak!

In a second the kyak turned bottom side up in the water! Menie
screamed. The people watching on the shore gave a great howl, and
Koko's father started up the beach after his own kyak.

He thought perhaps Kesshoo could not manage both the ice raft and
the seal, and he meant to go to help him.

But in one second Kesshoo was right side up again. No water could
get into the kyak because Kesshoo's skin coat was drawn tight
over the hole in the deck, and Kesshoo was in the coat!

Kesshoo often turned somersaults in the water in that way.
Sometimes he even did it for fun! He said afterward that he could
have turned the boat right side up again with just his nose,
without using either his paddle or his arms, if only his nose had
been a little bigger, and though he meant this for a joke, the
twins believed that he really could do it.

The moment he was right side up again, Kesshoo gave chase once
more to the bladder. The seal was very weak now, and Kesshoo knew
that it would soon come to the surface and float and that then he
could tow it in.

He had not long to wait. The bladder bobbed about for a while and
then was still. Kesshoo drew up the line, and paddled back to the
ice raft, towing the big seal after him.

"Catch this," he said to Menie. He threw him the end of the line.
"Wind the line six times round the harpoon," he said, "and hold
tight to the end of it."

Menie did as he was told. Then Kesshoo tied together the two ends
of the harpoon line, which he had cut, and began to tow the ice
raft back to share again.

Menie kept tight hold of the other line and towed the seal!

Kesshoo paddled slowly and carefully along, until at last there
was only a little strip of water between the kyak and the solid
ice.

But how in the world could Menie get across that strip of water
to safety?

The kyak was between him and the solid ice, and Menie could not
possibly get into the kyak. Neither could he swim. But Kesshoo
knew a way.

He came up closer to the solid ice. Then he gave a great sweep
with his paddle and lifted his kyak right up on to it. He sprang
out, and, seizing the harpoon line, pulled Menie's raft close up
to the edge of the firm ice.

Menie was still holding tight to the line that held the big seal.
Kesshoo threw him another line. Menie caught the end of it.

"Now tie the big seal's line fast to that," Kesshoo said. Menie
was a very small boy, but he knew how to tie knots. He did just
what his father told him to.

"Now," said his father, "pull up the harpoon." Menie did so. "Tie
the harpoon line to the little seal" Menie did that. "Now throw
the harpoon to me," commanded Kesshoo.

Menie threw it with all his might. His father caught it, and
stood on the firm ice, holding in his hands the line that the big
seal was tied to, and the harpoon, with its line fastened to the
little seal.

"Now hold on to the little seal, and I will pull you right up
against the solid ice, and when I say 'Jump,' you jump," said
Kesshoo.

Slowly and very, carefully he pulled, until the raft grated
against the solid ice.

"Jump!" shouted Kesshoo.

Menie jumped. The ice raft gave a lurch that nearly sent him into
the water, but Kesshoo caught him and pulled him to safety.

A great shout of joy went up from the shore, and Menie was glad
enough to shout too when he felt solid ice under his feet once
more!

While he helped his father pull in the little seal, all the
people came running out on to the ice to meet them, but Kesshoo
sent back every one except Koko's father. He was afraid the ice
might break again with so many people on it. Koko's father helped
pull the big seal out of the water and over the ice to the beach.

Menie dragged his own little seal after him by the harpoon line,
and when he came near the beach, the people all cried out, "See
the great hunter with his game!" And Koolee was so glad to see
Menie and so proud of her boy that she nearly burst with joy!

"I knew the charm would work," she cried. "Not only does he spy
bears - he kills seals! And he only five years old!"

She put her arms around him and pressed her flat nose to his.
That's the Eskimo way of kissing.

Menie tried to look as if he killed seals and got carried away on
an ice pan every day in the week, but inside he felt very proud,
too.

When Kesshoo and Koko's father came up with the big seal, Koolee
and the other women dragged it to the village, where it was
skinned and cut up. Every one had a piece of raw blubber to eat
at once, and the very first piece went to Menie.

While they were eating it, Koko came back. He had gone so far up
the shore hunting little auks that he hadn't seen a thing that
had happened. And he hadn't killed any little auks either.

Koko felt that things were very unequally divided in this world.
He wanted to kill a seal and get lost on a raft and be a hero
too.

But Koolee gave him a large piece of blubber, and that made him
feel much more cheerful again. He just said to Monnie, "If I had
been with Menie, this never would have happened! I should not
have let him get so near the edge of the ice! But then, you know,
I am six, and he is only five, so, of course, he didn't know any
better."

Everybody in the village had seal meat that night, and the
Angakok had the head, which they all thought was the best part.
He said he didn't feel very well, and his Tornak had told him
nothing would cure him so quickly as a seal's head. So Koolee
gave it to him.

The skin of the little white seal Koolee saved and dressed very
carefully. She chewed it, all over, on the wrong side, and sucked
out all the blubber, and made it soft and fine as velvet; and
when that was done, she made out of it two beautiful pairs of
white mittens for the twins.



VIII.  THE WOMAN-BOATS

THE WOMAN-BOATS

I.

During the long, dark hours of the winter Kesshoo found many
pleasant things to do at home. He was always busy. He carved a
doll for Monnie out of the ivory tusk of a walrus.

Monnie named the doll Annadore, and she loved it dearly. Koolee
dressed Annadore in fur, with tiny kamiks of sealskin, and Monnie
carried her doll in her hood, just the way Koko's mother carried
her baby.

For Menie, his father made dog harnesses out of walrus hide. He
made them just the right size for Nip and Tup.

Menie harnessed the little dogs to his sled. Then he and Monnie
would play sledge journeys. Annadore would sit on the sled all
wrapped in furs, while Menie drove the dogs, and Monnie followed
after.

Nip and Tup did not like this play very well, and they didn't
always go where they were told to. Once they dashed right over
the igloo and spilled Annadore off.

Annadore rolled down one side of the igloo, while Nip and Tup
galloped down the other. Annadore was buried in the snow and had
to be dug out, so it was quite a serious accident, you see, but
Nip and Tup did not seem to feel at all responsible about it.

Kesshoo made knives and queer spoons out of bone or ivory for
Koolee, and for himself he made new barbs for his bladder-dart,
new bone hooks for fishlines, and all sorts of things for
hunting.

He made salmon spears, and bird darts, and fishlines, and he
ornamented his weapons with little pictures or patterns. He
carved two frogs on the handle of his snow knife, and scratched
the picture of a walrus on the blade.

Sometimes Koolee carved things, too, but most of the time she was
busy making coats or kamiks, or chewing skins to make them soft
and fine for use in the igloo; or to cover the kyaks, or to make
their summer tent.

Once during the winter the whole family went thirty miles up the
coast by moonlight to visit Koolee's brother in another village.
They went with the dog sledge, and it took them two days.

They had meat and blubber with them and plenty of warm skins, and
when they got tired, Kesshoo made a snow house for them to rest
in. The twins thought this was the best fun of all.


II.

When spring came on, there were other things to do. As the days
grew longer, the ice in the bay cracked and broke into small
pieces and floated away.

The water turned deep blue, and danced in the sunlight, and ice
floated about in it. Often there were walrus on these ice-pans.

The twins sometimes saw their huge black bodies on the white ice,
and heard their hoarse barks. Then all the men in the village
would rush for their kyaks and set out after the walrus.

The men were brave and enjoyed the dangerous sport, but the women
used to watch anxiously until they saw the kyaks coming home
towing the walrus behind them.

Then they would rush down to the shore, help pull the kyaks up on
the beach, where they cut the walrus in pieces and divided it
among the families of the hunters.

When the snow had melted on the Big Rock, hundreds of sea birds
made their nests there and filled the air with their cries.

Sometimes Kesshoo went egg hunting on the cliff, and sometimes he
set traps there for foxes, and he helped Menie and Koko make a
little trap to catch hares. There was plenty to do in every
season of the year.

At last the nights shortened to nothing at all. The long day had
begun. The stone but, which they had found so comfortable in
winter, seemed dark and damp now.

Menie and Monnie remembered the summer days when they did not
have to dive down through a hole to get into their house, so
Menie said to Monnie one day, "Let's go and ask father if it
isn't time to put up the tents."

They ran out to find him. He was down on the beach talking with
Koko's father and the other men of the village.

On the beach were two very long boats. The men were looking them
over carefully to see if they were water tight.

Koko was with the men. When he saw the twins coming, he tore up
the slope to meet them, waving his arms and shouting, "They're
getting out the woman boats! They're getting out the woman
boats!"

This was glorious news to the twins. They ran down to the beach
with Koko as fast as their legs could carry them.

They got there just in time to hear Koko's father say to Kesshoo,
"I think it's safe to start. The ice is pretty well out of the
bay, and the reindeer will be coming down to the fiords after
fresh moss."

All the men listened to hear what Kesshoo would say, and the
twins listened, too, with all their ears.

"If it's clear, I think we could start after one more sleep,"
said Kosshoo.


III.

The twins didn't wait to hear any more. They flew for home, and
dashed down the tunnel and up into the room.

Koolee was gathering all the knives and spoons and fishing-things
and sewing things, and dumping them into a large musk-ox hide
which was spread on the floor.

The musk ox hide covered the entrance hole. The first thing
Koolee knew something thumped the musk ox skin on the under side,
and the knives and thimbles and needle cases and other things
flew in all directions. Up through the hole popped the faces of
Menie and Monnie!

"Oh, Mother," they shouted. "We're going off on the woman boats!
After only one more sleep, if it's pleasant! Father said so!"

Koolee laughed. "I know it!" she said. "I was just packing. You
can help me. There's a lot to do to get ready."

The twins were delighted to help. They got together all their own
treasures - the sled, and the fishing rods, the dog harnesses, and
Annadore, and bound them up with walrus thongs. All but Annadore.
Annadore rode in Monnie's hood as usual.

Koolee gathered all her things together again and wrapped them in
the musk ox hide. She took down the long narwhal tusks that the
dog harnesses were hung on.

These were the tent poles. She and the twins carried all these
things to the beach. The men stayed on the beach and packed the
things away in the boats. The other women brought down their
bundles from their igloos. There was room for everything in the
two big boats.

Only the skins were left on the sleeping bench in the hut. When
everything else was ready, Koolee and the twins went up on top of
the igloo.

They pulled the moss and dirt out of the chinks between the
stones that made the roof, and then Koolee pulled up the stones
themselves and let them fall over to one side. This left the roof
open to the sky.

"What makes you do that?" Menie asked.

"So the sun and rain can clean house for us," said Koolee.

Everybody else in the village got ready in the same way.

At last Kesshoo came up from the beach and said to Koolee, "Let
us have some meat and a sleep and then we will start. Everything
is ready. The boats are packed and it looks as if the weather
would be clear."

Koolee brought out some walrus meat and blubber for supper,
though it might just as well be called breakfast, for there was
no night coming, and the twins ate theirs sitting on the roof of
the igloo with their feet hanging down inside.

Once Menie's feet kicked his father's head. It was an accident,
but Kesshoo reached up and took hold of Menie's foot and pulled
him down on to the sleeping bench and rolled him over among the
skins.

"Crawl in there and go to sleep," he said.

Monnie let herself down through the roof by her hands and crept
in beside Menie. Then Kesshoo and Koolee wrapped themselves in
the warm skins and lay down, too.

It took Menie and Monnie some time to go to sleep, for they could
look straight up through the roof at the sky, and the sky was
bright and blue with little white clouds sailing over it.
Besides, they were thinking about the wonderful things that would
happen when they should wake up.



IX.  THE VOYAGE

THE VOYAGE

I.

When the twins awoke, the sun was shining as brightly as ever,
and Nip and Tup were barking at them through the hole in the
roof.

Kesshoo and Koolee were gone!

Menie and Monnie were frightened. They were afraid they were left
behind. They sat up in bed and howled!

In a moment Koolee's face looked down at them through the roof.

"What's the matter?" she said.

"We thought we were left," wailed Monnie!

"As if I could leave you behind!" cried Koolee.

She laughed at them. "Hand up the skins to me," she said. She
reached her arm down the hole and pulled out all the skins from
the bed as fast as the twins gave them to her.

Then she put her head down into the opening and looked all
around. "We haven't left a thing," she said; "come along."

The twins couldn't climb out through the roof, though they wanted
to, so they went out by the tunnel, and helped their mother carry
the skins to the beach.

All the people in the village and all the dogs were there before
them. The great woman boats were packed, the kyaks of the men
waited beside them in a row on the beach, with their noses in the
water.

The dogs barked and raced up and down the beach, the babies
crowed, and the children shouted for joy. Even the grown people
were gay. They talked in loud tones and laughed and made jokes.


II.

At last Kesshoo shouted, "All ready! In you go!" He told each
person where to sit.

He put the Angakok in one boat to steer. He put Koko's father in
the other.

In Koko's father's boat he placed Koko and his mother and the
baby, Koolee and the twins, the pups, all three dogs, and four of
the women who lived in the other igloos. So you see it was quite
a large boat.

In the Angakok's boat he placed his two wives, and all the rest
of the women and children and dogs. The women took up the
paddles. One end of the boat was partly in the water when they
got in. The men gently pushed it farther out until it floated.

Then the men got into their kyaks at the water's edge, fastened
their skin coats over the rims, and paddled out into deep water.

At last, when all the boats, big and little, were afloat, Kesshoo
called out, "We are going north. Follow me."

The women obeyed the signal of Koko's father and the Angakok. The
paddles dipped together into the water. The great boats moved!
They were off!

The children all sat together in the bottom of the boat, but the
twins and Koko were big enough to see over the sides. While the
babies played with the dogs, they were busy watching the things
that passed on the shores. Soon they passed the Big Rock with
little auks and puffins flying about it. They could see the red
feet of the puffins, and a blue fox sitting on the top of the
rock, waiting for a chance to catch a bird.

Then the Big Rock hid the village from sight.


III.

Beyond the Big Rock the country was all new to the twins and
Koko. They looked into narrow bays and inlets as the boat moved
along, and saw green moss carpeting the sunny slopes in sheltered
places.

They could even see bright flowers growing in the warm spots
which faced the sun. The sky was blue overhead. The water was
blue below.

Beyond the green slopes they could see the bare hillsides crowned
with the white ice cap which never melts, and streams of water
dashing down the hillsides and pouring themselves into the waters
of the bay.

When they had gone a good many miles up the coast, Kesshoo waved
his hand and pointed to a strange sight on the shore.

There was a great river of ice! They could see where it came out
of a hollow place between two hills. It looked just like a river,
only it was frozen solid, and the end of it, where it came into
the sea, was broken off like a great wall of ice, and there were
cakes of ice floating about in the water.

Suddenly there was a cracking sound. Menie had heard that sound
before. It was the same sound that he had heard when he went seal-
hole hunting and got carried away on the ice raft. Menie didn't
like the sound anymore. It scared him!

Right after the cracking noise Kesshoo's voice shouted, "Row
farther out! Follow me!"

He turned his kyak straight out to sea. All the other boats
followed.

They had gone only about half a mile when suddenly. there was a
loud crick-crick-CRACK as if a piece of the world had broken
off, and then there was a splash that could be heard for miles,
if there had been any one to hear it.

The end of the glacier, or ice river, had broken off and fallen
down into the water! It had made an iceberg!

The splash was so great that in a moment the waves it made
reached the boats. The boats rocked up and down on the water and
bounced about like corks.

The twins and Koko thought this was great fun, but the Angakok
didn't like it a bit. One wave splashed over him, and some of the
water went down his neck.

All the grown people knew that if they hadn't rowed quickly away
from shore when Kesshoo called they might have been upset and
drowned.


IV.

When the waves made by the iceberg had calmed down again, Kesshoo
paddled round among the boats.

He said, "I think we'd better land about a mile above here.
There's a stream there, and perhaps we can get some salmon for
our dinner."

He led the way in his kyak, and all the other boats followed.
They kept out of the path of the iceberg, which had already
floated some distance from the shore, and it was not long before
they came to a little inlet.

Kesshoo paddled into it and up to the very end of it, where a
beautiful stream of clear water came dashing down over the rocks
into the sea.

The hills sloped suddenly down to the shore. The sun shone
brightly on the green slopes, and the high cliffs behind shut off
the cold north winds. It was a little piece of summer set right
down in the valley.

"Oh, how beautiful!" everybody cried.

The boats were soon drawn up on the beach, the women and children
tumbled out, and then began preparations for dinner.

The women got out their cooking pots, and Koolee set to work to
make a fireplace out of three stones.

They had blubber and moss with them, but how could they get a
fire? They had no matches. They had never even heard of a match.

The Angakok sat down on the beach. He had some little pieces of
dry driftwood and some dried moss.

He held one end of a piece of driftwood in a sort of handle which
he pressed against his lips. The other end was in a hollow spot
in another piece of wood.

The Angakok rolled one driftwood stick round and round in the
hollow spot of the other. He did this by means of a bow which he
pulled from one side to the other. This made the stick whirl
first one way, then back again. Soon a little smoke came curling
up round the stick.

Koolee dropped some dried moss on the smoking spot. Suddenly
there was a little blaze!

She fed the little flame with more moss, and then lighted the
moss on the stones of the fireplace. She put a soapstone kettle
filled with water over the fire, and soon the kettle was boiling.

While all this was going on down on the beach, the men took their
salmon spears and went up the river, and Koko and the twins went
with them.

The wives of the Angakok went to find moss to feed the fire. They
brought back great armfuls of it, and put it beside the
fireplace.

Koolee was the cook. She stayed on the beach and looked after the
babies and the dogs, and the fire. Everything was ready for
dinner, except the food!

Meanwhile the men had found a good place where there were big
stones in the river. They stood on these stones with their spears
in their hands. There were hundreds of salmon in the little
stream. The salmon were going up to the little lake from which
the river flowed.

When the fish leaped in the water, the men struck at them with
their fish spears. There were so many fish, and the men were so
skillful that they soon had plenty for dinner.

They strung them all on a walrus line and went back to the beach.
Koolee popped as many as she could into her pot to cook, but the
men were so hungry they ate theirs raw, and the twins and Koko
had as many fishes' eyes to eat as they wanted, for once in their
lives.

When everybody had eaten as much as he could possibly hold, the
babies were rolled up in furs in the sand and went to sleep. The
Angakok lay down on the sand in the sunshine with his hands over
his stomach and was soon asleep, too.

The men sat in a little group near by, and Menie and Koko lay on
their stomachs beside Kesshoo.

The women had gone a little farther up the beach. The air was
still, except for the rippling sound of the water, the distant
chatter of the women, the snores of the Angakok, and the buzzing
of mosquitoes!

For quite a long time everybody rested. Menie and Koko didn't go
to sleep. They were having too much fun. They played with shells
and pebbles and watched the mosquitoes buzzing over the Angakok's
face. There were a great many mosquitoes, and they seemed to like
the Angakok. At last one settled on his nose, and bit and bit.
Menie and Koko wanted to slap it, but, of course, they didn't
dare. They just had to let it bite!

All of a sudden the Angakok woke up and slapped it himself. He
slapped it harder than he intended to. He looked very much
surprised and quite offended about it. He sat up and looked round
for his wives, as if he thought perhaps they had something to do
with it. But they were at the other end of the beach. The Angakok
yawned and rubbed his nose, which was a good deal swollen.

Just then Kesshoo spoke, "I think we shall look a long time
before we find a better spot than this to camp," he said. "Here
are plenty of salmon. We can catch all we need to dry for winter
use, right here. There must be deer farther up the fiord. What do
you say to setting up the tents right here?"

When Kesshoo said anything, the others were pretty sure to agree,
because Kesshoo was such a brave and skillful man that they
trusted his judgment.

All the men said, "Yes, let us stay."

Then the Angakok said, "Yes, my children, let us stay! While you
thought I was asleep here on the sand I was really in a trance. I
thought it best to ask my Tornak about this spot, and whether we
should be threatened here by any hidden danger. My Tornak says to
stay!"

This settled the matter.

"Tell the women," said Kesshoo. Koko's father went over to the
place where the women and children were.

"Get out the tent poles," he called to them. "Here's where we
stay."


V.

The women jumped up and ran to the woman boats. They got out the
long narwhal tusks, and the skins, and set them down on the
beach.

"Come with me," Koolee called to the twins. She gave them each a
long tent pole to carry. She herself carried the longest pole of
all, and a pile of skins.

Koolee led the way up the green slope to a level spot overlooking
the stream and the bay. It was beside some high rocks, and there
were smaller stones all about.

There was a flat stone that she used for the sleeping bench. When
the poles were set up and securely fastened, she got the tent
skins and covered the poles.

She put on one layer of skin with the hair inside and over that
another covering of skin with the fur side out. She sewed the
skins together over the entrance with leather thongs and left a
flap for a door.

Then she placed stones around the edge of the tent covering to
keep the wind from blowing it away. She piled the bed skins on
the rock, and their summer house was ready.

The twins brought the musk ox hides, with all their treasures in
them, and the cooking pots and knives and household things from
the beach, while Koolee made the fireplace in the tent.

She made the fireplace by driving four sticks into the ground and
lashing them together to make a framework.

She hung the cooking kettle by straps from the four corners.
Under the kettle on a flat stone she placed the lamp. Then the
stove was ready.

"We shall cook out of doors most of the time," she said to the
twins, "but in rainy weather we shall need the lamp."

It was only a little while before there was a whole new village
ready to live in, with plenty of fish and good fresh water right
at hand.


VI.

Menie and Monnie were happy in their new home. They climbed about
on the rock and found a beautiful cave to play in. They gathered
flowers and shells and colored stones and brought them to their
mother.

Then later they went for more fish with the men, and Kesshoo let
them stand on the stones and try to spear the fish just the way
the men did.

Menie caught one, and Koko caught one, but Monnie had no luck at
all. "Anyway, I caught a codfish once," Monnie said, to comfort
herself.

In two hours everything was as settled about the camp as if they
had lived there a week, and every one was hungry again.
Hungriness and sleepiness came just as regularly as if they had
had nights and clocks both, to measure time by.

When the food was ready, Kesshoo called "Ujo, ujo," which meant
"boiled meat," and everybody came running to the beach.

The men sat in one circle, the women and children in another.
Pots of boiled fish were set in the middle of the circles, and
they all dipped in with their fingers and took what they wanted.

When everybody had eaten, the children played on the beach. They
skipped stones and danced and played ball, and their mothers
played with them.

The men had their fun, too. They sat in their circle, told
stories, and played games which weren't children's games, and the
Angakok sang a song, beating time on a little drum. All the men
sang the chorus.

By and by, Koolee saw Monnie's head nodding. So she said to the
twins, "Come, children, let's go up to the tent."

She took their hands and led them up the slope.

"We're not sleepy," the twins declared.

"I am," said Koolee, "and I want you with me."

They went into the tent, which was not so light as it was out of
doors in the bright sunlight. Then they undressed, crawled in
among the deerskins, and were soon sound asleep, all three of
them. After a while Kesshoo came up from the beach and went to
sleep too.



X.  THE SUMMER DAY

THE SUMMER DAY

I.

The summer days flew by, only one really shouldn't say days at
all, but summer day. For three whole bright months it was just
one daylight picnic all the time!

The people ate when they were hungry and slept when they were
sleepy. The men caught hundreds of salmon, and the women split
them open and dried them on the rocks for winter use. The
children played all day long.

The men hunted deer and musk ox and bears up in the hills and
brought them back to camp. They hunted game both by land and by
sea. There was so much to eat that everybody grew fatter, and as
for the Angakok, he got so very fat that Koko said to Menie, "I
don't believe we can ever get the Angakok home in the woman boat!
He's so heavy he'll sink it! I think it would be a good plan to
tie a string to him and tow him back like a walrus!"

"Yes," said Menie. "Maybe he would shrink some if we soaked him
well. Don't you know how water shrinks the walrus hide cords that
we tie around things when we want them to hold tight together?"

It was lucky for Menie and Koko that nobody heard them say that
about the Angakok. It would have been thought very disrespectful.

When the game grew scarce, or they got tired of camping in one
spot everything was piled into their boats again, and away they
went up the coast until they found another place they liked
better. Then they would set up their tents again.

Sometimes they came to other camps and had a good time meeting
new people and making new friends.

At last, late in August, the sun slipped down below the edge of
the World again. It stayed just long enough to fill the sky with
wonderful red and gold sunset clouds, then it came up again. The
next night there was a little time between the sunset sky and the
lovely colors of the sunrise.

The next night was longer still. Each day grew colder and colder.
Still the people lingered in their tents. They did not like to
think the pleasant summer was over, and the long night near.

But at last Kesshoo said, "I think it is time to go back to
winter quarters. The nights are fast growing longer. The snow may
be upon us any day now. I don't know of a better place to settle
than the village where we spent last winter. The igloos are all
built there ready to use again. What do you say? Shall we go back
there?"

"Yes, let us go back," they all said.


II.

The very next day they started. The boats were heavily loaded
with dried fish, there were great piles of new skins heaped in
the woman boats, and every kyak towed a seal.

For days they traveled along the coast, stopping only for rest
and food. The twins and Koko sat in the bottom of the boat with
the dogs, and listened to the regular dip of the paddles, to the
cries of the sea birds as they flew away toward the south, and to
the chatter of the women. These were almost the only sounds they
heard, for the silence of the Great White World was all about
them. They talked together in low voices and planned all the
things they would do when the long night was really upon them
once more.

When at last they came in sight of the Big Rock, they felt as if
they had reached home after a very long journey.

Koko stood up in the boat and pointed to it. "See," he cried,
"there's the Big Rock where we found the bear!"

"Yes," Monnie said, "and where we slid downhill."

"And I see where I got caught on the ice raft," Menie shouted.

"Sit down," said Koko's mother. "You'll tip the boat and spill us
all into the water."

Koko sat down; the boat glided along through the water, nearer
and nearer, until at last they came round the Big Rock, and
there, just as if they had not been away at all, lay the whole
village of five igloos, looking as if it had gone to sleep in the
sunshine.

The big boats waited until the men had all paddled to the shore
and beached their kyaks, then they were drawn carefully up on to
the sand, and every one got out. The beach at once became a very
busy place. The men pulled the walruses and seals out of the
water and took care of the boats, while the women set up the
tents, cut the meat into big pieces for storage, and carried all
their belongings to the tents.

Although the village looked just the same, other things looked
quite different. Nip and Tup were big dogs by this time. They ran
away up the beach with Tooky and the other dogs the moment they
were out of the boats. They did not stay with the twins all the
time now, as they used to do. The twins were much bigger, too.
Koolee looked at them as they helped her carry the tent-skins up
from the beach, and said to them, "My goodness, I must make my
needles fly! winter is upon us and your clothes are getting too
small for you! You must have new things right away." The twins
thought this was a very good idea. They liked new clothes as well
as any one in the world.

Koolee set up the tent beside their old igloo, and there they
lived while the men of the village went out every day in their
kyaks for seal and walrus, or back into the hills after other
game to store away for food during the long winter. The women
scraped and cured the skins and cut up the meat and packed it
away as fast as the men could kill the game and bring it home.

Each day it grew colder, and each night was longer than the last,
until one short September day there came a great snow storm! It
snowed all day long, and that night the wind blew so hard that
Koolee and the twins nearly froze even among the fur covers of
their bed, and when morning came they found themselves nearly
buried under a great drift.

That very day Koolee put the stones over the roof of the igloo
once more, and the twins helped her fill in the chinks with moss
and earth, and cover it with a heavy layer of snow, patted down
with the snow shovel, until everything was snug and tight again.

Then they moved in. By the next day all the igloos in the village
were in use, and when night came their windows shone with the
light of the lamps, just as they had so many months before.

Nip and Tup slept outside with Tooky now, in a snow house which
Kesshoo had built for them. Menie and Monnie missed them, but
Koolee said, "You are getting so big now you must begin to do
something besides play with puppies. Monnie must learn to sew,
and Menie must help Father with feeding the dogs and looking
after their harnesses, and driving the sledge."

"Maybe Father will teach you both to carve fine things out of
ivory this winter! Monnie will soon need her own thimble and
needles. They must be made. And she can help me clean the skins
and suck out the blubber, and prepare them for being made into
clothes!"

"Dear me! what a lot there is to do to keep clothes on our backs
and food in our mouths! The Giants are always waiting before the
igloo and we must work very hard to keep them outside!"

She did not mean real giants. She meant that Hunger and Want are
always waiting to seize the Eskimo who does not work all the time
to supply food for himself and his family. She meant that Menie
must learn to be a brave strong hunter, afraid of nothing on sea
or land, and that Monnie must learn to do a woman's work well, or
else the time would come when they would be without food or
shelter or clothing, and the fierce cold would soon make an, end
of them.

It was lucky they got into the warm igloo just when they did, for
the winter had come to stay. The bay froze over far out from
shore, and the white snow covered the igloos so completely that
if it had not been for the windows, and for people moving about
out of doors, no one could have told that there was any village
there.

The Last Day of all was so short that Menie and Monnie and Koko
saw the whole of it from the top of the Big Rock! They had gone
up there in the gray twilight that comes before the sunrise to
build a snow house to play in. They had been there only a little
while when the sky grew all rosy just over the Edge of the World.
The color grew stronger and stronger until the little stars were
all drowned in it and then up came the great round red face of
the sun itself! The children watched it as it peered over the
horizon, threw long blue shadows behind them across the snow, and
then sank slowly, slowly down again, leaving only the flaming
colors in the sky to mark the place where it had been. They waved
their hands as it slipped out of sight. "Good bye, old Sun," they
shouted, "and good bye, Shadow, too! We shall be glad to see you
both when you come back again."

Then, because the wind blew very cold and they could see a snow
cloud coming toward them from the Great White World where the
Giants lived, the children ran together down the snowy slope
toward the bright windows of their homes.


THE END


SUGGESTIONS TO TEACHERS

To arouse the children's interest and thus to make the reading of
this story most valuable as a school exercise, it is suggested
that at the outset the children be allowed to look at the
pictures in the book in order to get acquainted with "Menie" and
"Monnie" and with the scenes illustrating their home life and
surroundings.

During the reading, point out the North Pole, Greenland, etc., on
a map of the world or on a globe, and tell the children something
about the many years of effort before Peary succeeded in reaching
his goal; also about the work of subsequent explorers in this
part of the world, and around the South Pole as well. Thus this
supplementary reading material may be connected with the work in
geography.

The text is so simply written that the second grade child can
read it without much or any preparation. It may be well to have
the children read it first in a study period in order to work out
the pronunciation of the more difficult words. But many classes
will be able to read it at sight, without the preparatory study.
The possibilities in the story for dramatization and for language
and constructive work will be immediately apparent.

In connection with the reading of the book, teachers should tell
to the children stories describing Eskimo life, and the
experiences of explorers and pioneers in the North. Grenfell's
Adrift on an Ice-Pan is suitable, for example. Holbrook's
Northland Heroes and Schultz's Sinopah, the Indian Boy, while
not belonging to the land of the Eskimos, contain stories of
allied interest. Let the children bring to class pictures of
scenes in the North, clipped from magazines and newspapers.

The unique illustrations in The Eskimo Twins should be much used,
both in the reading of the story and in other ways. Children will
enjoy sketching some of them; their simple treatment makes them
especially useful for this purpose.

The book is printed on paper which will take watercolor well, and
where the books are individually owned some of the sketches could
be used for coloring in flat washes. They also afford suggestions
for action sketching by the children.

An excellent oral language exercise would be for the children,
after they have read the story, to take turns telling the story
from the illustrations; and a good composition exercise would be
for each child to select the illustration that he would like to
write upon, make a sketch of it, and write the story in his own
words.

These are only a few of the many ways that will occur to
resourceful teachers for making the book a valuable as well as an
enjoyable exercise in reading.









Edited by Charles Aldarondo (aldarondo@yahoo.com)

SKY ISLAND

BEING THE FURTHER EXCITING ADVENTURES
OF TROT AND CAP'N BILL AFTER THEIR
VISIT TO THE SEA FAIRIES

BY L. FRANK BAUM





TO

MY SISTER

MARY LOUISE BREWSTER





A LITTLE TALK TO MY READERS





WITH "The Sea Fairies," my book for 1911, I ventured into a new
field of fairy literature and to my delight the book was received
with much approval by my former readers, many of whom have written
me that they like Trot "almost as well as Dorothy." As Dorothy was
an old, old friend and Trot a new one, I think this is very high
praise for Cap'n Bill's little companion. Cap'n Bill is also a new
character who seems to have won approval, and so both Trot and the
old sailor are again introduced in the present story, which may be
called the second of the series of adventures of Trot and Cap'n
Bill.

But you will recognize some other acquaintances in "Sky Island."
Here, for instance, is Button-Bright, who once had an adventure with
Dorothy in Oz, and without Button-Bright and his Magic Umbrella you
will see that the story of "Sky Island" could never have been
written. As Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter, lives in the sky, it
is natural that Trot and Button-Bright meet her during their
adventures there.

This story of Sky Island has stonished me considerably, and I think
it will also astonish you. The sky country is certainly a remarkable
fairland, but after reading about it I am sure you will agree with
me that our old Mother Earth is a very good place to live upon and
that Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were fortunate to get
back to it again.

By the way, one of my little correspondents has suggested that I
print my address in this book, so that the children may know where
letters will reach me. I am doing this, as you see, and hope that
many will write to me and tell me how they like "Sky Island." My
greatest treasures are these letters from my readers and I am always
delighted to receive them.

L. FRANK BAUM.

"OZCOT" at HOLLYWOOD in CALIFORNIA






A MYSTERIOUS ARRIVAL

CHAPTER 1





"Hello," said the boy.

"Hello," answered Trot, looking up surprised. "Where did you come
from?"

"Philadelphia," said he.

"Dear me," said Trot, "you're a long way from home, then."

"'Bout as far as I can get, in this country," the boy replied, gazing
out over the water. "Isn't this the Pacific Ocean?"

"Of course."

"Why of course?" he asked.

"Because it's the biggest lot of water in all the world."

"How do you know?"

"Cap'n Bill told me," she said.

"Who's Cap'n Bill?"

"An old sailorman who's a friend of mine. He lives at my house, too--
the white house you see over there on the bluff."

"Oh; is that your home?"

"Yes," said Trot proudly. "Isn't it pretty?"

"It's pretty small, seems to me," answered the boy.

"But it's big enough for mother and me, an' for Cap'n Bill," said
Trot.

"Haven't you any father?"

"Yes, 'ndeed. Cap'n Griffith is my father, but he's gone most of the
time, sailin' on his ship. You mus' be a stranger in these parts,
little boy, not to know 'bout Cap'n Griffith," she added, looking at
her new acquaintance intently.

Trot wasn't very big herself, but the boy was not quite as big as
Trot. He was thin, with a rather pale complexion, and his blue eyes
were round and earnest. He wore a blouse waist, a short jacket, and
knickerbockers. Under his arm he held an old umbrella that was as
tall as he was. Its covering had once been of thick, brown cloth,
but the color had faded to a dull drab except in the creases, and
Trot thought it looked very old-fashioned and common. The handle,
though, was really curious. It was of wood and carved to resemble an
elephant's head. The long trunk of the elephant was curved to make a
crook for the handle. The eyes of the beast were small red stones,
and it had two tiny tusks of ivory.

The boy's dress was rich and expensive, even to his fine silk
stockings and tan shoes, but the umbrella looked old and
disreputable.

"It isn't the rainy season now," remarked Tot with a smile.

The boy glanced at his umbrella and hugged it tighter. "No," he
said, "but umbrellas are good for other things 'sides rain."

"'Fraid of gett'n sun-struck?" asked Trot.

He shook his head, still gazing far out over the water. "I don't
b'lieve this is bigger than any other ocean," said he. "I can't see
any more of it than I can of the Atlantic."

"You'd find out if you had to sail across it," she declared.

"When I was in Chicago I saw Lake Michigan," he went on dreamily,
"and it looked just as big as this water does."

"Looks don't count, with oceans," she asserted. "Your eyes can only
see jus' so far, whether you're lookin' at a pond or a great sea."

"Then it doesn't make any difference how big an ocean is," he
replied. "What are those buildings over there?" pointing to the
right, along the shore of the bay.

"That's the town," said Trot. "Most of the people earn their living
by fishing. The town is half a mile from here, an' my house is
almost a half-mile the other way, so it's 'bout a mile from my house
to the town."

The boy sat down beside her on the flat rock.

"Do you like girls?" asked Trot, making room for him.

"Not very well," the boy replied. "Some of 'em are pretty good
fellows, but not many. The girls with brothers are bossy, an' the
girls without brothers haven't any 'go' to 'em. But the world's full
o' both kinds, and so I try to take 'em as they come. They can't
help being girls, of course. Do you like boys?"

"When they don't put on airs or get roughhouse," replied Trot. "My
'sperience with boys is that they don't know much, but think they
do."

"That's true," he answered. "I don't like boys much better than I do
girls, but some are all right, and--you seem to be one of 'em."

"Much obliged," laughed Trot. "You aren't so bad, either, an' if we
don't both turn out worse than we seem, we ought to be friends."

He nodded rather absently and tossed a pebble into the water. "Been
to town?" he asked.

"Yes. Mother wanted some yarn from the store. She's knittin' Cap'n
Bill a stocking."

"Doesn't he wear but one?"

"That's all. Cap'n Bill has one wooden leg," she explained. "That's
why he don't sailor any more. I'm glad of it, 'cause Cap'n Bill
knows ev'rything. I s'pose he knows more than anyone else in all the
world."

"Whew!" said the boy. "That's taking a good deal for granted. A
one-legged sailor can't know much."

"Why not?" asked Trot a little indignantly. "Folks don't learn
things with their legs, do they?"

"No, but they can't get around without legs to find out things."

"Cap'n Bill got 'round lively 'nough once, when he had two meat
legs," she said. "He's sailed to most ev'ry country on the earth,
an' found out all that the people in 'em knew and a lot besides. He
was shipwrecked on a desert island once, and another time a cannibal
king tried to boil him for dinner, an' one day a shark chased him
seven leagues through the water, an'--"

"What's a league?" asked the boy.

"It's a--a distance, like a mile is. But a league isn't a mile, you
know."

"What is it, then?"

"You'll have to ask Cap'n Bill. He knows ever'thing."

"Not ever'thing," objected the boy. "I know some things Cap'n Bill
don't know."

"If you do, you're pretty smart," said Trot.

"No, I'm not smart. Some folks think I'm stupid. I guess I am. But I
know a few things that were wonderful. Cap'n Bill may know more'n I
do--a good deal more--but I'm sure he can't know the same things.
Say, what's your name?"

"I'm Mayre Griffith, but ever'body calls me 'Trot.' I's a nickname I
got when I was a baby, 'cause I trotted so fast when I walked, an'
it seems to stick. What's YOUR name?"

"Button-Bright."

"How did it happen?"

"How did what happen?"

"Such a funny name."

The boy scowled a little. "Just like your own nickname happened," he
answered gloomily. "My father once said I was bright as a button,
an' it made ever'body laugh. So they always call me Button-Bright."

"What's your real name?" she inquired.

"Saladin Paracelsus de Lambertine Evagne von Smith."

"Guess I'll call you Button-Bright," said Trot, sighing. "The only
other thing would be 'Salad,' an' I don't like salads. Don't you
find it hard work to 'member all of your name?"

"I don't try to," he said. "There's a lot more of it, but I've
forgotten the rest."

"Thank you," said Trot. "Oh, here comes Cap'n Bill!" as she glanced
over her shoulder.

Button-Bright turned also and looked solemnly at the old sailor who
came stumping along the path toward them. Cap'n Bill wasn't a very
handsome man. He was old, not very tall, somewhat stout and chubby,
with a round face, a bald head, and a scraggly fringe of reddish
whisker underneath his chin. But his blue eyes were frank and merry,
and his smile like a ray of sunshine. He wore a sailor shirt with a
broad collar, a short peajacket and wide-bottomed sailor trousers,
one leg of which covered his wooden limb but did not hide it. As he
came "pegging" along the path--as he himself described his hobbling
walk--his hands were pushed into his coat pockets, a pipe was in his
mouth, and his black neckscarf was fluttering behind him in the
breeze like a sable banner.

Button-Bright liked the sailor's looks. There was something very
winning--something jolly and carefree and honest and sociable--about
the ancient seaman that made him everybody's friend, so the strange
boy was glad to meet him.

"Well, well, Trot," he said, coming up, "is this the way you hurry
to town?"

"No, for I'm on my way back," said she. "I did hurry when I was
going, Cap'n Bill, but on my way home I sat down here to rest an'
watch the gulls--the gulls seem awful busy today, Cap'n Bill--an'
then I found this boy."

Cap'n Bill looked at the boy curiously. "Don't think as ever I sawr
him at the village," he remarked. "Guess as you're a stranger, my
lad."

Button-Bright nodded.

"Hain't walked the nine mile from the railroad station, have ye?"
asked Cap'n Bill.

"No," said Button-Bright.

The sailor glanced around him. "Don't see no waggin er no
autymob'l," he added.

"No," said Button-Bright.

"Catch a ride wi' some one?"

Button-Bright shook his head.

"A boat can't land here; the rocks is too thick an' too sharp,"
continued Cap'n Bill, peering down toward the foot of the bluff on
which they sat and against which the waves broke in foam.

"No," said Button-Bright, "I didn't come by water."

Trot laughed. "He must 'a' dropped from the sky, Cap'n Bill!" she
exclaimed.

Button-Bright nodded very seriously. "That's it," he said.

"Oh, a airship, eh?" cried Cap'n Bill in surprise. "I've hearn tell
o' them sky keeridges; someth'n' like flyin' autymob'ls, ain't
they?"

"I don't know," said Button-Bright. "I've never seen one."

Both Trot and Cap'n Bill now looked at the boy in astonishment. "Now
then, lemme think a minute," said the sailor reflectively. "Here's a
riddle for us to guess, Trot. He dropped from the sky, he says, an'
yet he didn't come in a airship!"

"'Riddlecum, riddlecum ree;
What can the answer be?'"

Trot looked the boy over carefully. She didn't see any wings on him.
The only queer thing about him was his big umbrella. "Oh!" she said
suddenly, clapping her hands together. "I know now."

"Do you?" asked Cap'n Bill doubtfully. "Then you're some smarter ner
I am, mate."

"He sailed down with the umbrel!" she cried. "He used his umbrel as
a para--para--"

"Shoot," said Cap'n Bill. "They're called parashoots, mate; but why,
I can't say. Did you drop down in that way, my lad?" he asked the
boy.

"Yes," said Button-Bright. "That was the way."

"But how did you get up there?" asked Trot. "You had to get up in
the air before you could drop down, an'--oh, Cap'n Bill! He says
he's from Phillydelfy, which is a big city way at the other end of
America."

"Are you?" asked the sailor, surprised.

Button-Bright nodded again. "I ought to tell you my story," he said,
"and then you'd understand. But I'm afraid you won't believe me,
and--" he suddenly broke off and looked toward the white house in
the distance "--Didn't you say you lived over there?" he inquired.

"Yes," said Trot. "Won't you come home with us?"

"I'd like to," replied Button-Bright.

"All right, let's go then," said the girl, jumping up.

The three walked silently along the path. The old sailorman had
refilled his pipe and lighted it again, and he smoked thoughtfully
as he pegged along beside the children. "Know anyone around here?"
he asked Button-Bright.

"No one but you two," said the boy, following after Trot, with his
umbrella tucked carefully underneath his arm.

"And you don't know us very well," remarked Cap'n Bill. "Seems to me
you're pretty young to be travelin' so far from home an' among
strangers. But I won't say anything more till we've heard your
story. Then, if you need my advice, or Trot's advice--she's a wise
little girl, fer her size, Trot is--we'll freely give it an' be glad
to help you."

"Thank you," replied Button-Bright. "I need a lot of things, I'm
sure, and p'raps advice is one of 'em."






THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

CHAPTER 2





When they reached the neat frame cottage which stood on a high bluff
a little back from the sea and was covered with pretty green vines,
a woman came to the door to meet them. She seemed motherly and good,
and when she saw Button-Bright, she exclaimed, "Goodness me! Who's
this you've got, Trot?"

"It's a boy I've just found," explained the girl. "He lives way off
in Phillydelphy."

"Mercy sakes alive!" cried Mrs. Griffith, looking into his upturned
face. "I don't believe he's had a bite to eat since he started.
Ain't you hungry, child?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright.

"Run, Trot, an' get two slices o' bread-an'-butter," commanded Mrs.
Griffith. "Cut 'em thick, dear, an' use plenty of butter."

"Sugar on 'em?" asked Trot, turning to obey.

"No," said Button-Bright. "Just bread-an'-butter's good enough when
you're hungry, and it takes time to spread sugar on."

"We'll have supper in an hour," observed Trot's mother briskly, "but
a hungry child can't wait a whole hour, I'm sure. What are you
grinning at, Cap'n Bill? How dare you laugh when I'm talking? Stop
it this minute, you old pirate, or I'll know the reason why!"

"I didn't, mum," said Cap'n Bill meekly. "I on'y--"

"Stop right there, sir! How dare you speak when I'm talking?" She
turned to Button-Bright, and her tone changed to one of much
gentleness as she said, "Come in the house, my poor boy, an' rest
yourself. You seem tired out. Here, give me that clumsy umbrella."

"No, please," said Button-Bright, holding the umbrella tighter.

"Then put it in the rack behind the door," she urged.

The boy seemed a little frightened. "I--I'd rather keep it with me,
if you please," he pleaded.

"Never mind," Cap'n Bill ventured to say, "it won't worry him so
much to hold the umbrella, mum, as to let it go. Guess he's afraid
he'll lose it, but it ain't any great shakes, to my notion. Why, see
here, Button-Bright, we've got half-a-dozen umbrellas in the closet
that's better ner yours."

"Perhaps," said the boy. "Yours may look a heap better, sir,
but--I'll keep this one, if you please."

"Where did you get it?" asked Trot, appearing just then with a plate
of bread-and-butter.

"It--it belongs in our family," said Button-Bright, beginning to eat
and speaking between bites. "This umbrella has been in our family
years, an' years, an' years. But it was tucked away up in our attic
an' no one ever used it 'cause it wasn't pretty."

"Don't blame 'em much," remarked Cap'n Bill, gazing at it curiously.
"It's a pretty old-lookin' bumbershoot." They were all seated in the
vine-shaded porch of the cottage--all but Mrs. Griffith, who had
gone into the kitchen to look after the supper--and Trot was on one
side of the boy, holding the plate for him, while Cap'n Bill sat on
the other side.

"It is old," said Button-Bright. "One of my great-great-grandfathers
was a Knight--an Arabian Knight--and it was he who first found this
umbrella."

"An Arabian Night!" exclaimed Trot. "Why, that was a magic night,
wasn't it?"

"There's diff'rent sorts o' nights, mate," said the sailor, "an' the
knight Button-Bright means ain't the same night you mean. Soldiers
used to be called knights, but that were in the dark ages, I guess,
an' likely 'nough Butt'n-Bright's great-gran'ther were that sort of
a knight."

"But he said an Arabian Knight," persisted Trot.

"Well, if he went to Araby, or was born there, he'd be an Arabian
Knight, wouldn't he? The lad's gran'ther were prob'ly a furriner,
an' yours an' mine were, too, Trot, if you go back far enough; for
Ameriky wasn't diskivered in them days."

"There!" said Trot triumphantly. "Didn't I tell you, Button-Bright,
that Cap'n Bill knows ever'thing?"

"He knows a lot, I expect," soberly answered the boy, finishing the
last slice of bread-and-butter and then looking at the empty plate
with a sigh. "But if he really knows ever'thing, he knows about the
Magic Umbrella, so I won't have to tell you anything about it."

"Magic!" cried Trot with big, eager eyes. "Did you say MAGIC Umbrel,
Button-Bright?"

"I said 'Magic.' But none of our family knew it was a Magic Umbrella
till I found it out for myself. You're the first people I've told
the secret to," he added, glancing into their faces rather uneasily.

"Glory me!" exclaimed the girl, clapping her hands in ecstacy. "It
must be jus' ELEGANT to have a Magic Umbrel!"

Cap'n Bill coughed. He had a way of coughing when he was suspicious.
"Magic," he observed gravely, "was once lyin' 'round loose in the
world. That was in the Dark Ages, I guess, when the magic Arabian
Nights was. But the light o' Civilization has skeered it away long
ago, an' magic's been a lost art since long afore you an' I was
born, Trot."

"I know that fairies still live," said Trot reflectively. She didn't
like to contradict Cap'n Bill, who knew "ever'thing."

"So do I," added Button-Bright. "And I know there's magic still in
the world--or in my umbrella, anyhow."

"Tell us about it!" begged the girl excitedly.

"Well," said the boy, "I found it all out by accident. It rained in
Philadelphia for three whole days, and all the umbrellas in our
house were carried out by the family and lost or mislaid or
something, so that when I wanted to go to Uncle Bob's house, which
is at Germantown, there wasn't an umbrella to be found. My governess
wouldn't let me go without one, and--"

"Oh," said Trot. "Do you have a governess?"

"Yes, but I don't like her. She's cross. She said I couldn't go to
Uncle Bob's because I had no umbrella. Instead she told me to go up
in the attic and play. I was sorry 'bout that, but I went up in the
attic, and pretty soon I found in a corner this old umbrella. I
didn't care how it looked. It was whole and strong and big, and
would keep me from getting wet on the way to Uncle Bob's. So off I
started for the car, but I found the streets awful muddy, and once I
stepped in a mud-hole way up to my ankle. 'Gee!,' I said, 'I wish I
could fly through the air to Uncle Bob's.'

"I was holding up the open umbrella when I said that, and as soon as
I spoke, the umbrella began lifting me up into the air. I was awful
scared at first, but I held on tight to the handle, and it didn't
pull very much, either. I was going pretty fast, for when I looked
down all the big buildings were sliding past me so swift that it
made me dizzy, and before I really knew what had happened the
umbrella settled down and stood me on my feet at Uncle Bob's front
gate.

"I didn't tell anybody about the wonderful thing that had happened,
'cause I thought no one would believe me. Uncle Bob looked sharp at
the thing an' said, 'Button-Bright, how did your father happen to
let you take that umbrella?' 'He didn't,' I said. 'Father was away
at the office, so I found it in the attic an' I jus' took it.' Then
Uncle Bob shook his head an' said I ought to leave it alone. He said
it was a fam'ly relic that had been handed down from father to son
for many generations. But I told him my father had never handed it
to me, though I'm his son. Uncle Bob said our fam'ly always believed
that it brought 'em good luck to own this umbrella. He couldn't say
why, not knowing its early history, but he was afraid that if I lost
the umbrella, bad luck would happen to us. So he made me go right
home to put the umbrella back where I got it. I was sorry Uncle Bob
was so cross, and I didn't want to go home yet, where the governess
was crosser 'n he was. I wonder why folks get cross when it rains?
But by that time it had stopped raining--for awhile, anyhow--and
Uncle Bob told me to go straight home and put the umbrella in the
attic an' never touch it again.

"When I was around the corner, I thought I'd see if I could fly as I
had before. I'd heard of Buffalo, but I didn't know just where it
was, so I said to the umbrella, 'Take me to Buffalo.' Up in the air
I went, just as soon as I said it, and the umbrella sailed so fast
that I felt as if I was in a gale of wind. It was a long, long trip,
and I got awful tired holding onto the handle, but just as I thought
I'd have to let go, I began to drop down slowly, and then I found
myself in the streets of a big city. I put down the umbrella and
asked a man what the name of the city was, and he said 'Buffalo'."

"How wonderful!" gasped Trot. Cap'n Bill kept on smoking and said
nothing.

"It was magic, I'm sure," said Button-Bright. "It surely couldn't
have been anything else."

"P'raps," suggested Trot, "the umbrella can do other magic things."

"No," said the boy. "I've tried it. When I landed in Buffalo I was
hot and thirsty. I had ten cents car fare, but I was afraid to spend
it. So I held up the umbrella and wished I had an ice-cream soda,
but I didn't get it. Then I wished for a nickel to buy an ice-cream
soda with, but I didn't get that, either. I got frightened and was
afraid the umbrella didn't have any magic left, so to try it I said
'Take me to Chicago.' I didn't want to go to Chicago, but that was
the first place I thought of, and I soon saw this was going to be
another long journey, so I called out to the umbrella, 'Never mind.
Stop! I guess I won't go to Chicago. I've changed my mind, so take
me home again.' But the umbrella wouldn't. It kept right on flying,
and I shut my eyes and held on. At last I landed in Chicago, and
then I was in a pretty fix. It was nearly dark, and I was too tired
and hungry to make the trip home again. I knew I'd get an awful
scolding, too, for running away and taking the family luck with me,
so I thought that as long as I was in for it, I'd better see a good
deal of the country while I had the chance. I wouldn't be allowed to
come away again, you know."

"No, of course not," said Trot.

"I bought some buns and milk with my ten cents, and then I walked
around the streets of Chicago for a time and afterward slept on a
bench in one of the parks. In the morning I tried to get the
umbrella to give me a magic breakfast, but it won't do anything but
fly. I went to a house and asked a woman for something to eat, and
she gave me all I wanted and advised me to go straight home before
my mother worried about me. She didn't know I lived in Philadelphia.
That was this morning."

"This mornin'!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill. "Why, lad, it takes three or
four days for the railroad trains to get to this coast from
Chicago."

"I know," replied Button-Bright. "But I didn't come on a railroad
train. This umbrella goes faster than any train ever did. This
morning I flew from Chicago to Denver, but no one there would give
me any lunch. A policeman said he'd put me in jail if he caught me
begging, so I got away and told the umbrella to take me to the
Pacific Ocean. When I stopped I landed over there by the big rock. I
shut up the umbrella and saw a girl sitting on the rock, so I went
up and spoke to her. That's all."

"Goodness me!" said Trot. "If that isn't a fairy story, I never
heard one."

"It IS a fairy story," agreed Button-Bright. "Anyhow, it's a magic
story, and the funny part of it is, it's true. I hope you believe
me, but I don't know as I'd believe it myself if it hadn't been me
that it happened to."

"I believe ev'ry word of it!" declared Trot earnestly.

"As fer me," said Cap'n Bill slowly, "I'm goin' to believe it, too,
by'm'by, when I've seen the umbrel fly once."

"You'll see me fly away with it," asserted the boy. "But at present
it's pretty late in the day, and Philadelphia is a good way off. Do
you s'pose, Trot, your mother would let me stay here all night?"

"Course she would!" answered Trot. "We've got an extra room with a
nice bed in it, and we'd love to have you stay just as long as you
want to, wouldn't we, Cap'n Bill?"

"Right you are, mate," replied the old man, nodding his bald head.
"Whether the umbrel is magic or not, Butt'n-Bright is welcome."

Mrs. Griffith came out soon after and seconded the invitation, so
the boy felt quite at home in the little cottage. It was not long
before supper was on the table and in spite of all the
bread-and-butter he had eaten Button-Bright had a fine appetite for
the good things Trot's mother had cooked. Mrs. Griffith was very
kind to the children, but not quite so agreeable toward poor Cap'n
Bill. When the old sailorman at one time spilled some tea on the
tablecloth, Trot's mother flew angry and gave the culprit such a
tongue-lashing that Button-Bright was sorry for him. But Cap'n Bill
was meek and made no reply. "He's used to it, you know," whispered
Trot to her new friend, and indeed, Cap'n Bill took it all
cheerfully and never minded a bit.

Then it came Trot's turn to get a scolding. When she opened the
parcel she had bought at the village, it was found she had selected
the wrong color of yarn, and Mrs. Griffith was so provoked that
Trot's scolding was almost as severe as that of Cap'n Bil l. Tears
came to the little girl's eyes, and to comfort her the boy promised
to take her to the village next morning with his magic umbrella, so
she could exchange the yarn for the right color.

Trot quickly brightened at this promise, although Cap'n Bill looked
grave and shook his head solemnly. When supper was over and Trot had
helped with the dishes, she joined Button-Bright and the sailorman
on the little porch again. Dusk had fallen, and the moon was just
rising. They all sat in silence for a time and watched the silver
trail that topped the crests of the waves far out to sea.

"Oh, Button-Bright!" cried the little girl presently. "I'm so glad
you're going to let me fly with you way to town and back tomorrow.
Won't it be fine, Cap'n Bill?"

"Dunno, Trot," said he. "I can't figger how both of you can hold on
to the handle o' that umbrel."

Trot's face fell. "I'll hold on to the handle," said Button-Bright,
"and she can hold on to me. It doesn't pull hard at all. You've no
idea how easy it is to fly that way after you get used to it."

"But Trot ain't used to it," objected the sailor. "If she happened
to lose her hold and let go, it's goodbye Trot. I don't like to risk
it, for Trot's my chum, an' I can't afford to lose her."

"Can't you tie us together, then?" asked the boy.

"We'll see, we'll see," replied Cap'n Bill, and began to think very
deeply. He forgot that he didn't believe the umbrella could fly, and
after Button-Bright and Trot had both gone to bed, the old sailor
went out into the shed and worked a while before he, too, turned
into his "bunk." The sandman wasn't around, and Cap'n Bill lay awake
for hours thinking of the strange tale of the Magic Umbrella before
he finally sank into slumber. Then he dreamed about it, and waking
or dreaming he found the tale hard to believe.






A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE

CHAPTER 3





They had early breakfasts at Trot's house, because they all went to
bed early, and it is possible to sleep only a certain number of
hours if one is healthy in body and mind. And right after breakfast
Trot claimed Button-Bright's promise to take her to town with the
Magic Umbrella.

"Any time suits me," said the boy. He had taken his precious
umbrella to bed with him and even carried it to the breakfast table,
where he stood it between his knees as he ate; so now he held it
close to him and said he was ready to fly at a moment's notice. This
confidence impressed Cap'n Bill, who said with a sigh:

"Well, if you MUST go, Trot, I've pervided a machine that'll carry
you both comf'table. I'm summat of an inventor myself, though there
ain't any magic about me."

Then he brought from the shed the contrivance he had made the night
before. It was merely a swing seat. He had taken a wide board that
was just long enough for both the boy and girl to sit upon, and had
bored six holes in it, two holes at each end and two in the middle.
Through these holes he had run stout ropes in such a way that the
seat could not turn and the occupants could hold on to the ropes on
either side of them. The ropes were all knotted together at the top,
where there was a loop that could be hooked upon the crooked handle
of the umbrella.

Button-Bright and Trot both thought Cap'n Bill's invention very
clever. The sailor placed the board upon the ground while they sat
in their places, Button-Bright at the right of Trot, and then the
boy hooked the rope loop to the handle of the umbrella, which he
spread wide open. "I want to go to the town over yonder," he said,
pointing with his finger to the roofs of the houses that showed
around the bend in the cliff.

At once the umbrella rose into the air, slowly at first, but quickly
gathering speed. Trot and Button-Bright held fast to the ropes and
were carried along very easily and comfortably. It seemed scarcely a
minute before they were in the town, and when the umbrella set them
down just in front of the store--for it seemed to know just where
they wanted to go--a wondering crowd gathered around them. Trot ran
in and changed the yarn, while Button-Bright stayed outside and
stared at the people who stared at him. They asked questions, too,
wanting to know what sort of an aeroplane this was and where his
power was stored and lots of other things, but the boy answered not
a sound. When the little girl came back and took her seat,
Button-Bright said, "I want to go to Trot's house."

The simple villagers could not understand how the umbrella suddenly
lifted the two children into the air and carried them away. They had
read of airships, but here was something wholly beyond their
comprehension.

Cap'n Bill had stood in front of the house, watching with a feeling
akin to bewilderment the flight of the Magic Umbrella. He could
follow its course until it descended in the village, and he was so
amazed and absorbed that his pipe went out. He had not moved from
his position when the umbrella started back. The sailor's big blue
eyes watched it draw near and settle down with its passengers upon
just the spot it had started from.

Trot was joyous and greatly excited. "Oh, Cap'n, it's gal-lor-ious!"
she cried in ecstasy. "It beats ridin' in a boat or--or--in anything
else. You feel so light an' free an'--an'--glad! I'm sorry the trip
didn't last longer, though. Only trouble is, you go too fast."

Button-Bright was smiling contentedly. He had proved to both Trot
and Cap'n Bill that he had told the truth about the Magic Umbrella,
however marvelous his tale had seemed to them. "I'll take you on
another trip, if you like," said he. "I'm in no hurry to go home,
and if you will let me stay with you another day, we can make two or
three little trips with the family luck."

"You mus' stay a whole week," said Trot decidedly. "An' you mus'
take Cap'n Bill for an air-ride, too."

"Oh, Trot! I dunno as I'd like it," protested Cap'n Bill nervously.

"Yes you would. You're sure to like it."

"I guess I'm too heavy."

"I'm sure the umbrella could carry twenty people if they could be
fastened to the handle," said Button-Bright.

"Solid land's pretty good to hold on to," decided Cap'n Bill. "A
rope might break, you know."

"Oh, Cap'n Bill! You're scared stiff," said Trot.

"I ain't, mate. It ain't that at all. But I don't see that human
critters has any call to fly in the air, anyhow. The air were made
for the birds, an'--an' muskeeters, an'--"

"An' flyin'-fishes," added Trot. "I know all that, Cap'n, but why
wasn't it made for humans, too, if they can manage to fly in it? We
breathe the air, an' we can breathe it high up, just as well as down
on the earth."

"Seein' as you like it so much, Trot, it would be cruel for me to go
with Butt'n-Bright an' leave you at home," said the sailor. "When I
were younger--which is ancient history--an' afore I had a wooden
leg, I could climb a ship's ropes with the best of 'em, an' walk out
on a boom or stand atop a mast. So you know very well I ain't
skeered about the highupness."

"Why can't we all go together?" asked the boy. "Make another seat,
Cap'n, and swing it right under ours. Then we can all three ride
anywhere we want to go."

"Yes, do!" exclaimed Trot. "And see here, Cap'n, let's take a day
off and have a picnic. Mother is a little cross today, and she wants
to finish knitting your new stockin', so I guess she'll be glad to
get rid of us."

"Where'll we go?" he asked, shifting on his wooden leg uneasily.

"Anywhere. I don't care. There'll be the air-ride there an' the
air-ride back, an' that's the main thing with ME. If you say we'll
go, Cap'n, I'll run in an' pack a basket of lunch."

"How'll we carry it?"

"Swing it to the bottom of your seat."

The old sailor stood silent a moment. He really longed to take the
air-ride but was fearful of danger. However, Trot had gone safely to
town and back and had greatly enjoyed the experience. "All right,"
he said. "I'll risk it, mate, although I guess I'm an old fool for
temptin' fate by tryin' to make a bird o' myself. Get the lunch,
Trot, if your mother'll let you have it, and I'll rig up the seat."

He went into the shed and Trot went to her mother. Mrs. Griffith,
busy with her work, knew nothing of what was going on in regard to
the flight of the Magic Umbrella. She never objected when Trot
wanted to go away with Cap'n Bill for a day's picnicking. She knew
the child was perfectly safe with the old sailor, who cared for Trot
even better than her mother would have done. If she had asked any
questions today and had found out they intended to fly in the air,
she might have seriously objected, but Mrs. Griffith had her mind on
other things and merely told the girl to take what she wanted from
the cupboard and not bother her. So Trot, remembering that
Button-Bright would be with them and had proved himself to be a
hearty eater, loaded the basket with all the good things she could
find.

By the time she came out, lugging the basket with both hands, Cap'n
Bill appeared with the new seat he had made for his own use, which
he attached by means of ropes to the double seat of the boy and
girl. "Now then, where'll we go?" asked Trot.

"Anywhere suits me," replied Cap'n Bill. They had walked to the high
bluff overlooking the sea, where a gigantic acacia tree stood on the
very edge. A seat had been built around the trunk of the tree, for
this was a favorite spot for Trot and Cap'n Bill to sit and talk and
watch the fleet of fishing boats sail to and from the village. When
they came to this tree, Trot was still trying to think of the most
pleasant place to picnic. She and Cap'n Bill had been every place
that was desirable and nearby, but today they didn't want a nearby
spot. They must decide upon one far enough away to afford them a
fine trip through the air. Looking far out over the Pacific, the
girl's eyes fell upon a dim island lying on the horizon line just
where the sky and water seemed to meet, and the sight gave her an
idea.

"Oh, Cap'n Bill!" she exclaimed. "Let's go to that island for our
picnic. We've never been there yet, you know."

The sailor shook his head. "It's a good many miles away, Trot," he
said, "further than it looks to be from here."

"That won't matter," remarked Button-Bright. "The umbrella will
carry us there in no time."

"Let's go!" repeated Trot. "We'll never have another such chance,
Cap'n. It's too far to sail or row, and I've always wanted to visit
that island."

"What's the name of it?" inquired Button-Bright while the sailor
hesitated to decide.

"Oh, it's got an awful hard name to pernounce," replied the girl,
"so Cap'n Bill and I jus' call it 'Sky Island' 'cause it looks as if
it was half in the sky. We've been told it's a very pretty island,
and a few people live there and keep cows and goats and fish for a
living. There are woods and pastures and springs of clear water, and
I'm sure we would find it a fine place for a picnic."

"If anything happened on the way," observed Cap'n Bill, "we'd drop
in the water."

"Of course," said Trot, "and if anything happened while we were
flyin' over the land, we'd drop there. But nothing's goin' to
happen, Cap'n. Didn't Button-Bright come safe all the way from
Philydelfy?"

"I think I'd like to go to Sky Island," said the boy. "I've always
flown above the land so far, and it will be something new to fly
over the ocean."

"All right, I'm agree'ble," decided Cap'n Bill. "But afore we starts
on such a long journey, s'pose we make a little trial trip along the
coast. I want to see if the new seat fits me an' make certain the
umbrel will carry all three of us."

"Very well," said Button-Bright. "Where shall we go?"

"Let's go as far as Smuggler's Cove an' then turn 'round an' come
back. If all's right an' shipshape, then we can start for the
island."

They put the broad double seat on the ground, and then the boy and
girl sat in their places and Button-Bright spread open the Magic
Umbrella. Cap'n Bill sat in his seat just in front of them, all
being upon the ground.

"Don't we look funny?" said Trot with a chuckle of glee. "But hold
fast the ropes, Cap'n, an' take care of your wooden leg."

Button-Bright addressed the umbrella, speaking to it very
respectfully, for it was a thing to inspire awe. "I want to go as
far as Smuggler's Cove and then turn around in the air and come back
here," he said. At once the umbrella rose into the air, lifting
after it first the seat in which the children sat, and then Cap'n
Bill's seat.

"Don't kick your heels, Trot!" cried the sailor in a voice that
proved he was excited by his novel experience. "You might bump me in
the nose."

"All right," she called back. "I'll be careful."

It was really a wonderful, exhilarating ride, and Cap'n Bill wasn't
long making up his mind he liked the sensation. When about fifty
feet above the ground the umbrella began moving along the coast
toward Smuggler's Cove, which it soon reached. Looking downward,
Cap'n Bill suddenly exclaimed, "Why, there' a boat cast loose, an'
it's goin' to smash on the rocks. Hold on a minute, Butt'n-Bright,
till we can land an' drag it ashore."

"Hold on a minute, Umbrella!" cried the boy. But the Magic Umbrella
kept steadily upon its way. It made a circle over the Cove and then
started straight back the way it had come. "It's no use, sir," said
Button-Bright to the sailor. "If I once tell it to go to a certain
place, the umbrella will go there, and nowhere else. I've found that
out before this. You simply CAN'T stop it."

"Won't let you change your mind, eh?" replied Cap'n Bill. "Well,
that has its advantidges, an' its disadvantiges. If your ol' umbrel
hadn't been so obstinate, we could have saved that boat."

"Never mind," said Trot briskly, "here we are safe back again.
Wasn't it jus' the--the fascinatingest ride you ever took, Cap'n?"

"It's pretty good fun," admitted Cap'n Bill. "Beats them aeroplanes
an' things all holler, 'cause it don't need any regulatin.'"

"If we're going to that island, we may as well start right away,"
said Button-Bright when they had safely landed.

"All right. I'll tie on the lunch-basket," answered the sailor. He
fastened it so it would swing underneath his own seat, and they all
took their places again.

"Ready?" asked the boy.

"Let 'er go, my lad."

"I want to go to Sky Island," said Button-Bright to the umbrella,
using the name Trot had given him. The umbrella started promptly. It
rose higher than before, carrying the three voyagers with it, and
then started straight away over the ocean.






THE ISLAND IN THE SKY

CHAPTER 4





They clung tightly to the ropes, but the breeze was with them, so
after a few moments, when they became accustomed to the motion, they
began to enjoy the ride immensely.

Larger and larger grew the island, and although they were headed
directly toward it, the umbrella seemed to rise higher and higher
into the air the farther it traveled. They had not journeyed ten
minutes before they came directly over the island, and looking down
they could see the forests and meadows far below them. But the
umbrella kept up its rapid flight.

"Hold on, there!" cried Cap'n Bill. "If it ain't keerful, the ol'
thing will pass by the island."

"I--I'm sure it has passed it already," exclaimed Trot. "What's
wrong, Button-Bright? Why don't we stop?"

Button-Bright seemed astonished, too.

"Perhaps I didn't say it right," he replied after a moment's
thought. Then, looking up at the umbrella, he repeated distinctly,
"I said I wanted to go to Sky Island! Sky Island, don't you
understand?"

The umbrella swept steadily along, getting farther and farther out
to sea and rising higher and higher toward the clouds.

"Mack'rel an' herrings!" roared Cap'n Bill, now really frightened.
"Ain't there any blamed way at all to stop her?"

"None that I know of," said Button-Bright anxiously.

"P'raps," said Trot after a pause during which she tried hard to
think. "P'raps 'Sky Island' isn't the name of that island at all."

"Why, we know very well it ain't the name of it," yelled Cap'n Bill
from below. "We jus' called it that 'cause its right name is too
hard to say."

"That's the whole trouble, then," returned Button-Bright. "Somewhere
in the world there's a real Sky Island, and having told the Magic
Umbrella to take us there, it's going to do so."

"Well, I declare!" gasped the sailorman. "Can't we land anywhere
else?"

"Not unless you care to tumble off," said the boy. "I've told the
umbrella to take us to Sky Island, so that's the exact place we're
bound for. I'm sorry. It was your fault for giving me the wrong
name."

They glided along in silence for a while. The island was now far
behind them, growing small in the distance. "Where do you s'pose the
real Sky Island can be?" asked Trot presently.

"We can't tell anything about it until we get there," Button-Bright
answered. "Seems to me I've heard of the Isle of Skye, but that's
over in Great Britain, somewhere the other side of the world, and it
isn't Sky Island, anyhow."

"This miser'ble ol' umbrel is too pertic'ler," growled Cap'n Bill.
"It won't let you change your mind an' it goes ezzac'ly where you
say."

"If it didn't," said Trot, "we'd never know where we were going."

"We don't know now," said the sailor. "One thing's certain, folks:
we're gett'n' a long way from home."

"And see how the clouds are rolling just above us," remarked the
boy, who was almost as uneasy as Cap'n Bill.

"We're in the sky, all right," said the girl. "If there could be an
island up here among the clouds, I'd think it was there we're
going."

"Couldn't there be one?" asked Button-Bright. "Why couldn't there be
an island in the sky that would be named Sky Island?"

"Of course not!" declared Cap'n Bill. "There wouldn't be anything to
hold it up, you know."

"What's holding US up?" asked Trot.

"Magic, I guess."

"Then magic might hold an island in the sky. Whee-e-e! What a black
cloud!"

It grew suddenly dark, for they were rushing through a thick cloud
that rolled around them in billows. Trot felt little drops of
moisture striking her face and knew her clothing was getting damp
and soggy. "It's a rain cloud," she said to Button-Bright, "and it
seems like an awful big one, 'cause it takes so long for us to pass
through it."

The umbrella never hesitated a moment. It made a path through the
length of the heavy, black cloud at last and carried its passengers
into a misty, billowy bank of white, which seemed as soft and fleecy
as a lady's veil. When this broke away, they caught sight of a
majestic rainbow spanning the heavens, its gorgeous colors glinting
brightly in the sun, its arch perfect and unbroken from end to end.
But it was only a glimpse they had, for quickly they dove into
another bank of clouds and the rainbow disappeared.

Here the clouds were not black, nor heavy, but they assumed queer
shapes. Some were like huge ships, some like forest trees, and
others piled themselves into semblances of turreted castles and
wonderful palaces. The shapes shifted here and there continually,
and the voyagers began to be bewildered by the phantoms.

"Seems to me we're goin' down," called Trot.

"Down where?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Who knows?" said Button-Bright. "But we're dropping, all right."

It was a gradual descent. The Magic Umbrella maintained a uniform
speed, swift and unfaltering, but its path through the heavens was
now in the shape of an arch, as a flying arrow falls. The queer
shapes of the clouds continued for some time, and once or twice Trot
was a little frightened when a monstrous airy dragon passed beside
them or a huge giant stood upon a peak of cloud and stared savagely
at the intruders into his domain. But none of these fanciful, vapory
creatures seemed inclined to molest them or to interfere with their
flight, and after a while the umbrella dipped below this queer
cloudland and entered a clear space where the sky was of an
exquisite blue color.

"Oh, look!" called Cap'n Bill. "There's land below us." The boy and
girl leaned over and tried to see this land, but Cap'n Bill was also
leaning over, and his big body hid all that was just underneath
them.

"Is it an island?" asked Trot solemnly.

"Seems so," the old sailor replied. "The blue is around all one side
of it an' a pink sunshine around the other side. There's a big cloud
just over the middle, but I guess it's surely an island, Trot, an'
bein' as it's in the sky, it's likely to be Sky Island."

"Then we shall land there," said the boy confidently. "I knew the
umbrella wouldn't make a mistake."

Presently Cap'n Bill spoke again. "We're goin' down on the blue part
o' the island," he said. "I can see trees an' ponds an' houses. Hold
tight, Trot! Hold tight, Butt'n-Bright! I'm afeared we're a'goin' to
bump somethin'!"

They were certainly dropping very quickly now, and the rush of air
made their eyes fill with water so that they could not see much
below them. Suddenly, the basket that was dangling below Cap'n Bill
struck something with a loud thud, and this was followed by a yell
of anger. Cap'n Bill sat flat upon the ground, landing with such a
force that jarred the sailorman and made his teeth click together,
while down upon him came the seat that Trot and Button-Bright
occupied, so that for a moment they were all tangled up.

"Get off from me! Get off from my feet, I say!" cried an excited
voice. "What in the Sky do you mean by sitting on my feet? Get off!
Get off at once!"






THE BOOLOOROO OF THE BLUES

CHAPTER 5





Cap'n Bill suspected that these remarks were addressed to him, but
he couldn't move just then because the seat was across him, and a
boy and girl were sprawling on the seat. As the Magic Umbrella was
now as motionless as any ordinary umbrella might be, Button-Bright
first released the catch and closed it up, after which he unhooked
the crooked handle from the rope and rose to his feet. Trot had
managed by this time to stand up, and she pulled the board off from
Cap'n Bill. All this time the shrill, excited voice was loudly
complaining because the sailor was on his feet, and Trot looked to
see who was making the protest, while Cap'n Bill rolled over and got
on his hands and knees so he could pull his meat leg and his wooden
leg into an upright position, which wasn't a very easy thing to do.

Button-Bright and Trot were staring with all their might at the
queerest person they had ever seen. They decided it must be a man
because he had two long legs, a body as round as a ball, a neck like
an ostrich, and a comical little head set on the top of it. But the
most curious thing about him was his skin, which was of a lovely
sky-blue tint. His eyes were also sky-blue, and his hair, which was
trained straight up and ended in a curl at the top of his head, was
likewise blue in color and matched his skin and his eyes. He wore
tight-fitting clothes made of sky-blue silk, with a broad blue
ruffle around his long neck, and on his breast glittered a
magnificent jewel in the form of a star, set with splendid blue
stones.

If the blue man astonished the travelers, they were no less
surprised by his surroundings, for look where they might, everything
they beheld was of the same blue color as the sky above. They seemed
to have landed in a large garden, surrounded by a high wall of blue
stone. The trees were all blue, the grass was blue, the flowers were
blue, and even the pebbles in the paths were blue. There were many
handsomely carved benches and seats of blue wood scattered about the
garden, and near them stood a fountain made of blue marble, which
shot lovely sprays of blue water into the blue air.

But the angry inhabitants of this blue place would not permit them
to look around them in peace, for as soon as Cap'n Bill rolled off
his toes, he began dancing around in an excited way and saying very
disrespectful things of his visitors. "You brutes! You apes! You
miserable, white-skinned creatures! How dare you come into my garden
and knock me on the head with that awful basket and then fall on my
toes and cause me pain and suffering? How dare you, I say? Don't you
know you will be punished for your impudence? Don't you know the
Boolooroo of the Blues will have revenge? I can have you patched for
this insult, and I will--just as sure as I'm the Royal Boolooroo of
Sky Island!"

"Oh, is this Sky Island, then?" asked Trot.

"Of course it's Sky Island. What else could it be? And I'm its
Ruler, its King, its sole Royal Potentate and Dictator. Behold in
the Personage you have injured the Mighty Quitey Righty Boolooroo of
the Blues!" Here he strutted around in a very pompous manner and
wagged his little head contemptuously at them.

"Glad to meet you, sir," said Cap'n Bill. "I allus had a likin' for
kings, bein' as they're summat unusual. Please 'scuse me for
a-sittin' on your royal toes, not knowin' as your toes were there."

"I won't excuse you!" roared the Boolooroo. "But I'll punish you.
You may depend upon that."

"Seems to me," said Trot, "you're actin' rather imperlite to
strangers. If anyone comes to our country to visit us, we always
treat 'em decent."

"YOUR country!" exclaimed the Boolooroo, looking at them more
carefully and seeming interested in their appearance. "Where in the
Sky did you come from, then, and where is your country located?"

"We live on the Earth when we're at home," replied the girl.

"The Earth? Nonsense! I've heard of the Earth, my child, but it
isn't inhabited. No one can live there because it's just a round,
cold, barren ball of mud and water," declared the Blueskin.

"Oh, you're wrong about that," said Button-Bright.

"You surely are," added Cap'n Bill.

"Why, we live there ourselves," cried Trot.

"I don't believe it. I believe you are living in Sky Island, where
you have no right to be, with your horrid white skins. And you've
intruded into the private garden of the palace of the Greatly
Stately Irately Boolooroo, which is a criminal offense. And you've
bumped my head with your basket and smashed my toes with your boards
and bodies, which is a crime unparalleled in all the history of Sky
Island! Aren't you sorry for yourselves?"

"I'm sorry for you," replied Trot, "'cause you don't seem to know
the proper way to treat visitors. But we won't stay long. We'll go
home pretty soon."

"Not until you have been punished!" exclaimed the Boolooroo sternly.
"You are my prisoners."

"Beg parding, your Majesty," said Cap'n Bill, "but you're takin' a
good deal for granted. We've tried to be friendly and peaceable, an'
we've 'poligized for hurtin' you, but if that don't satisfy you,
you'll have to make the most of it. You may be the Boolooroo of the
Blues, but you ain't even a tin whistle to us, an' you can't skeer
us for half a minute. I'm an ol' man, myself, but if you don't
behave, I'll spank you like I would a baby, an' it won't be any
trouble at all to do it, thank'e. As a matter o' fact, we've
captured your whole bloomin' blue island, but we don't like the
place very much, and I guess we'll give it back. It gives us the
blues, don't it, Trot? So as soon as we eat a bite of lunch from our
basket, we'll sail away again."

"Sail away? How?" asked the Boolooroo.

"With the Magic Umbrel," said Cap'n Bill, pointing to the umbrella
that Button-Bright was holding underneath his arm.

"Oh, ho! I see, I see," said the Boolooroo, nodding his funny head.
"Go ahead, then, and eat your lunch."

He retreated a little way to a marble seat beside the fountain, but
watched the strangers carefully. Cap'n Bill, feeling sure he had won
the argument, whispered to the boy and girl that they must eat and
get away as soon as possible, as this might prove a dangerous
country for them to remain in. Trot longed to see more of the
strange blue island, and especially wanted to explore the
magnificent blue palace that adjoined the garden and which had six
hundred tall towers and turrets; but she felt that her old friend
was wise in advising them to get away quickly. So she opened the
basket, and they all three sat in a row on a stone bench and began
to eat sandwiches and cake and pickles and cheese and all the good
things that were packed in the lunch basket.

They were hungry from the long ride, and while they ate they kept
their eyes busily employed in examining all the queer things around
them. The Boolooroo seemed quite the queerest of anything, and Trot
noticed that when he pulled the long curl that stuck up from the top
of his head, a bell tinkled somewhere in the palace. He next pulled
at the bottom of his right ear, and another faraway bell tinkled;
then he touched the end of his nose, and still another bell was
faintly heard. The Boolooroo said not a word while he was ringing
the bells, and Trot wondered if that was the way he amused himself.
But now the frown died away from his face and was replaced with a
look of satisfaction.

"Have you nearly finished?" he inquired.

"No," said Trot, "we've got to eat our apples yet."

"Apples? Apples? What are apples?" he asked.

Trot took some from the basket. "Have one?" she said. "They're awful
good."

The Boolooroo advanced a step and took the apple, which he regarded
with much curiosity.

"Guess they don't grow anywhere but on the Earth," remarked Cap'n
Bill.

"Are they good to eat?" asked the Boolooroo.

"Try it and see," answered Trot, biting into an apple herself.

The Blueskin sat down on the end of their bench, next to
Button-Bright, and began to eat his apple. He seemed to like it, for
he finished it in a hurry, and when it was gone he picked up the
Magic Umbrella.

"Let that alone!" said Button-Bright, making a grab for it. But the
Boolooroo jerked it away in an instant, and standing up he held the
umbrella behind him and laughed aloud.

"Now then," said he, "you can't get away until I'm willing to let
you go. You are my prisoners."

"I guess not," returned Cap'n Bill, and reaching out one of his long
arms, the sailorman suddenly grasped the Boolooroo around his long,
thin neck and shook him until his whole body fluttered like a flag.
"Drop that umbrel. Drop it!" yelled Cap'n Bill, and the Boolooroo
quickly obeyed. The Magic Umbrella fell to the ground, and
Button-Bright promptly seized it. Then the sailor let go his hold
and the King staggered to a seat, choking and coughing to get his
breath back.

"I told you to let things alone," growled Cap'n Bill. "If you don't
behave, your Majesty, this Blue Island'll have to get another
Boolooroo."

"Why?" asked the Blueskin.

"Because I'll prob'ly spoil you for a king, an' mebbe for anything
else. Anyhow, you'll get badly damaged if you try to interfere with
us, an' that's a fact."

"Don't kill him, Cap'n Bill," said Trot cheerfully.

"Kill me? Why, he couldn't do that," observed the King, who was
trying to rearrange the ruffle around his neck. "Nothing can kill
me."

"Why not?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Because I haven't lived my six hundred years yet. Perhaps you don't
know that every Blueskin in Sky Island lives exactly six hundred
years from the time he is born."

"No, I didn't know that," admitted the sailor.

"It's a fact, said the King. "Nothing can kill us until we've lived
to the last day of our appointed lives. When the final minute is up,
we die; but we're obliged to live all of the six hundred years
whether we want to or not. So you needn't think of trying to kill
anybody on Sky Island. It can't be done."

"Never mind," said Cap'n Bill. "I'm no murderer, thank goodness, and
I wouldn't kill you if I could, much as you deserve it."

"But isn't six hundred years an awful long time to live?" questioned
Trot.

"It seems like it at first," replied the King, "but I notice that
whenever any of my subjects get near the end of their six hundred,
they grow nervous and say the life is altogether too short."

"How long have you lived?" asked Button-Bright.

The King coughed again and turned a bit bluer. "That is considered
an impertinent question in Sky Island," he answered, "but I will say
that every Boolooroo is elected to reign three hundred years, and
I've reigned not quite--ahem!--two hundred."

"Are your kings elected, then?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Yes, of course. This is a Republic, you know. The people elect all
their officers from the King down. Every man and every woman is a
voter. The Boolooroo tells them whom to vote for, and if they don't
obey, they are severely punished. It's a fine system of government,
and the only thing I object to is electing the Boolooroo for only
three hundred years. It ought to be for life. My successor has
already been elected, but he can't reign for a hundred years to
come."

"I think three hundred years is plenty long enough," said Trot. "It
gives someone else a chance to rule, an' I wouldn't be s'prised if
the next king is a better one. Seems to me you're not much of a
Boolooroo."

"That," replied the King indignantly, "is a matter of opinion. I
like myself very much, but I can't expect you to like me, because
you're deformed and ignorant."

"I'm not!" cried Trot.

"Yes, you are. Your legs are too short and your neck is nothing at
all. Your color is most peculiar, but there isn't a shade of blue
about any of you, except the deep-blue color of the clothes the old
ape that choked me wears. Also, you are ignorant because you know
nothing of Sky Island, which is the Center of the Universe and the
only place anyone would care to live."

"Don't listen to him, Trot," said Button-Bright. "He's an ignorant
himself."

Cap'n Bill packed up the lunch basket. One end of the rope was still
tied to the handle of the basket, and the other end to his swing
seat, which lay on the ground before them.

"Well," said he, "let's go home. We've seen enough of this Blue
Country and its Blue Boolooroo, I guess, an' it's a long journey
back again."

"All right," agreed Trot, jumping up.

Button-Bright stood on the bench and held up the Magic Umbrella, so
he could open it, and the sailor had just attached the ropes when a
thin blue line shot out from behind them and in a twinkling wound
itself around the umbrella. At the same instant another blue cord
wound itself around the boy's body, and others caught Trot and Cap'n
Bill in their coils, so that all had their arms pinned fast to their
sides and found themselves absolutely helpless.






THE SIX SNUBNOSED PRINCESSES

CHAPTER 6





The Boolooroo was laughing and dancing around in front of them as if
well pleased. For a moment the prisoners could not imagine what had
happened to them, but presently half a dozen Blueskins, resembling
in shape and costume their ruler but less magnificently dressed,
stepped in front of them and bowed low to the Boolooroo.

"Your orders, most Mighty, Flighty, Tight and Righty Monarch, have
been obeyed," said the leader.

"Very well, Captain. Take that umbrella and carry it to my Royal
Treasury. See that it is safely locked up. Here's the key, and if
you don't return it to me within five minutes, I'll have you
patched."

The Captain took the key and the Magic Umbrella and hastened away to
the palace. Button-Bright had already hooked the ropes to the
elephant-trunk handle, so that when the Captain carried away the
umbrella, he dragged after him first the double seat, then Cap'n
Bill's seat, which was fastened to it, and finally the lunch-basket,
which was attached to the lower seat. At every few steps some of
these would trip up the Captain and cause him to take a tumble, but
as he had only five minutes' time in which to perform his errand, he
would scramble to his feet again and dash along the path until a
board or the basket tripped him up again.

They all watched him with interest until he had disappeared within
the palace, when the King turned to his men and said:

"Release the prisoners. They are now quite safe, and cannot escape
me."

So the men unwound the long cords that were twined around the bodies
of our three friends, and set them free. These men seemed to be
soldiers, although they bore no arms except the cords. Each cord had
a weight at the end, and when the weight was skillfully thrown by a
soldier, it wound the cord around anything in the twinkling of an
eye and held fast until it was unwound again.

Trot decided these Blueskins must have stolen into the garden when
summoned by the bells the Boolooroo had rung, but they had kept out
of sight and crept up behind the bench on which our friends were
seated until a signal from the king aroused them to action.

The little girl was greatly surprised by the suddenness of her
capture, and so was Button-Bright. Cap'n Bill shook his head and
said he was afeared they'd get into trouble. "Our mistake," he
added, "was in stoppin' to eat our lunch. But it's too late now to
cry over spilt milk."

"I don't mind, not much anyhow," asserted Trot bravely. "We're in no
hurry to get back, are we, Button-Bright?"

"I'm not," said the boy. "If they hadn't taken the umbrella, I
wouldn't care how long we stopped in this funny island. Do you think
it's a fairy country, Trot?"

"Can't say, I'm sure," she answered. "I haven't seen anything here
yet that reminds me of fairies, but Cap'n Bill said a floating
island in the sky was sure to be a fairyland."

"I think so yet, mate," returned the sailor. "But there's all sorts
o' fairies, I've heard. Some is good, an' some is bad, an' if all
the Blueskins are like their Boolooroo, they can't be called
fust-class."

"Don't let me hear any more impudence, prisoners!" called the
Boolooroo sternly. "You are already condemned to severe punishment,
and if I have any further trouble with you, you are liable to be
patched."

"What's being patched?" inquired the girl.

The soldiers all laughed at this question, but the King did not
reply. Just then a door in the palace opened and out trooped a group
of girls. There were six of them, all gorgeously dressed in silken
gowns with many puffs and tucks and ruffles and flounces and laces
and ribbons, everything being in some shade of blue, grading from
light blue to deep blue. Their blue hair was elaborately dressed and
came to a point at the top of their heads. The girls approached in a
line along the garden path, all walking with mincing steps and
holding their chins high. Their skirts prevented their long legs
from appearing as grotesque as did those of the men, but their necks
were so thin and long that the ruffles around them only made them
seem the more absurd.

"Ah," said the King with a frown, "here come the Six Snubnosed
Princesses, the most beautiful and aristocratic ladies in Sky
Island."

"They're snubnosed, all right," observed Trot, looking at the girls
with much interest, "but I should think it would make 'em mad to
call 'em that."

"Why?" asked the Boolooroo in surprise. "Is not a snub nose the
highest mark of female beauty?"

"Is it?" asked the girl.

"Most certainly. In this favored island, which is the Center of the
Universe, a snub nose is an evidence of high breeding which any lady
would be proud to possess."

The Six Snubnosed Princesses now approached the fountain and stood
in a row, staring with haughty looks at the strangers.

"Goodness me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the first. "What queer,
dreadful-looking creatures are these? Where in all the Sky did they
come from?"

"They say they came from the Earth, Cerulia," answered the
Boolooroo.

"But that is impossible," said another Princess. "Our scientists
have proved that the Earth is not inhabited."

"Your scientists'll have to guess again, then," said Trot.

"But how did they get to Sky Island?" inquired the third snubnosed
one.

"By means of a Magic Umbrella, which I have captured and put away in
my Treasure Chamber," replied the Boolooroo.

"What will you do with the monsters, papa?" asked the fourth
Princess.

"I haven't decided yet," said the Boolooroo. "They're curiosities,
you see, and may serve to amuse us. But as they're only half
civilized, I shall make them my slaves."

"What are they good for? Can they do anything useful?" asked the
fifth.

"We'll see," returned the King impatiently. "I can't decide in a
hurry. Give me time, Azure, give me time. If there's anything I
hate, it's a hurry."

"I've an idea, your Majesty," announced the sixth Snubnosed
Princess, whose complexion was rather darker than that of her
sisters, "and it has come to me quite deliberately, without any
hurry at all. Let us take the little girl to be our maid--to wait
upon us and amuse us when we're dull. All the other ladies of the
court will be wild with envy, and if the child doesn't prove of use
to us, we can keep her for a living pincushion."

"Oh! Ah! That will be fine!" cried all the other five, and the
Boolooroo said:

"Very well, Indigo, it shall be as you desire." Then he turned to
Trot and added, "I present you to the Six Lovely Snubnosed
Princesses, to be their slave. If you are good and obedient, you
won't get your ears boxed oftener than once an hour."

"I won't be anybody's slave," protested Trot. "I don't like these
snubnosed, fussy females, an' I won't have anything to do with 'em."

"How impudent!" cried Cerulia.

"How vulgar!" cried Turquoise.

"How unladylike!" cried Sapphire.

"How silly!" cried Azure.

"How absurd!" cried Cobalt.

"How wicked!" cried Indigo. And then all six held up their hands as
if horrified.

The Boolooroo laughed. "You'll know how to bring her to time, I
imagine," he remarked, "and if the girl isn't reasonable and
obedient, send her to me and I'll have her patched. Now, then, take
her away."

But Trot was obstinate and wouldn't budge a step. "Keep us together,
your Majesty," begged Cap'n Bill. "If we're to be slaves, don't
separate us, but make us all the same kind o' slaves."

"I shall do what pleases me," declared the Boolooroo angrily. "Don't
try to dictate, old Moonface, for there's only one Royal Will in Sky
Island, and that's my own."

He then gave a command to a soldier, who hastened away to the palace
and soon returned with a number of long, blue ribbons. One he tied
around Trot's waist and then attached to it six other ribbons. Each
of the Six Snubnosed Princesses held the end of a ribbon, and then
they turned and marched haughtily away to the palace, dragging the
little girl after them.

"Don't worry, Trot," cried Button-Bright. "We'll get you out of this
trouble pretty soon."

"Trust to us, mate," added Cap'n Bill. "We'll manage to take care o'
you."

"Oh, I'm all right," answered Trot with fine courage. "I'm not
afraid of these gawkies."

But the princesses pulled her after them, and soon they had all
disappeared into one of the entrances to the Blue Palace.

"Now, then," said the Boolooroo. "I will instruct you two in your
future duties. I shall make old Moonface--"

"My name's Cap'n Bill Weedles," interrupted the sailor.

"I don't care what your name is. I shall call you old Moonface,"
replied the king, "for that suits you quite well. I shall appoint
you the Royal Nectar Mixer to the court of Sky Island, and if you
don't mix our nectar properly, I'll have you patched."

"How do you mix it?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I don't mix it. It's not the Boolooroo's place to mix nectar," was
the stern reply. "But you may inquire of the palace servants, and
perhaps the Royal Chef or the Major-domo will condescend to tell
you. Take him to the servants' quarters, Captain Ultramarine, and
give him a suit of the royal livery."

So Cap'n Bill was lad away by the chief of the soldiers, and when he
had gone, the king said to Button-Bright, "You, slave, shall be the
Royal Bootblue. Your duty will be to keep the boots and shoes of the
royal family nicely polished with blue."

"I don't know how," answered Button-Bright surlily.

"You'll soon learn. The Royal Steward will supply you with blue
paste, and when you've brushed this on our shoes, you must shine
them with Q-rays of Moonshine. Do you understand?"

"No," said Button-Bright.

Then the Boolooroo told one of the soldiers to take the boy to the
shoeblue den and have him instructed in his duties, and the soldiers
promptly obeyed and dragged Button-Bright away to the end of the
palace where the servants lived.






GHIP-GHISIZZLE PROVES FRIENDLY

CHAPTER 7





The Royal Palace was certainly a magnificent building, with large
and lofty rooms and superb furnishings, all being in shades of blue.
The soldier and the boy passed through several broad corridors and
then came to a big hall where many servants were congregated. These
were staring in bewilderment at Cap'n Bill, who had been introduced
to them by Captain Ultramarine. Now they turned in no less surprise
to examine the boy, and their looks expressed not only astonishment
but dislike.

The servants were all richly attired in blue silk liveries, and they
seemed disposed to resent the fact that these strangers had been
added to their ranks. They scowled and muttered and behaved in a
very unfriendly way, even after Captain Ultramarine had explained
that the newcomers were merely base slaves, and not to be classed
with the free royal servants of the palace.

One of those present, however, showed no especial enmity to
Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill, and this Blueskin attracted the boy's
notice because his appearance was so strange. He looked as if he
were made of two separate men, each cut through the middle and then
joined together, half of one to half of the other. One side of his
blue hair was curly and the other half straight; one ear was big and
stuck out from the side of his head, while the other ear was small
and flat; one eye was half shut and twinkling, while the other was
big and staring; his nose was thin on one side and flat on the
other, while one side of his mouth curled up and the other down.
Button-Bright also noticed that he limped as he walked because one
leg was a trifle longer than the other, and that one hand was
delicate and slender and the other thick and hardened by use.

"Don't stare at him," a voice whispered in the boy's ear. "The poor
fellow has been patched, that's all."

Button-Bright turned to see who had spoken and found by his side a
tall young Blueskin with a blue-gold chain around his neck. He was
quite the best looking person the boy had seen in Sky Island, and he
spoke in a pleasant way and seemed quite friendly. But the two-sided
man had overheard the remark, and he now stepped forward and said in
a careless tone:

"Never mind. It's no disgrace to be patched in a country ruled by
such a cruel Boolooroo as we have. Let the boy look at me if he
wants to. I'm not pretty, but that's not my fault. Blame the
Boolooroo."

"I--I'm glad to meet you, sir," stammered Button-Bright. "What is
your name, please?"

"I'm now named Jimfred Jonesjinks, and my partner is called Fredjim
Jinksjones. He's busy at present guarding the Treasure Chamber, but
I'll introduce you to him when he comes back. We've had the
misfortune to be patched, you know."

"What is being patched?" asked the boy.

"They cut two of us in halves and mismatch the halves--half of one
to half of the other, you know--and then the other two halves are
patched together. It destroys our individuality and makes us complex
creatures, so it's the worst punishment than can be inflicted in Sky
Island."

"Oh," said Button-Bright, alarmed at such dreadful butchery.
"Doesn't it hurt?"

"No, it doesn't hurt," replied Jimfred. "But it makes one
frightfully nervous. They stand you under a big knife, which drops
and slices you neatly in two, exactly in the middle. Then they match
half of you to another person who has likewise been sliced, and
there you are, patched to someone you don't care about and haven't
much interest in. If your half wants to do something, the other half
is likely to want to do something different, and the funny part of
it is you don't quite know which is your half and which is the other
half. It's a terrible punishment, and in a country where one can't
die or be killed until he has lived his six hundred years, to be
patched is a great misfortune."

"I'm sure it is," said Button-Bright earnestly. "But can't you ever
get--get--UNpatched again?"

"If the Boolooroo would consent, I think it could be done," Jimfred
replied, "but he never will consent. This is about the meanest
Boolooroo who ever ruled this land, and he was the first to invent
patching people as a punishment. I think we will all be glad when
his three hundred years of rule are ended."

"When will that be?" inquired the boy.

"Hush-sh-sh!" cried everyone in a chorus, and they all looked over
their shoulders as if frightened by the question. The officer with
the blue-gold chain pulled Button-Bright's sleeve and whispered,
"Follow me, please." And then he beckoned to Cap'n Bill and led the
two slaves to another room where they were alone.

"I must instruct you in your duties," said he when they were all
comfortably seated in cozy chairs with blue cushions. "You must
learn how to obey the Boolooroo's commands, so he won't become angry
and have you patched."

"How could he patch US?" asked the sailorman curiously.

"Oh, he'd just slice you all in halves and then patch half of the
boy to half of the girl, and the other half to half of you, and the
other half of you to the other half of the girl. See?"

"Can't say I do," said Cap'n Bill, much bewildered. "It's a reg'lar
mix-up."

"That's what it's meant to be," explained the young officer.

"An' seein' as we're Earth folks, an' not natives of Sky Island,
I've an idea the slicing machine would about end us, without bein'
patched," continued the sailor.

"Oh," said Button-Bright, "so it would."

"While you are in this country, you can't die till you've lived six
hundred years," declared the officer.

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "That's different, of course. But who are
you, please?"

"My name is Ghip-Ghi-siz-zle. Can you remember it?"

"I can 'member the 'sizzle,'" said the boy, "but I'm 'fraid the
Gwip--Grip--Glip--"

"Ghip-Ghi-siz-zle" repeated the officer slowly. "I want you to
remember my name, because if you are going to live here, you are
sure to hear of me a great many times. Can you keep a secret?"

"I can try," said Button-Bright.

"I've kep' secrets--once in a while," asserted Cap'n Bill.

"Well, try to keep this one. I'm to be the next Boolooroo of Sky
Island."

"Good for you!" cried the sailor. "I wish you was the Boolooroo now,
sir. But it seems you've got to wait a hundred years or more afore
you can take his place."

Ghip-Ghisizzle rose to his feet and paced up and down the room for a
time, a frown upon his face. Then he halted and faced Cap'n Bill.
"Sir," said he, "there lies all my trouble. I'm quite sure the
present Boolooroo has reigned three hundred years next Thursday, but
he claims it is only two hundred years, and as he holds the Royal
Book of Records under lock and key in the Royal Treasury, there is
no way for us to prove he is wrong."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "How old is the Boolooroo?"

"He was two hundred years old when he was elected," replied
Ghip-Ghisizzle. "If he has already reigned three hundred years as I
suspect, then he is now five hundred years old. You see, he is
trying to steal another hundred years of rule so as to remain a
tyrant all his life."

"He don't seem as old as that," observed Cap'n Bill thoughtfully.
"Why, I'm only sixty myself, an' I guess I look twice as old as your
king does."

"We do not show our age in looks," the officer answered. "I am just
about your age, sir--sixty-two my next birthday--but I'm sure I
don't look as old as that."

"That's a fact," agreed Cap'n Bill. Then he turned to Button-Bright
and added, "Don't that prove Sky Island is a fairy country as I
said?"

"Oh, I've known that all along," said the boy. "The slicing and
patching proves it, and so do lots of other things."

"Now then," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "let us talk over your duties. It
seems you must mix the royal nectar, Cap'n Bill. Do you know how to
do that?"

"I'm free to say as I don't, friend Sizzle."

"The Boolooroo is very particular about his nectar. I think he has
given you this job so he can find fault with you and have you
punished. But we will fool him. You are strangers here, and I don't
want you imposed upon. I'll send Tiggle to the royal pantry and keep
him there to mix the nectar. Then when the Boolooroo or the Queen or
any of the Snubnosed Princesses call for a drink, you can carry it
to them and it will be sure to suit them."

"Thank'e sir," said Cap'n Bill. "That's real kind of you."

"Your job, Button-Bright, is easier," continued Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"I'm no bootblack," declared the boy. "The Boolooroo has no right to
make me do his dirty work."

"You're a slave," the officer reminded him, "and a slave must obey."

"Why?" asked Button-Bright.

"Because he can't help himself. No slave ever wants to obey, but he
just has to. And it isn't dirty work at all. You don't black the
royal boots and shoes, you merely blue them with a finely perfumed
blue paste. Then you shine them neatly and your task is done. You
will not be humiliated by becoming a bootblack. You'll be a
bootblue."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "I don't see much difference, but perhaps
it's a little more respectable."

"Yes, the Royal Bootblue is considered a high official in Sky
Island. You do your work at evening or early morning, and the rest
of the day you are at liberty to do as you please."

"It won't last long, Button-Bright," said Cap'n Bill consolingly.
"Somethin's bound to happen pretty soon, you know."

"I think so myself," answered the boy.

"And now," remarked Ghip-Ghisizzle, "since you understand your new
duties, perhaps you'd like to walk out with me and see the Blue City
and the glorious Blue Country of Sky Island."

"We would that!" cried Cap'n Bill promptly.

So they accompanied their new friend through a maze of passages--for
the palace was very big--and then through a high, arched portal into
the streets of the City. So rapid had been their descent when the
umbrella landed them in the royal garden that they had not even
caught a glimpse of the Blue City, so now they gazed with wonder and
interest at the splendid sights that met their eyes.






THE BLUE CITY

CHAPTER 8





The Blue City was quite extensive, and consisted of many broad
streets paved with blue marble and lined with splendid buildings of
the same beautiful material. There were houses and castles and shops
for the merchants, and all were prettily designed and had many
slender spires and imposing turrets that rose far into the blue air.
Everything was blue here, just as was everything in the Royal Palace
and gardens, and a blue haze overhung all the city.

"Doesn't the sun ever shine?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Not in the blue part of Sky Island," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle. "The
moon shines here every night, but we never see the sun. I am told,
however, that on the other half of the Island--which I have never
seen--the sun shines brightly but there is no moon at all."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "Is there another half to Sky Island?'

"Yes, a dreadful place called the Pink Country. I'm told everything
there is pink instead of blue. A fearful place it must be, indeed!"
said the Blueskin with a shudder.

"I dunno 'bout that," remarked Cap'n Bill. "That Pink Country sounds
kind o' cheerful to me. Is your Blue Country very big?"

"It is immense," was the proud reply. "This enormous city extends a
half mile in all directions from the center, and the country outside
the City is fully a half-mile further in extent. That's very big,
isn't it?"

"Not very," replied Cap'n Bill with a smile. "We've cities on the
Earth ten times bigger, an' then some big besides. We'd call this a
small town in our country."

"Our Country is thousands of miles wide and thousands of miles
long--it's the great United States of America!" added the boy
earnestly.

Ghip-Ghisizzle seemed astonished. He was silent a moment, and then
he said, "Here in Sky Island we prize truthfulness very highly. Our
Boolooroo is not very truthful, I admit, for he is trying to
misrepresent the length of his reign, but our people as a rule speak
only the truth."

"So do we," asserted Cap'n Bill. "What Button-Bright said is the
honest truth, every word of it."

"But we have been led to believe that Sky Island is the greatest
country in the universe--meaning, of course, our half of it, the
Blue Country."

"It may be for you, perhaps," the sailor stated politely. "An' I
don't imagine any island floatin' in the sky is any bigger. But the
Universe is a big place, an' you can't be sure of what's in it till
you've traveled like we have."

"Perhaps you are right," mused the Blueskin, but he still seemed to
doubt them.

"Is the Pink side of Sky Island bigger than the Blue side?" asked
Button-Bright.

"No, it is supposed to be the same size," was the reply.

"Then why haven't you ever been there? Seems to me you could walk
across the whole island in an hour," said the boy.

"The two parts are separated by an impassable barrier," answered
Ghip-Ghisizzle. "Between them lies the Great Fog Bank."

"A fog bank? Why, that's no barrier!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill.

"It is indeed," returned the Blueskin. "The Fog Bank is so thick and
heavy that it blinds one, and if once you got into the Bank, you
might wander forever and not find your way out again. Also, it is
full of dampness that wets your clothes and your hair until you
become miserable. It is furthermore said that those who enter the
Fog Bank forfeit the six hundred years allowed them to live and are
liable to die at any time. Here we do not die, you know; we merely
pass away."

"How's that?" asked the sailor. "Isn't 'pass'n' away' jus' the same
as dyin'?"

"No indeed. When our six hundred years are ended, we march into the
Great Blue Grotto, through the Arch of Phinis, and are never seen
again."

"That's queer," said Button-Bright. "What would happen if you didn't
march through the Arch?"

"I do not know, for no one has ever refused to do so. It is the Law,
and we all obey it."

"It saves funeral expenses, anyhow," remarked Cap'n Bill. "Where is
this Arch?"

"Just outside the gates of the City. There is a mountain in the
center of the Blue land, and the entrance to the Great Blue Grotto
is at the foot of the mountain. According to our figures, the
Boolooroo ought to march into this Grotto a hundred years from next
Thursday, but he is trying to steal a hundred years and so perhaps
he won't enter the Arch of Phinis. Therefore, if you will please be
patient for about a hundred years, you will discover what happens to
one who breaks the Law."

"Thank'e," remarked Cap'n Bill. "I don't expect to be very curious a
hundred years from now."

"Nor I," added Button-Bright, laughing at the whimsical speech. "But
I don't see how the Boolooroo is able to fool you all. Can't any of
you remember two or three hundred years back when he first began to
rule?"

"No," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "that's a long time to remember, and we
Blueskins try to forget all we can, especially whatever is
unpleasant. Those who remember are usually the unhappy ones; only
those able to forget find the most joy in life."

During this conversation they had been walking along the streets of
the Blue City, where many of the Blueskin inhabitants stopped to
gaze wonderingly at the sailor and the boy, whose strange appearance
surprised them. They were a nervous, restless people, and their
egg-shaped heads, set on the ends of long, thin necks, seemed so
grotesque to the strangers that they could scarcely forbear laughing
at them. The bodies of these people were short and round and their
legs exceptionally long, so when a Blueskin walked, he covered twice
as much ground at one step as Cap'n Bill or Button-Bright did. The
women seemed just as repellent as the men, and Button-Bright began
to understand that the Six Snubnosed Princesses were, after all,
rather better looking than most of the females of the Blue Country
and so had a certain right to be proud and haughty.

There were no horses nor cows in this land, but there were plenty of
blue goats, from which the people got their milk. Children tended
the goats--wee Blueskin boys and girls whose appearance was so
comical that Button-Bright laughed whenever he saw one of them.

Although the natives had never seen before this any human beings
made as Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were, they took a strong
dislike to the strangers and several times threatened to attack
them. Perhaps if Ghip-Ghisizzle, who was their favorite, had not
been present, they would have mobbed our friends with vicious
ill-will and might have seriously injured them. But Ghip-Ghisizzle's
friendly protection made them hold aloof.

By and by they passed through a City gate, and their guide showed
them the outer walls, which protected the City from the country
beyond. There were several of these gates, and from their recesses
stone steps led to the top of the wall. They mounted a flight of
these steps and from their elevation plainly saw the low mountain
where the Arch of Phinis was located, and beyond that the thick,
blue-gray Fog Bank, which constantly rolled like billows of the
ocean and really seemed, from a distance, quite forbidding.

"But it wouldn't take long to get there," decided Button-Bright,
"and if you were close up, it might not be worse than any other fog.
Is the Pink Country on the other side of it?"

"So we are told in the Book of Records," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle.
"None of us now living know anything about it, but the Book of
Records calls it the 'Sunset Country' and says that at evening the
pink shades are drowned by terrible colors of orange and crimson and
golden-yellow and red. Wouldn't it be horrible to be obliged to look
upon such a sight? It must give the poor people who live there
dreadful headaches."

"I'd like to see that Book of Records," mused Cap'n Bill, who didn't
think the description of the Sunset Country at all dreadful.

"I'd like to see it myself," returned Ghip-Ghisizzle with a sigh,
"but no one can lay hands on it because the Boolooroo keeps it
safely locked up in his Treasure Chamber."

"Where's the key to the Treasure Chamber?" asked Button-Bright.

"The Boolooroo keeps it in his pocket night and day," was the reply.
"He is afraid to let anyone see the Book because it would prove he
has already reigned three hundred years next Thursday, and then he
would have to resign the throne to me and leave the Palace and live
in a common house."

"My Magic Umbrella is in that Treasure Chamber," said Button-Bright,
"and I'm going to try to get it."

"Are you?" inquired Ghip-Ghisizzle eagerly. "Well, if you manage to
enter the Treasure Chamber, be sure to bring me the Book of Records.
If you can do that, I will be the best and most grateful friend you
ever had!"

"I'll see," said the boy. "It ought not to be hard work to break
into the Treasure chamber. Is it guarded?"

"Yes. The outside guard is Jimfred Jinksjones, the double patch of
the Fredjim whom you have met, and the inside guard is a ravenous
creature known as the Blue Wolf, which has teeth a foot long and as
sharp as needles."

"Oh," said Button-Bright. "But never mind the Blue Wolf; I must
manage to get my umbrella somehow or other."

They now walked back to the palace, still objects of much curiosity
to the natives, who sneered at them and mocked them but dared not
interfere with their progress. At the palace they found that dinner
was about to be served in the big dining hall of the servants and
dependents and household officers of the royal Boolooroo.
Ghip-Ghisizzle was the Majordomo and Master of Ceremonies, so he
took his seat at the end of the long table and placed Cap'n Bill on
one side of him and Button-Bright on the other, to the great
annoyance of the other Blueskins present, who favored the strangers
with nothing pleasanter than envious scowls.

The Boolooroo and his Queen and daughters--the Six Snubnosed
Princesses--dined in formal state in the Banquet Hall, where they
were waited upon by favorite soldiers of the Royal Bodyguard. Here
in the servants' hall there was one vacant seat next to
Button-Bright which was reserved for Trot; but the little girl had
not yet appeared, and the sailorman and the boy were beginning to be
uneasy about her.






THE TRIBULATION OF TROT

CHAPTER 9





The apartments occupied by the Six Snubnosed Princesses were so
magnificent that when Trot first entered them, led by her haughty
captors, she thought they must be the most beautiful rooms in the
world. There was a long and broad reception room, with forty-seven
windows in it, and opening out of it were six lovely bedchambers,
each furnished in the greatest luxury. Adjoining each sleeping room
was a marble bath, and each Princess had a separate boudoir and a
dressing room. The furnishings were of the utmost splendor,
blue-gold and blue gems being profusely used in the decorations,
while the divans and chairs were of richly carved bluewood
upholstered in blue satins and silks. The draperies were superbly
embroidered, and the rugs upon the marble floors were woven with
beautiful scenes in every conceivable shade of blue.

When they first reached the reception room, Princess Azure cast
herself upon a divan while her five sisters sat or reclined in easy
chairs with their heads thrown back and their blue chins scornfully
elevated. Trot, who was much annoyed at the treatment she had
received, did not hesitate to seat herself also in a big easy chair.

"Slave!" cried Princess Cerulia, "Fetch me a mirror."

"Slave!" cried Princess Turquoise, "A lock of my hair is loosened;
bind it up."

"Slave!" cried Princess Cobalt, "Unfasten my shoes; they're too
tight."

"Slave!" cried Princess Sapphire, "Bring hither my box of blue
chocolates."

"Slave!" cried Princess Azure, "Stand by my side and fan me."

"Slave!" cried Princess Indigo, "Get out of that chair. How dare you
sit in our presence?"

"If you're saying all those things to me," replied Trot, "you may as
well save your breath. I'm no slave." And she cuddled down closer in
the chair.

"You ARE a slave!" shouted the six all together.

"I'm not!"

"Our father, the Revered and Resplendent Royal Ruler of the Blues,
has made you our slave," asserted Indigo with a yawn.

"But he can't," objected the little girl. "I'm some Royal an'
Rapturous an' Ridic'lous myself, an' I won't allow any cheap
Boolooroo to order me 'round."

"Are you of royal birth?" asked Azure, seeming surprised.

"Royal! Why, I'm an American, Snubnoses, and if there's anything
royaler than an American, I'd like to know what it is."

The Princesses seemed uncertain what reply to make to this speech
and began whispering together. Finally, Indigo said to Trot, "We do
not think it matters what you were in your own country, for having
left there you have forfeited your rank. By recklessly intruding
into our domain, you have become a slave, and being a slave you must
obey us or suffer the consequences."

"What cons'quences?" asked the girl.

"Dare to disobey us and you will quickly find out," snapped Indigo,
swaying her head from side to side on its long, swan-like neck like
the pendulum of a clock.

"I don't want any trouble," said Trot gravely. "We came to Sky
Island by mistake and wanted to go right away again; but your father
wouldn't let us. It isn't our fault we're still here, an' I'm free
to say you're a very dis'gree'ble an' horrid lot of people with no
manners to speak of, or you'd treat us nicely."

"No impertinence!" cried Indigo savagely.

"Why, it's the truth," replied Trot.

Indigo made a rush and caught Trot by both shoulders. The Princess
was twice the little girl's size, and she shook her victim so
violently that Trot's teeth rattled together. Then Princess Cobalt
came up and slapped one side of the slave's face, and Princess
Turquoise ran forward and slapped the other side. Cerulia gave Trot
a push one way, and Sapphire pushed her the other way, so the little
girl was quite out of breath and very angry when finally her
punishment ceased. She had not been much hurt, though, and she was
wise enough to understand that these Princesses were all cruel and
vindictive, so that her safest plan was to pretend to obey them.

"Now then," commanded Princess Indigo, "go and feed my little blue
dog that crows like a rooster."

"And feed my pretty blue cat that sings like a bird," said Princess
Azure.

"And feed my soft, blue lamb that chatters like a monkey," said
Princess Cobalt.

"And feed my poetic blue parrot that barks like a dog," said
Princess Sapphire.

"And feed my fuzzy blue rabbit that roars like a lion," said
Princess Turquoise.

"And feed my lovely blue peacock that mews like a cat," said
Princess Cerulia.

"Anything else?" asked Trot, drawing a long breath.

"Not until you have properly fed our pets," replied Azure with a
scowl.

"What do they eat, then?"

"Meat!"

"Milk!"

"Clover!"

"Seeds!"

"Bread!"

"Carrots!"

"All right," said Trot, "where do you keep the menagerie?"

"Our pets are in our boudoirs," said Indigo harshly. "What a little
fool you are!"

"Perhaps," said Trot, pausing as she was about to leave the room,
"when I grow up I'll be as big a fool as any of you."

Then she ran away to escape another shaking, and in the first
boudoir she found the little blue dog curled up on a blue cushion in
a corner. Trot patted his head gently, and this surprised the dog,
who was accustomed to cuffs and kicks. So he licked Trot's hand and
wagged his funny little tail and then straightened up and crowed
like a rooster. The girl was delighted with the queer doggie, and
she found some meat in a cupboard and fed him out of her hand,
patting the tiny creature and stroking his soft blue hair. The
doggie had never in his life known anyone so kind and gentle, so
when Trot went into the next boudoir, the animal followed close at
her heels, wagging his tail every minute.

The blue cat was asleep on a window seat, but it woke up when Trot
tenderly took it in her lap and fed it milk from a blue-gold dish.
It was a pretty cat and instantly knew the little girl was a friend
vastly different from its own bad-tempered mistress, so it sang
beautifully as a bird sings, and both the cat and the dog followed
Trot into the third boudoir.

Here was a tiny baby lamb with fleece as blue as a larkspur and as
soft as milk.

"Oh, you darling!" cried Trot, hugging the little lamb tight in her
arms. At once the lamb began chattering just as a monkey chatters,
only in the most friendly and grateful way, and Trot fed it a
handful of fresh blue clover and smoothed and petted it until the
lamb was eager to follow her wherever she might go.

When she came to the fourth boudoir, a handsome blue parrot sat on a
blue perch and began barking as if it were nearly starved. Then it
cried out,

"Rub-a-dub, dub,
Gimme some grub!"

Trot laughed and gave it some seeds, and while the parrot ate them
she stroked gently his soft feathers. The bird seemed much
astonished at the unusual caress and turned upon the girl first one
little eye and then the other as if trying to discover why she was
so kind. He had never experienced kind treatment in all his life. So
it was no wonder that when the little girl entered the fifth boudoir
she was followed by the parrot, the lamb, the cat and the dog, who
all stood beside her and watched her feed the peacock, which she
found strutting around and mewing like a cat for his dinner. Said
the parrot,

"I spy a peacock's eye
On every feather. I wonder why?"

The peacock soon came to love Trot as much as the other bird and all
the beasts did, and it spread its tail and strutted after her into
the next boudoir, the sixth one. As she entered this room, Trot gave
a start of fear, for a terrible roar like the roar of a lion greeted
her. But there was no lion there; a fuzzy, blue rabbit was making
all the noise. "For goodness sake keep quiet," said Trot. "Here's a
nice blue carrot for you. The color seems all wrong, but it may
taste jus' as good as if it was red."

Evidently it did taste good, for the rabbit ate it greedily. When it
was not roaring, the creature was so soft and fluffy that Trot
played with it and fondled it a long time after it had finished
eating, and the rabbit played with the cat and the dog and the lamb
and did not seem a bit afraid of the parrot or the peacock. But all
of a sudden in pounced Princess Indigo with a yell of anger.

"So this is how you waste your time, is it?" exclaimed the Princess,
and grabbing Trot's arm, she jerked the girl to her feet and began
pushing her from the room. All the pets began to follow her, and
seeing this, Indigo yelled at them to keep back. As they paid no
attention to this command, the princess seized a basin of water and
dashed the fluid over the beasts and birds, after which she renewed
her attempt to push Trot from the room. The pets rebelled at such
treatment, and believing they ought to protect Trot, whom they knew
to be their friend, they proceeded to defend her. The little blue
dog dashed at Indigo and bit her right ankle, while the blue cat
scratched her left leg with its claws and the parrot flew upon her
shoulder and pecked her ear. The lamb ran up and butted Indigo so
that she stumbled forward on her face, when the peacock proceeded to
pound her head with his wings. Indigo, screaming with fright, sprang
to her feet again, but the rabbit ran between her legs and tripped
her up, all the time roaring loudly like a lion, and the dog crowed
triumphantly, as a rooster crows, while the cat warbled noisily and
the lamb chattered and the parrot barked and the peacock screeched
"me-ow!"

Altogether, Indigo was, as Trot said, "scared stiff," and she howled
for help until her sisters ran in and rescued her, pulling her
through the bedchamber into the reception room. When she was alone,
Trot sat down on the floor and laughed until the tears came to her
eyes, and she hugged all the pets and kissed them every one and
thanked them for protecting her.

"That's all right;
We like a fight,"

declared the parrot in reply.

The Princesses were horrified to find Indigo so scratched and
bitten, and they were likewise amazed at the rebellion of their six
pets, which they had never petted, indeed, but kept in their
boudoirs so they could abuse them whenever they felt especially
wicked or ill-natured. None of the snubnosed ones dared enter the
room where the girl was, but they called through a crack in the door
for Trot to come out instantly. Trot, pretending not to hear, paid
no attention to these demands.

Finding themselves helpless and balked of their revenge, the Six
Snubnosed Princesses finally recovered from their excitement and
settled down to a pleasant sisterly quarrel, as was their customary
amusement. Indigo wanted to have Trot patched, and Cerulia wanted
her beaten with knotted cords, and Cobalt wanted her locked up in a
dark room, and Sapphire wanted her fed on sand, and Turquoise wanted
her bound to a windmill, and so between these various desires, they
quarreled and argued until dinner time arrived.

Trot was occupying Indigo's room, so that Princess was obliged to
dress with Azure, not daring to enter her own chamber, and the two
sisters quarreled so enthusiastically that they almost came to blows
before they were ready for dinner.

Before the Six Snubnosed Princesses went to the Royal Banquet Hall,
Cobalt stuck her head through a crack of the door and said to Trot,
"If you want any dinner, you'll find it in the servants' hall. I
advise you to eat, for after our dinner we will decide upon a
fitting punishment for you, and then I'm sure you won't have much
appetite."

"Thank you," replied the girl. "I'm right hungry, jus' now." She
waited until the snubnosed sextette had pranced haughtily away, and
then she came out, followed by all the pets, and found her way to
the servants' quarters.






THE KING'S TREASURE CHAMBER

CHAPTER 10





All the Blueskins assembled in the servants' hall were amazed to see
the pets of the Princesses trailing after the strange little girl,
but Trot took her place next to Button-Bright at the table, and the
parrot perched upon her shoulder, while the peacock stood upon one
side of her chair, and the lamb upon the other, and the cat and dog
lay at her feet and the blue rabbit climbed into her lap and cuddled
down there. Some of the Blueskins insisted that the animals and
birds must be put out of the room, but Ghip-Ghisizzle said they
could remain, as they were the favored pets of the lovely Snubnosed
Princesses.

Cap'n Bill was delighted to see his dear little friend again, and so
was Button-Bright, and now that they were reunited--for a time, at
least--they paid little heed to the sour looks and taunting remarks
of the ugly Blueskins and ate heartily of the dinner, which was
really very good.

The meal was no sooner over than Ghip-Ghisizzle was summoned to the
chamber of his Majesty the Boolooroo, but before he went away, he
took Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright into a small room and
advised them to stay there until he returned so that the servants
and soldiers would not molest them. "My people seem to dislike
strangers," said the Majordomo thoughtfully, "and that surprises me
because you are the first strangers they have ever seen. I think
they imagine you will become favorites of the Boolooroo and of the
Princesses, and that is why they are jealous and hate you."

"They needn't worry 'bout that," replied Trot. "The Snubnoses hate
me worse than the people do."

"I can't imagine a bootblue becoming a royal favorite," grumbled
Button-Bright.

"Or a necktie mixer," added Cap'n Bill.

"You don't mix neckties; you're a nectar mixer," said Ghip-Ghisizzle
correcting the sailor. "I'll not be gone long, for I'm no favorite
of the Boolooroo, either, so please stay quietly in this room until
my return."

The Majordomo found the Boolooroo in a bad temper. He had finished
his dinner, where his six daughters had bitterly denounced Trot all
through the meal and implored their father to invent some new and
terrible punishment for her. Also, his wife, the Queen, had made him
angry by begging for gold to buy ribbons with. Then, when he had
retired to his own private room, he decided to send for the umbrella
he had stolen from Button-Bright and test its magic powers. But the
umbrella, in his hands, proved just as common as any other umbrella
might be. He opened it and closed it, and turned it this way and
that, commanding it to do all sorts of things, but of course the
Magic Umbrella would obey no one but a member of the family that
rightfully owned it. At last the Boolooroo threw it down and stamped
upon it and then kicked it into a corner, where it rolled underneath
a cabinet. Then he sent for Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"Do you know how to work that Magic Umbrella?" he asked the
Majordomo.

"No, your Majesty, I do not," was the reply.

"Well, find out. Make the Whiteskins tell you so that I can use it
for my own amusement."

"I'll do my best, your Majesty," said Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"You'll do more than that, or I'll have you patched!" roared the
angry Boolooroo. "And don't waste any time, either, for as soon as
we find out the secret of the umbrella I'm going to have the three
strangers marched through the Arch of Phinis, and that will be the
end of them."

"You can't do that, your Majesty," said the Majordomo.

"Why can't I?"

"They haven't lived six hundred years yet, and only those who have
lived that length of time are allowed to march through the Arch of
Phinis into the Great Blue Grotto."

The King looked at him with a sneer. "Has anyone ever come out of
that Arch alive?" he asked.

"No," said Ghip-ghisizzle, "but no one has ever gone into the Blue
Grotto until his allotted time was up."

"Well, I'm going to try the experiment," declared the Boolooroo. "I
shall march these three strangers through the Arch, and if by chance
they come out alive, I'll do a new sort of patching--I'll chop off
their heads and mix 'em up, putting the wrong head on each of 'em.
Ha, ha! Won't it be funny to see the old Moonface's head on the
little girl? Ho, ho! I really hope they'll come out of the Great
Blue Grotto alive!"

"I also hope they will," replied Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"Then I'll bet you four buttonholes they don't. I've a suspicion
that once they enter the Great Blue Grotto that's the last of them."

Ghip-Ghisizzle went away quite sad and unhappy. He did not approve
the way the strangers were being treated and thought it was wicked
and cruel to try to destroy them.

During his absence, the prisoners had been talking together very
earnestly. "We must get away from here somehow 'r other," said Cap'n
Bill, "but o' course we can't stir a step without the Magic Umbrel."

"No, I must surely manage to get my umbrella first," said
Button-Bright.

"Do it quick, then," urged Trot, "for I can't stand those snubnoses
much longer."

"I'll do it tonight," said the boy.

"The sooner, the better, my lad," remarked the sailor, "but seein'
as the Blue Boolooroo has locked it up in his Treasure Chamber, it
mayn't be easy to get hold of."

"No, it won't be easy," Button-Bright admitted. "But it has to be
done, Cap'n Bill, and there's no use waiting any longer. No one here
likes us, and in a few days they may make an end of us."

"Oh, Button-Bright! There's a Blue Wolf in the Treasure Chamber!"
exclaimed Trot.

"Yes, I know."

"An' a patched man on guard outside," Cap'n Bill reminded him.

"I know," repeated Button-Bright.

"And the key's in the King's own pocket," added Trot despairingly.

The boy nodded. He didn't say how he would overcome all these
difficulties, so the little girl feared they would never see the
Magic Umbrella again. But their present position was a very serious
one, and even Cap'n Bill dared not advise Button-Bright to give up
the desperate attempt.

When Ghip-Ghisizzle returned, he said, "You must be very careful not
to anger the Boolooroo, or he may do you a mischief. I think the
little girl had better keep away from the Princesses for tonight
unless they demand her presence. The boy must go for the King's
shoes and blue them and polish them and then take them back to the
Royal Bedchamber. Cap'n Bill won't have anything to do, for I've
ordered Tiggle to mix the nectar."

"Thank 'e, friend Sizzle," said Cap'n Bill.

"Now follow me, and I will take you to your rooms."

He led them to the rear of the palace, where he gave them three
small rooms on the ground floor, each having a bed in it. Cap'n
Bill's room had a small door leading out into the street of the
City, but Ghip Ghisizzle advised him to keep this door locked, as
the city people would be sure to hurt the strangers if they had the
chance to attack them.

"You're safer in the palace than anywhere else," said the Majordomo,
"for there is no way you can escape from the island, and here the
servants and soldiers dare not injure you for fear of the
Boolooroo."

He placed Trot and her six pets--which followed her wherever she
went--in one room, and Cap'n Bill in another, and took Button-Bright
away with him to show the boy the way to the King's bedchamber. As
they proceeded, they passed many rooms with closed doors, and before
one of these a patched Blueskin was pacing up and down in a tired
and sleepy way. It was Jimfred Jinksjones, the double of the Fredjim
Jonesjinks they had talked with in the servants' hall, and he bowed
low before the Majordomo.

"This is the King's new bootblue, a stranger who has lately arrived
here," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, introducing the boy to the patched man.

"I'm sorry for him," muttered Jimfred. "He's a queer-looking chap,
with his pale yellow skin, and I imagine our cruel Boolooroo is
likely to patch him before long, as he did me--I mean us."

"No he won't," said Button-Bright positively. "The Boolooroo's
afraid of me."

"Oh, that's different," said Jimfred. "You're the first person I
ever knew that could scare our Boolooroo."

They passed on, and Ghip-Ghisizzle whispered, "That is the Royal
Treasure Chamber." Button-Bright nodded. He had marked the place
well so he couldn't miss it when he wanted to find it again. When
they came to the King's apartments there was another guard before
the door, this time a long-necked soldier with a terrible scowl.

"This slave is the Royal Bootblue," said Ghip-Ghisizzle to the
guard. "You will allow him to pass into his Majesty's chamber to get
the royal shoes and to return them when they are blued."

"All right," answered the guard. "Our Boolooroo is in an ugly mood
tonight. It will go hard with this little short-necked creature if
he doesn't polish the shoes properly."

Then Ghip-Ghisizzle left Button-Bright and went away, and the boy
passed through several rooms to the Royal Bedchamber, where his
Majesty sat undressing.

"Hi, there! What are you doing here?" he roared as he saw
Button-Bright.

"I've come for the shoes," said the boy.

The king threw them at his head, aiming carefully, but Button-Bright
dodged the missiles, and one smashed a mirror while the other
shattered a vase on a small table. His Majesty looked around for
something else to throw, but the boy seized the shoes and ran away,
returning to his own room.

While he polished the shoes he told his plans to Cap'n Bill and Trot
and asked them to be ready to fly with him as soon as he returned
with the Magic Umbrella. All they need to do was to step out into
the street, through the door of Cap'n Bill's room, and open the
umbrella. Fortunately, the seats and the lunch-basket were still
attached to the handle--or so they thought--and there would be
nothing to prevent their quickly starting on the journey home.

They waited a long time, however, to give the Boolooroo time to get
to sleep, so it was after midnight when Button-Bright finally took
the shoes in his hand and started for the Royal Bedchamber. He
passed the guard of the Royal Treasury and Fredjim nodded
good-naturedly to the boy. But the sleepy guard before the King's
apartments was cross and surly.

"What are you doing here at this hour?" he demanded.

"I'm returning his Majesty's shoes," said Button-Bright.

"Go back and wait till morning," commanded the guard.

"If you prevent me from obeying the Boolooroo's orders," returned
the boy quietly, "he will probably have you patched."

This threat frightened the long-necked guard, who did not know what
orders the Boolooroo had given his Royal Bootblue. "Go in, then,"
said he, "but if you make a noise and waken his Majesty, the chances
are you'll get yourself patched."

"I'll be quiet," promised the boy.

Indeed, Button-Bright had no desire to waken the Boolooroo, whom he
found snoring lustily with the curtains of his high-posted bed drawn
tightly around him. The boy had taken off his own shoes after he
passed the guard and now he tiptoed carefully into the room, set
down the royal shoes very gently and then crept to the chair where
his Majesty's clothes were piled. Scarcely daring to breathe for
fear of awakening the terrible monarch, the boy searched in the
royal pockets until he found a blue-gold key attached to a blue-gold
chain. At once he decided this must be the key to the Treasure
Chamber, but in order to make sure he searched in every other
pocket--without finding another key.

Then Button-Bright crept softly out of the room again, and in one of
the outer rooms he sat down near a big cabinet and put on his shoes.
Poor Button-Bright did not know that lying disregarded beneath that
very cabinet at his side was the precious umbrella he was seeking,
or that he was undertaking a desperate adventure all for nothing. He
passed the long-necked guard again, finding the man half asleep, and
then made his way to the Treasure Chamber. Facing Jimfred, he said
to the patched man in a serious tone, "His Majesty commands you to
go at once to the corridor leading to the apartments of the Six
Snubnosed Princesses and to guard the entrance until morning. You
are to permit no one to enter or leave the apartments."

"But--good gracious!" exclaimed the surprised Jimfred. "Who will
guard the Treasure Chamber?"

"I am to take your place," said Button-Bright.

"Oh, very well," replied Jimfred. "This is a queer freak for our
Boolooroo to indulge in, but he is always doing something absurd.
You're not much of a guard, seems to me, but if anyone tries to rob
the Treasure Chamber you must ring this big gong, which will alarm
the whole palace and bring the soldiers to your assistance. Do you
understand?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright.

Then Fredjim stalked away to the other side of the palace to guard
the Princesses, and Button-Bright was left alone with the key to the
Treasure Chamber in his hand. But he had not forgotten that the
ferocious Blue Wolf was guarding the interior of the Chamber, so he
searched in some of the rooms until he found a sofa-pillow, which he
put under his arm and then returned to the corridor.

He placed the key in the lock, and the bolt turned with a sharp
click. Button-Bright did not hesitate. He was afraid, to be sure,
and his heart was beating fast with the excitement of the moment,
but he knew he must regain the Magic Umbrella if he would save his
comrades and himself from destruction, for without it they could
never return to the Earth. So he summoned up his best courage,
opened the door, stepped quickly inside, and closed the door after
him.






BUTTON-BRIGHT ENCOUNTERS THE BLUE WOLF

CHAPTER 11





A low, fierce growl greeted him. The Treasure Chamber was pretty
dark, although the moonlight came in through some of the windows,
but the boy had brought with him the low brass lamp that lighted the
corridor, and this he set upon a table beside the door before he
took time to look around him.

The Treasure Chamber was heaped and crowded with all the riches the
Boolooroo had accumulated during his reign of two or three hundred
years. Piles of gold and jewels were on all sides, and precious
ornaments and splendid cloths, rare pieces of carved furniture,
vases, bric-a-brac and the like, were strewn about the room in
astonishing profusion.

Just at the boy's feet crouched a monstrous animal of most fearful
aspect. He knew at a glance it was the terrible Blue Wolf, and the
sight of the beast sent a shiver through him. The Blue Wolf's head
was fully as big as that of a lion, and its wide jaws were armed
with rows of long, pointed teeth. His shoulders and front legs were
huge and powerful, but the rest of the wolf's body dwindled away
until at the tail it was no bigger than a dog. The jaws were
therefore the dangerous part of the creature, and its small blue
eyes flashed wickedly at the intruder.

Just as the boy made his first step forward, the Blue Wolf sprang
upon him with its enormous jaws stretched wide open. Button-Bright
jammed the sofa-pillow into the brute's mouth and crowded it in as
hard as he could. The terrible teeth came together and buried
themselves in the pillow, and then Mr. Wolf found he could not pull
them out again--because his mouth was stuffed full. He could not
even growl or yelp, but rolled upon the floor trying in vain to
release himself from the conquering pillow.

Button-Bright paid no further attention to the helpless animal, but
caught up the blue-brass lamp and began a search for his umbrella.
Of course he could not find it, as it was not there. He came across
a small book bound in light-blue leather which lay upon an
exquisitely carved center-table. It was named, in dark-blue letters
stamped on the leather, "The Royal Record Book," and remembering
Ghip-Ghisizzle longed to possess this book, Button-Bright hastily
concealed it inside his blouse. Then he renewed his search for the
umbrella, but it was quite in vain. He hunted in every crack and
corner, bumbling the treasures here and there in the quest, but at
last he became positive that the Magic Umbrella was not there.

The boy was bitterly disappointed and did not know what to do next.
But he noticed that the Blue Wolf had finally seized an edge of the
sofa-pillow in its sharp claws and was struggling to pull the thing
out of his mouth; so, there being no object in his remaining longer
in the room where he might have to fight the wolf again,
Button-Bright went out and locked the door behind him.

While he stood in the corridor wondering what to do next, a sudden
shouting reached his ears. It was the voice of the Boolooroo, saying
"My Key, my Key! Who has stolen my golden Key?" And then there
followed shouts of soldiers and guards and servants, and the rapid
pattering of feet was heard throughout the palace.

Button-Bright took to his heels and ran along the passages until he
came to Cap'n Bill's room, where the sailorman and Trot were
anxiously awaiting him.

"Quick!" cried the boy. "We must escape from here at once, or we
will be caught and patched."

"Where's the umbrel?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"I don't know. I can't find it. But all the palace is aroused, and
the Boolooroo is furious. Come, let's get away at once!"

"Where'll we go?" inquired Trot.

"We must make for the open country and hide in the Fog Bank or in
the Arch of Phinis," replied the boy.

They did not stop to argue any longer, but all three stepped out of
the little door into the street, where they first clasped hands so
they would not get separated in the dark, and then ran as swiftly as
they could down the street, which was deserted at this hour by the
citizens. They could not go very fast because the sailorman's wooden
leg was awkward to run with and held them back, but Cap'n Bill
hobbled quicker than he had ever hobbled before in all his life, and
they really made pretty good progress.

They met no one on the streets and continued their flight until at
last they came to the City Wall, which had a blue-iron gate in it.
Here was a Blueskin guard, who had been peacefully slumbering when
aroused by the footsteps of the fugitives. "Halt!" cried the guard
fiercely.

Cap'n Bill halted long enough to grab the man around his long neck
with one hand and around his long leg with the other hand. Then he
raised the Blueskin in the air and threw him far over the wall. A
moment later they had unfastened the gate and fled into the open
country, where they headed toward the low mountain whose outlines
were plainly visible in the moonlight.

The guard was now howling and crying for help. In the city were
answering shouts. A hue and cry came from every direction, reaching
as far as the palace. Lights began to twinkle everywhere in the
streets, and the Blue city hummed like a beehive filled with angry
bees. "It won't do for us to get caught now," panted Cap'n Bill as
they ran along. "I'm more afeared o' them Blue citizens ner I am 'o
the Blue Boolooroo. They'd tear us to pieces if they could."

Sky Island was not a very big place, especially the blue part of it,
and our friends were now very close to the low mountain. Presently
they paused before a grim archway of blue marble, above which was
carved the one word, "Phinis." The interior seemed dark and terrible
as they stopped to regard it as a possible place of refuge.

"Don't like that place, Cap'n," whispered Trot.

"No more do I, mate," he answered.

"I think I'd rather take a chance on the Fog Bank," said
Button-Bright.

Just then they were all startled by a swift flapping of wings, and a
voice cried in shrill tones,

"Where are you, Trot?
As like as not I've been forgot!"

Cap'n Bill jumped this way and Button-Bright that, and then there
alighted on Trot's shoulder the blue parrot that had been the pet of
the Princess Cerulia. Said the bird,

"Gee! I've flown
Here all alone.
t's pretty far,
But here we are!"

and then he barked like a dog and chuckled with glee at having found
his little friend.

In escaping the palace, Trot had been obliged to leave all the pets
behind her, but it seemed that the parrot had found some way to get
free and follow her. They were all astonished to hear the bird
talk--and in poetry, too--but Cap'n Bill told Trot that some parrots
he had known had possessed a pretty fair gift of language, and he
added that this blue one seemed an unusually bright bird. "As fer
po'try," said he, "that's as how you look at po'try. Rhymes come
from your head, but real po'try from your heart, an' whether the
blue parrot has a heart or not, he's sure got a head."

Having decided not to venture into the Arch of Phinis, they again
started on, this time across the country straight toward the Fog
Bank, which hung like a blue-grey cloud directly across the center
of the island. They knew they were being followed by bands of the
Blueskins, for they could hear the shouts of their pursuers growing
louder and louder every minute, since their long legs covered the
ground more quickly than our friends could possibly go. Had the
journey been much farther, the fugitives would have been overtaken,
but when the leaders of the pursuing Blueskins were only a few yards
behind them, they reached the edge of the Fog Bank and without
hesitation plunged into its thick mist, which instantly hid them
from view.

The Blueskins fell back, horrified at the mad act of the strangers.
To them the Fog Bank was the most dreadful thing in existence, and
no Blueskin had ever ventured within it even for a moment.

"That's the end of those short-necked Yellowskins," said one,
shaking his head. "We may as well go back and report the matter to
the Boolooroo."






THROUGH THE FOG BANK

CHAPTER 12





It was rather moist in the Fog Bank. "Seems like a reg'lar drizzle,"
said Trot. "I'll be soaked through in a minute." She had been given
a costume of blue silk in exchange for her own dress, and the silk
was so thin that the moisture easily wetted it.

"Never mind," said Cap'n Bill. "When it's a case of life 'n' death,
clo's don't count for much. I'm sort o' drippy myself."

Cried the parrot, fluttering his feathers to try to keep them from
sticking together,

"Floods and gushes fill our path--
This is not my day for a bath!
Shut if off, or fear my wrath."

"We can't," laughed Trot. "We'll jus' have to stick it out till we
get to the other side."

"Had we better go to the other side?" asked Button-Bright anxiously.

"Why not?" returned Cap'n Bill. "The other side's the only safe side
for us."

"We don't know that, sir," said the boy. "Ghip-Ghisizzle said it was
a terrible country."

"I don't believe it," retorted the sailor stoutly. "Sizzle's never
been there, an' he knows nothing about it. 'The Sunset Country'
sounds sort o' good to me."

"But how'll we ever manage to get there?" inquired Trot. "Aren't we
already lost in this fog?"

"Not yet," said Cap'n Bill. "I've kep' my face turned straight ahead
ever since we climbed inter this bank o' wetness. If we don't get
twisted any, we'll go straight through to the other side."

It was no darker in the Fog Bank than it had been in the Blue
Country. They could see dimly the mass of fog, which seemed to cling
to them, and when they looked down, they discovered that they were
walking upon white pebbles that were slightly tinged with the blue
color of the sky. Gradually this blue became fainter until, as they
progressed, everything became a dull gray.

"I wonder how far it is to the other side," remarked Trot wearily.

"We can't say till we get there, mate," answered the sailor in a
cheerful voice. Cap'n Bill had a way of growing more and more
cheerful when danger threatened.

"Never mind," said the girl. "I'm as wet as a dishrag now, and I'll
never get any wetter."

"Wet, wet, wet!
It's awful wet, you bet!"

moaned the parrot on her shoulder.

"I'm a fish-pond, I'm a well;
I'm a clam without a shell!"

"Can't you dry up?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Not this evening, thank you, sir;
To talk and grumble I prefer,"

replied the parrot dolefully.

They walked along more slowly now, still keeping hold of hands, for
although they were anxious to get through the Fog Bank, they were
tired with the long run across the country and with their day's
adventures. They had no sleep and it was a long time past midnight.

"Look out!" cried the parrot sharply; and they all halted to find a
monstrous frog obstructing their path. Cap'n Bill thought it was as
big as a whale, and as it squatted on the gray pebbles, its eyes
were on a level with those of the old sailor.

"Ker-chug, herk-choo!" grunted the frog. "What in the Sky is THIS
crowd?"

"W-we're strangers," stammered Trot, "an' we're tryin' to 'scape
from the Blueskins an' get into the Pink Country."

"I don't blame you," said the frog in a friendly tone. "I hate those
Blueskins. The Pinkies, however, are very decent neighbors."

"Oh, I'm glad to hear that!" cried Button-Bright. "Can you tell us,
Mister--Mistress--good Mr. Frog--eh, eh, your Royal Highness, if
we're on the right road to the Pink Country?"

The frog seemed to laugh, for he gurgled in his throat in a very
funny way. "I'm no Royal Highness," he said. "I'm just a common
frog, and a little wee tiny frog, too. But I hope to grow in time.
This Fog Bank is the Paradise of Frogs, and our King is about ten
times as big as I am."

"Then he's a big 'un, an' no mistake," admitted Cap'n Bill. "I'm
glad you like your country, but it's a mite too damp for us, an'
we'd be glad to get out of it."

"Follow me," said the frog. "I'll lead you to the border. It's only
about six jumps." He turned around, made a mighty leap and
disappeared in the gray mist. Our friends looked at one another in
bewilderment.

"Don't see how we can foller that lead," remarked Cap'n Bill, "but
we may as well start in the same direction."

"Brooks and creeks,
How it leaks!"

muttered the parrot.

"How can we jog
To a frog in the fog?"

The big frog seemed to understand their difficulty, for he kept
making noises in his throat to guide them to where he had leaped.
When at last they came up to him, he made a second jump--out of
sight, as before--and when they attempted to follow, they found a
huge lizard lying across the path. Cap'n Bill thought it must be a
giant alligator at first, it was so big, but he looked at them
sleepily and did not seem at all dangerous.

"O, Liz--you puffy Liz--Get out of our way and mind your biz," cried
the parrot.

"Creep-a-mousie, crawl-a-mousie, please move on!
We can't move a step till you are gone."

"Don't disturb me," said the lizard. "I'm dreaming about parsnips.
Did you ever taste a parsnip?"

"We're in a hurry, if it's the same to you, sir," said Cap'n Bill
politely.

"Then climb over me or go around, I don't care which," murmured the
lizard. "When they're little, they're juicy; when they're big,
there's more of 'em; but either way there's nothing so delicious as
a parsnip. There are none here in the Fog Bank, so the best I can do
is dream of them. Oh, parsnips, par-snips, p-a-r-snips!" He closed
his eyes sleepily and resumed his dreams.

Walking around the lizard, they resumed their journey and soon came
to the frog, being guided by its grunts and croaks. Then off it went
again, its tremendous leap carrying it far into the fog. Suddenly,
Cap'n Bill tripped and would have fallen flat had not Trot and
Button-Bright held him up. Then he saw that he had stumbled over the
claw of a gigantic land-crab, which lay sprawled out upon the pebbly
bottom.

"Oh, beg parding, I'm sure!" exclaimed Cap'n Bill, backing away.

"Don't mention it," replied the crab in a tired tone. "You did not
disturb me, so there is no harm done."

"We didn't know you were here," explained Trot.

"Probably not," said the crab. "It's no place for me, anyhow, for I
belong in the Constellations, you know, with Taurus and Gemini and
the other fellows. But I had the misfortune to tumble out of the
Zodiac some time ago. My name is Cancer, but I'm not a disease.
Those who examine the heavens in these days, alas! can find no
Cancer there."

"Yes we can, sir, Mister Cancer!" said the parrot with a chuckle.

"Once," remarked Cap'n Bill, "I sawr a picter of you in an almanac."

"Ah, the almanacs always did us full justice," the crab replied,
"but I'm told they're not fashionable now."

"If you don't mind, we'd like to pass on," said Button-Bright.

"No, I don't mind, but be careful not to step on my legs. They're
rheumatic, it's so moist here."

They climbed over some of the huge legs and walked around others.
Soon they had left the creature far behind. "Aren't you rather
slow?" asked the frog when once more they came up to him.

"It isn't that," said Trot. "You are rather swift, I guess." The
frog chuckled and leaped again. They noticed that the fog had caught
a soft rose tint and was lighter and less dense than before, for
which reason the sailor remarked that they must be getting near to
the Pink Country.

On this jump they saw nothing but a monstrous turtle, which lay
asleep with its head and legs drawn into its shell. It was not in
their way, so they hurried on and rejoined the frog, which said to
them, "I'm sorry, but I'm due at the King's Court in a few minutes,
and I can't wait for your short, weak legs to make the journey to
the Pink Country. But if you will climb upon my back, I think I can
carry you to the border in one more leap."

"I'm tired," said Trot, "an' this awful fog's beginnin' to choke me.
Let's ride on the frog, Cap'n."

"Right you are, mate," he replied, and although he shook a bit with
fear, the old man at once began to climb to the frog's back. Trot
seated herself on one side of him and Button-bright on the other,
and the sailor put his arms around them both to hold them tight
together.

"Are you ready?" asked the frog.

"Ding-dong!" cried the parrot.

"All aboard, let 'er go!
Jump the best jump that you know."

"Don't--don't! Jump sort o' easy, please," begged Cap'n Bill.

But the frog was unable to obey his request. Its powerful hind legs
straightened like steel springs and shot the big body, with its
passengers, through the fog like an arrow launched from a bow. They
gasped for breath and tried to hang on, and then suddenly the frog
landed just at the edge of the Fog Bank, stopping so abruptly that
his three riders left his back and shot far ahead of him. They felt
the fog melt away and found themselves bathed in glorious rays of
sunshine, but they had no time to consider this change because they
were still shooting through the air, and presently--before they
could think of anything at all--all three were rolling heels over
head on the soft grass of a meadow.






THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 13





When the travelers could collect their senses and sit up, they
stared about them in bewilderment, for the transition from the
sticky, damp fog to this brilliant scene was so abrupt as to daze
them at first.

It was a Pink Country indeed. The grass was a soft pink, the trees
were pink, all the fences and buildings which they saw in the near
distance were pink--even the gravel in the pretty paths was pink.
Many shades of color were there, of course, grading from a faint
blush rose to deep pink verging on red, but no other color was
visible. In the sky hung a pink glow, with rosy clouds floating here
and there, and the sun was not silvery white, as we see it from the
Earth, but a distinct pink.

The sun was high in the sky just now, which proved the adventurers
had been a long time in passing through the Fog Bank. But all of
them were wonderfully relieved to reach this beautiful country in
safety, for aside from the danger that threatened them in the Blue
Country, the other side of the island was very depressing. Here the
scene that confronted them was pretty and homelike, except for the
prevailing color and the fact that all the buildings were round,
without a single corner or angle.

Half a mile distant was a large City, its pink tintings glistening
bravely in the pink sunshine, while hundreds of pink banners floated
from its numerous domes. The country between the Fog Bank and the
city was like a vast garden, very carefully kept and as neat as wax.

The parrot was fluttering its wings and pruning its feathers to
remove the wet of the fog. Trot and Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill
were all soaked to the skin and chilled through, but as they sat
upon the pink grass they felt the rays of the sun sending them
warmth and rapidly drying their clothes; so, being tired out, they
laid themselves comfortably down and first one and then another fell
cozily asleep.

It was the parrot that aroused them.

"Look out--look out--
There's folks about!"

it screamed.

"The apple-dumplings, fat and pink, Will be here quicker than a
wink!"

Trot stared up in alarm and rubbed her eyes; Cap'n Bill rolled over
and blinked, hardly remembering where he was; Button-Bright was on
his feet in an instant. Advancing toward them were four of the
natives of the Pink Country.

Two were men and two were women, and their appearance was in sharp
contrast to that of the Blueskins. For the Pinkies were round and
chubby--almost like "apple-dumplings," as the parrot called
them--and they were not very tall, the highest of the men being no
taller than Trot or Button-Bright. They all had short necks and
legs, pink hair and eyes, rosy cheeks and pink complexions, and
their faces were good-natured and jolly in expression.

The men wore picturesque pink clothing and round hats with pink
feathers in them, but the apparel of the women was still more
gorgeous and striking. Their dresses consisted of layer after layer
of gauzy tuck and ruffles and laces, caught here and there with bows
of dainty ribbon. The skirts--which of course were of many shades of
pink--were so fluffy and light that they stuck out from the fat
bodies of the Pinkie women like the skirts of ballet-dancers,
displaying their chubby pink ankles and pink kid shoes. They wore
rings and necklaces and bracelets and brooches of rose-gold set with
pink gems, and all four of the new arrivals, both men and women,
carried sharp-pointed sticks made of rosewood for weapons.

They halted a little way from our adventurers, and one of the women
muttered in a horrified voice, "Blueskins!"

"Guess again! The more you guess
I rather think you'll know the less,"

retorted the parrot, and then he added grumblingly in Trot's ear,
"Blue feathers don't make bluebirds."

"Really," said the girl, standing up and bowing respectfully to the
Pinkies, "we are not Blueskins, although we are wearing the blue
uniforms of the Boolooroo and have just escaped from the Blue
Country. If you will look closely, you will see that our skins are
white."

"There is some truth in what she says," remarked one of the men
thoughtfully. "Their skins are not blue, but neither are they white.
To be exact, I should call the skin of the girl and that of the boy
a muddy pink, rather faded, while the skin of the gigantic monster
with them is an unpleasant brown."

Cap'n Bill looked cross for a minute, for he did not like to be
called a "gigantic monster," although he realized he was much larger
than the pink people.

"What country did you come from" asked the woman who had first
spoken.

"From the Earth," replied Button-Bright.

"The Earth! The Earth!" they repeated. "That is a country we have
never heard of. Where is it located?"

"Why, down below somewhere," said the boy, who did now know in which
direction the Earth lay. "It isn't just one country, but a good many
countries."

"We have three countries in Sky Island," returned the woman. "They
are the Blue Country, the Fog Country and the Pink Country. But of
course this end of the Island is the most important."

"How came you in the Blue Country, from whence you say you escaped?"
asked the man.

"We flew there by means of a Magic Umbrella," explained
Button-Bright, "but the wicked Boolooroo stole it from us."

"Stole it! How dreadful," they all cried in a chorus.

"And they made us slaves," said Trot.

"An' wanted fer to patch us," added Cap'n Bill indignantly.

"So we ran away and passed through the Fog Bank and came here," said
Button-Bright.

The Pinkies turned away and conversed together in low tones. Then
one of the women came forward and addressed the strangers. "Your
story is the strangest we have ever heard," said she, "and your
presence here is still more strange and astonishing. So we have
decided to take you to Tourmaline and let her decide what shall be
your fate."

"Who is Tourmaline?" inquired Trot doubtfully, for she didn't like
the idea of being "taken" to anyone.

"The Queen of the Pinkies. She is the sole Ruler of our country, so
the word of Tourmaline is the Law of the Land."

"Seems to me we've had 'bout enough of kings an' queens," remarked
Cap'n Bill. "Can't we shy your Tut-Tor-mar-line--or whatever you
call her--in some way an' deal with you direct?"

"No. Until we prove your truth and honor we must regard you as
enemies of our race. If you had a Magic Umbrella, you may be
magicians and sorcerers come here to deceive us and perhaps betray
us to our natural enemies, the Blueskins."

"Mud and bricks, fiddlesticks!
We don't play such nasty tricks,"

yelled the parrot angrily, and this caused the Pinkies to shrink
back in alarm, for they had never seen a parrot before.

"Surely this is magic!" declared one of the men. "No bird can talk
unless inspired by witchcraft."

"Oh yes, parrots can," said Trot. But this incident had determined
the Pinkies to consider our friends prisoners and to take them
immediately before their Queen.

"Must we fight you?" asked the woman. "Or will you come with us
peaceably?"

"We'll go peaceable," answered Cap'n Bill. "You're a-makin' a sad
mistake, for we're as harmless as doves; but seein' as you're
suspicious, we'd better have it out with your Queen first as last."

Their clothing was quite dry by this time, although much wrinkled
and discolored by the penetrating fog, so at once they prepared to
follow the Pinkies. The two men walked on either side of them,
holding the pointed sticks ready to jab them if they attempted to
escape, and the two women followed in the rear, also armed with
sharp sticks.

So the procession moved along the pretty roadways to the City, which
they soon reached. There was a strong, high wall of pink marble
around it, and they passed through a gate made of pink metal bars
and found themselves in a most delightful and picturesque town. The
houses were big and substantial, all round in shape, with domed
roofs and circular windows and doorways. In all the place there was
but one street--a circular one that started at the gate and wound
like a corkscrew toward the center of the City. It was paved with
pink marble, and between the street and the houses that lined both
sides of it were gardens filled with pink flowers and pink grass
lawns, which were shaded by pink trees and shrubbery.

As the Queen lived in the very center of the city, the captives were
obliged to parade the entire length of this street, and that gave
all the Pink Citizens a chance to have a good look at the strangers.
The Pinkies were every one short and fat and gorgeously dressed in
pink attire, and their faces indicated that they were contented and
happy. They were much surprised at Cap'n Bill's great size and
wooden leg--two very unusual things in their experience--and the old
sailor frightened more than one Pink boy and girl and sent them
scampering into the houses, where they viewed the passing procession
from behind the window shutters in comparative safety. As for the
grown people, many of them got out their sharp-pointed sticks to use
as weapons in case the strangers attacked them or broke away from
their guards. A few, more bold than the others, followed on at the
tail of the procession, and so presently they all reached an open,
circular place in the exact center of the Pink City.






TOURMALINE THE POVERTY QUEEN

CHAPTER 14





The open space which they entered was paved with pink marble, and
around it were two rows of large, pink statues, at least life-size
and beautifully sculptured. All were set upon nicely carved pink
pedestals. They were, of course, statues of Pinky men and women, and
all had bands of pink metal around their foreheads, in the center of
each band being a glistening pink jewel.

About the middle of the open space inside the statues, which
appeared to be the public meeting place of the Pinkies, was a small,
low house, domed like all the other houses but built of a coarse
pink stone instead of the fine marble to be seen everywhere else. It
had no ornamentation, being exceedingly plain in appearance. No
banners floated from it; no flowers grew near it.

"Here," said one of their guides as the procession halted before the
little stone building, "is the palace of Tourmaline, who is our
Queen."

"What, that little cabin?" exclaimed Trot.

"Of course. Did you suppose a palace would be like one of our
handsome residences?" asked the woman, evidently surprised.

"I thought it would be better," said the girl. "All the palaces I've
seen were splendid."

"A splendid palace!" exclaimed one of the Pinkies, and then they
looked at one another in amazement and seemed to doubt that their
ears had heard aright.

"These intruders are very peculiar people," remarked a man in the
crowd.

"They seem very ignorant, poor things!" said another in reply.

"Come!" commanded the woman who led the party. "You three must
follow me to the presence of Tourmaline. The people must wait
outside, for there is no room for them in the palace."

So they followed her through the low archway, and in a room beyond,
very simply furnished, sat a young girl engaged in darning a pair of
pink stockings. She was a beautiful girl of about seventeen years of
age, not fat like all the rest of the Pinkies but slender and well
formed according to our own ideas of beauty. Her complexion was not
a decided pink, but a soft, rosy tint not much deeper than that of
Trot's skin. Instead of a silken gown furbelowed like all the others
they had seen women wear in this land, Tourmaline was dressed in a
severely plain robe of coarse pink cloth much resembling bedticking.
Across her brow, however, was a band of rose gold, in the center of
which was set a luminous pink jewel which gleamed more brilliantly
than a diamond. It was her badge of office and seemed very
incongruous when compared with her poor rainment and simple
surroundings.

As they entered, the girl sighed and laid down her work. Her
expression was patient and resigned as she faced her audience. "What
is it, Coralie?" she asked the woman.

"Here are three strange people, Tourmaline," was the reply, "who say
they have entered our country through the Fog Bank. They tell a
queer story of an escape from the Blueskins, so I decided to bring
them to you, that you may determine their fate."

The Queen gazed upon our friends with evident interest. She
smiled--a little sadly--at Trot, seemed to approve Button-Bright's
open, frank face, and was quite surprised because Cap'n Bill was so
much bigger than her own people. "Are you a giant?" she asked the
sailor in a soft, sweet voice.

"No, your Majesty," he replied, "I'm only--"

"Majesty!" she exclaimed, flushing a deeper pink. "Are you
addressing that word to me?"

"O' course, ma'am," answered Cap'n Bill. "I'm told that's the proper
way to speak to a Queen."

"Perhaps you are trying to ridicule me," she continued, regarding
the sailor's face closely. "There is nothing majestic about me, as
you know very well. Coralie, do you consider 'majesty' a proper word
to use when addressing a Queen?" she added, appealing to the Pinky
woman.

"By no means," was the prompt reply.

"What shall I call her, then?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"Just Tourmaline. That is her name, and it is sufficient," said the
woman.

"The Ruler of a country ought to be treated with great respec',"
declared Trot a little indignantly, for she thought the pretty
little queen was not being properly deferred to.

"Why?" asked Tourmaline curiously.

"Because the Ruler is the mos' 'risticratic person in any land,"
explained the little girl. "Even in America ever'body bows low to
our President, an' the Blueskins are so 'fraid o' their Boolooroo
that they tremble whenever they go near him."

"But surely that is all wrong," said Tourmaline gravely. "The Ruler
is appointed to protect and serve the people, and here in the Pink
Country I have the full power to carry out the laws. I even decree
death when such a punishment is merited. Therefore I am a mere agent
to direct the laws, which are the Will of the People, and am only a
public servant obliged constantly to guard the welfare of my
subjects."

"In that case," said Button-Bright, "you're entitled to the best
there is to pay for your trouble. A powerful ruler ought to be rich
and to live in a splendid palace. Your folks ought to treat you with
great respect, as Trot says."

"Oh no," responded Tourmaline quickly. "That would indeed be very
wrong. Too much should never be given to anyone. If, with my great
power, conferred upon me by the people, I also possessed great
wealth, I might be tempted to be cruel and overbearing. In that case
my subjects would justly grow envious of my superior station. If I
lived as luxuriously as my people do and had servants and costly
gowns, the good Pinkies would say that their Queen had more than
they themselves, and it would be true. No, our way is best. The
Ruler, be it king or queen, has absolute power to rule, but no
riches, no high station, no false adulation. The people have the
wealth and honor, for it is their due. The Queen has nothing but the
power to execute the laws, to adjust grievances and to compel
order."

"What pays you, then, for all your bother?" asked Trot.

"I have one great privilege. After my death a pink marble statue of
me will be set up in the Grand Court, with the statues of the other
Kings and Queens who have ruled this land, and all the Pinkies in
ages to come will then honor me as having been a just and upright
queen. That is my reward."

"I'm sorry for you, ma'am," said Cap'n Bill. "Your pay for bein' a
queen is sort o' like a life-insurance. If don't come due till after
you're dead, an' then you can't get much fun out o' it."

"I did not choose to be the Queen," answered Tourmaline simply. "A
misfortune of birth placed me here, and I cannot escape my fate. It
is much more desirable to be a private citizen, happy and carefree.
But we have talked long enough of myself. Tell me who you are, and
why you have come here."

Between them they told the story of how the Magic Umbrella had taken
them to Sky Island, which they did not know when they started was
anywhere in existence. Button-Bright told this, and then Trot
related their adventures among the Blueskins and how the Boolooroo
had stolen the umbrella and prevented them from going home again.
The parrot on her shoulder kept interrupting her continually, for
the mention of the Boolooroo seemed to make the bird frantic with
rage.

"Naughty, naughty Boolooroo!
He's the worst I ever knew!"

the parrot repeated over and over again.

Cap'n Bill finished the story by telling of their escape through the
Fog Bank. "We didn't know what your Pink Country was like, o'
course," he said, "but we knew it couldn't be worse than the Blue
Country, an' we didn't take any stock in their stories that the Fog
Bank would be the death o' us."

"Pretty wet! Pretty wet
Was the journey, you can bet!"

declared the parrot in conclusion.

"Yes, it was wet an' sticky, all right," agreed the sailor, "but the
big frog helped us an' we got through all right."

"But what can you do here?" asked Tourmaline. "You are not like my
people, the Pinkies, and there is no place for you in our country."

"That's true enough," said Cap'n Bill, "but we had to go somewhere,
an' this was the likeliest place we could think of. Your Sky Island
ain't very big, so when we couldn't stay in the Blue Country, where
ever'body hated us, or in the Fog Bank, which ain't healthy an' is
too wet for humans to live in for long, we nat'rally were forced to
enter the Pink Country, where we expected to find nice people."

"We ARE nice," said Tourmaline, "but it is our country, not yours,
and we have no place here for strangers. In all our history you are
the first people from outside our borders who have ever stepped a
foot in our land. We do not hate you, as you say the Blueskins do,
nor are we savage or cruel, but we do not want you here, and I am
really puzzled what to do with you."

"Isn't there a law to cover this case?" asked Coralie.

"I do not remember any such law," replied the queen, "but I will
search in the Great Book and see if I can find anything that refers
to strange people entering our land."

"If not," said the woman, "you must make a law. It is your duty."

"I know," answered Tourmaline, "but I hope such a responsibility
will not fall upon my shoulders. These poor strangers are in a very
uncomfortable position, and I wish I could help them to get back to
their own country."

"Thank you," said Trot. "We wish so, too. Haven't you any fairies
here?"

"Oh, there are fairies, of course, as there are everywhere,"
answered Tourmaline, "but none that we can call to our assistance or
command to do our bidding."

"How about witches?" asked Button-Bright.

"I know of one witch," said Tourmaline thoughtfully, "but she is not
very obliging. She says it makes her head ache to perform
witchcraft, and so she seldom indulges in it. But if there is no
other way, I may be obliged to call upon Rosalie for help. I'll look
in the Great Book first. Meantime, you will go home with Coralie,
who will feed you and give you entertainment. Tomorrow morning come
to me again and then I will decree your fate." The little queen then
picked up her stocking and began to darn the holes in it, and
Coralie, without any formal parting, led the strangers from the
miserable palace.






THE SUNRISE TRIBE AND THE SUNSET TRIBE

CHAPTER 15





Although Trot and her comrades were still prisoners, they were far
more comfortable than they had been in the Blue Country. Coralie
took them to her own home, where she lived in great luxury, being
one of the prominent women of the Pinkies. In this country the women
seemed fully as important as the men, and instead of being coddled
and petted, they performed their share of the work, both in public
and private affairs, and were expected to fight in the wars exactly
as the men did.

Our friends learned considerable about the Pinkies during that
afternoon and evening, for their hostess proved kind and agreeable
and frankly answered all their questions. Although this half of Sky
Island was no larger than the Blue Country, being no more than two
miles square, it had several hundred inhabitants. These were divided
into two tribes, which were called the Sunrise Tribe and the Sunset
Tribe. The Sunrise Tribe lived in the eastern half of the Pink
Country and the Sunset Tribe in the west half, and there was great
rivalry between them, and sometimes war.

It was all a question of social importance. The Sunrise Tribe
claimed that every day the sun greeted them first of all, which
proved they were the most important; but on the other hand, the
Sunset Tribe claimed that the sun always deserted the other tribe
and came to them, which was evidence that they were the most
attractive people. On Sky Island--at least on the Pink side--the sun
arose in wonderful splendor, but also it set in a blaze of glory,
and so there were arguments on both sides, and for want of something
better to argue about, the Pinkies took this queer subject as a
cause of dispute.

Both Tribes acknowledged Tourmaline their Queen and obeyed the laws
of the country, and just at this time there was peace in the land,
and all the inhabitants of the east and west were friendly. But they
had been known, Coralie said, to fight one another fiercely with
their sharp sticks, at which times a good many were sure to get
hurt.

"Why do they call this an Island?" asked Button-Bright. "There isn't
any water around it, is there?"

"No, but there is sky all around it," answered Coralie. "And if one
should step off the edge, he would go tumbling into the great sky
and never be heard of again."

"Is there a fence around the edge?" asked Trot.

"Only a few places are fenced," was the reply. "Usually there are
rows of thick bushes set close to the edge to prevent people from
falling off. Once there was a King of the Pinkies who was cruel and
overbearing and imagined he was superior to the people he ruled, so
one day his subjects carried him to the edge of the island and threw
him over the bushes."

"Goodness me!" said Trot. "He might have hit someone on the Earth."

"Guess he skipped it, though," added Cap'n Bill, "for I never heard
of a Pinky till I came here."

"And I have never heard of the Earth," retorted Coralie. "Of course,
there must be such a place, because you came from there, but the
Earth is never visible in our sky."

"No," said Button-Bright, "'cause it's UNDER your island. But it's
there, all right, and it's a pretty good place to live. I wish I
could get back to it."

"So do I, Button-Bright!" exclaimed Trot.

"Let's fly!" cried the parrot, turning his head so that one bright
little eye looked directly into the girl's eye. "Say goodbye and
let's fly through the sky, far and high!"

"If we only had my umbrella, we'd fly in a minute," sighed
Button-Bright. "But the Boolooroo stole it."

"Naughty, naughty Boolooroo,
What a wicked thing to do!"

wailed the parrot, and they all agreed with him.

Coralie belonged to the Sunset Tribe, as she lived west of the
queen's palace, which was the center of the Pink Country. A servant
came to the room where they were conversing to state that the sun
was about to set, and at once Coralie arose and took the strangers
to an upper balcony, where all the household had assembled.

The neighboring houses also had their balconies and roofs filled
with people, for it seemed all the Sunset Tribe came out every night
to witness the setting of the sun. It was really a magnificent
sight, and Trot scarcely breathed as the great, golden ball sank low
in the sky and colored all the clouds with gorgeous tints of orange,
red and yellow. Never on the Earth was there visible such splendor,
and as the little girl watched the ever-changing scene, she decided
the Sunset Tribe was amply justified in claiming that the West was
the favored country of the sun.

"You see," said Cap'n Bill, "the sky is all around us, an' we're
high up, so the sun really loses itself in the clouds an' leaves a
trail of beauty behind him."

"He does that!" agreed Trot. "This is almost worth comin' for,
Cap'n."

"But not quite," said Button-bright sadly. "I'd get along without
the sunset if only we could go home."

They went in to dinner after this, and sat at Coralie's own table
with her husband and children and found the meal very good. After a
pleasant evening, during which no reference was made to their being
prisoners, they were shown to prettily furnished rooms--all in
pink--and slept soundly in the soft beds provided for them. Trot
wakened early the next morning and went out on the balcony to see
the sunrise. The little girl was well repaid, for the splendor of
the rising sun was almost equal to that of the setting sun. Surely
this was a wonderful country and much more delightful than the Blue
side of the island, where the sun was hidden by the great Fog and
only the moon was visible.

When she went in, she found that both Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill
were up and dressed, so they decided to take a walk before
breakfast. No one restrained them or interfered with them in any
way. "They know we can't get away," observed the sailor, "so they
don't need to watch us."

"We could go into the Fog Bank again," suggested Trot.

"We could, mate, but we won't," answered Cap'n Bill. "If there's no
way for us to get clean off'n Sky Island, I'd rather stay with the
Pinkies than with the Blues."

"I wonder what they'll do with us," said Button-Bright. "The Queen
seems like a nice girl, and I don't think she'll hurt us, whatever
happens."

They walked freely along the circular street, seeing such sights as
the Pink City afforded, and then returned to Coralie's house for
breakfast. Coralie herself was not there, as she had been summoned
to the Queen's palace, but her husband looked after the guests, and
when breakfast was finished he said to them, "I am to take you to
Tourmaline, who has promised to decide your fate this morning. I am
curious to know what she will do with you, for in all our history we
have never before had strangers intrude upon us."

"We're curious, too," said Trot, "but we'll soon find out." As they
walked down the street, they observed that the sky was now covered
with dark clouds which entirely hid the sun.

"Does it ever rain here?" inquired Button-Bright.

"Certainly," answered Coralie's husband, "that is the one drawback
of our country: it rains quite often. And although it makes the
flowers and the grass grow, I think rain is very disagreeable. I am
always glad to see the rainbow, which is a sign that the sun will
shine again."

"Looks like rain now," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"It does," said the man, glancing at the sky. "We must hurry, or we
may get wet."

"Haven't you any umbrellas?" asked Button-Bright.

"No, we don't know what umbrellas are," replied the Pinky man.

It did not rain at once, and they reached Tourmaline's wretched hut
in safety. There they found quite a number of Pinkies assembled, and
a spirited discussion was taking place when they arrived.

"Come in, please," said Tourmaline, opening the door for them, and
when they had entered, she placed a pinkwood bench for them to sit
upon and went back to her throne, which was a common rocking chair.
At her right were seated six men and women of the Sunrise Tribe, and
on her left six men and women of the Sunset Tribe, among the latter
being Coralie. The contrast between the plain, simple dress of the
Queen and the gorgeous apparel of her Counselors was quite
remarkable, yet her beauty far surpassed that of any of her people,
and her demeanor was so modest and unassuming that it was difficult
for the prisoners to believe that her word would decree life or
death and that all the others were subservient to her. Tourmaline's
eyes were so deep a shade of pink that they were almost hazel, and
her hair was darker than that of the others, being a golden-red in
color. These points, taken with her light-pink skin and slender
form, rendered her distinctive among the Pinkies, whatever gown she
might wear.

When the strangers were seated, she turned to them and said, "I have
searched through the Great Book of Laws and found nothing about
foreign people entering our land. There is a law that if any of the
Blueskins break through the Fog Bank, they shall be driven back with
sharp sticks; but you are not Blueskins, so this Law does not apply
to you. Therefore, in order to decide your fate, I have summoned a
Council of twelve of my people, who will vote as to whether you
shall be permitted to remain here or not. They wanted to see you
before they cast their final vote, that they may examine you
carefully and discover if you are worthy to become inhabitants of
the Pink Country."

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
But Trot is sweeter than the two!"

declared the parrot in a loud voice. It was a little verse Cap'n
Bill had taught the bird that very morning while Trot was seeing the
sun rise.

The Pinkies were startled and seemed a little frightened at hearing
a bird speak so clearly. Trot laughed and patted the bird's head in
return for the compliment. "Is the Monster Man whose legs are part
wood a dangerous creature?" asked one of the Sunrise Tribe.

"Not to my friends," replied Cap'n Bill, much amused. "I s'pose I
could fight your whole crowd of Pinkies if I had to, an' make you
run for your lives, but bein' as you're friendly to us, you ain't in
any danger." The sailor thought this speech was diplomatic and might
"head off any trouble," but the Pinkies seemed uneasy, and several
of them picked up their slender, pointed sticks and held them in
their hands. They were not cowardly, but it was evident they
mistrusted the big man, who on Earth was not considered big at all,
but rather undersized.

"What we'd like," said Trot, "is to stay here, cozy an' peaceable,
till we can find a way to get home to the Earth again. Your country
is much nicer than the Blue Country, and we like you pretty well
from what we've seen of you, so if you'll let us stay, we won't be
any more trouble to you than we can help."

They all gazed upon the little girl curiously, and one of them said,
"How strangely light her color is! And it is pink, too, which is in
her favor. But her eyes are of that dreadful blue tint which
prevails in the other half of Sky Island, while her hair is a queer
color unknown to us. She is not like our people and would not
harmonize with the universal color here."

"That's true," said another. "The three strangers are all
inharmonious. If allowed to remain here, they would ruin the color
scheme of the country, where all is now pink."

"In spite of that," said Coralie, "they are harmless creatures and
have done us no wrong."

"Yes they have," replied a nervous little Sunrise man, "they wronged
us by coming here."

"They could not help doing that," argued Coralie, "and it is their
misfortune that they are here on Sky Island at all. Perhaps if we
keep them with us for a while, they may find a way to return safely
to their own country."

"We'll fly through the sky by-and-by--ki-yi!" yelled the parrot with
startling suddenness.

"Is that true?" asked a Pinky seriously.

"Why, we would if we could," answered Trot. "We flew to this island,
anyhow."

"Perhaps," said another, "if we pushed them off the edge, they could
fly down again. Who knows?"

"We know," answered Cap'n Bill hastily. "We'd tumble, but we
wouldn't fly."

"They'd take a fall--
And that is all!"

observed the parrot, fluttering its wings. There was silence for a
moment while all the Pinkies seemed to think deeply. Then the Queen
asked the strangers to step outside while they counseled together.
Our friends obeyed, and leaving the room they all entered the
courtyard and examined the rows of pink marble statues for nearly an
hour before they were summoned to return to the little room in
Tourmaline's palace.

"We are now ready to vote as to your fate," said the pretty Queen to
them. "We have decided there are but two things for us do to: either
permit you to remain here as honored guests or take you to an edge
of the island and throw you over the bushes into the sky."

They were silent at hearing this dreadful alternative, but the
parrot screamed shrilly,

"Oh, what a dump! Oh, what a jump!
Won't we all thump when we land with a bump?"

"If we do," said Cap'n Bill thoughtfully, "we'll none of us know
it."






ROSALIE THE WITCH

CHAPTER 16





Trot and Button-Bright had now become worried and anxious, for they
knew if they were tossed over the edge of the island they would be
killed. Cap'n Bill frowned and set his jaws tight together. The old
sailor had made up his mind to make a good fight for his boy and
girl, as well as for his own life, if he was obliged to do so.

The twelve Counselors then voted, and when the vote was counted,
Tourmaline announced that six had voted to allow the strangers to
remain and six to toss them over the bushes. "We seem evenly divided
on this matter," remarked the Queen with a puzzled look at her
Council.

Trot thought the pretty Queen was their friend, so she said, "Of
course you'll have the deciding vote, then, you being the Ruler."

"Oh no," replied Tourmaline. "Since I have asked these good people
to advise me, it would be impolite to side against some of them and
with the others. That would imply that the judgment of some of my
Counselors is wrong, and the judgment of others right. I must ask
someone else to cast the deciding vote."

"Who will it be, then?" inquired Trot. "Can't I do it? Or Cap'n Bill
or Button-Bright?"

Tourmaline smiled and shook her head, while all the Counselors
murmured their protests.

"Let Trot do it
Or you'll rue it!"

advised the parrot, and then he barked like a dog and made them all
jump.

"Let me think a moment," said the Queen, resting her chin on her
hand.

"A Pink can think
As quick's a wink!"

the parrot declared. But Tourmaline's thoughts required time, and
all her Counselors remained silent and watched her anxiously.

At last she raised her head and said, "I shall call upon Rosalie the
Witch. She is wise and honest and will decide the matter justly."

The Pinkies seemed to approve this choice, so Tourmaline rose and
took a small, pink paper parcel from a drawer. In it was a pink
powder, which she scattered upon the seat of a big armchair. Then
she lighted this powder, which at first flashed vivid pink and then
filled all the space around the chair with a thick, pink cloud of
smoke. Presently the smoke cleared away, when they all saw seated
within the chair Rosalie the Witch.

This famous woman was much like the other Pinkies in appearance
except that she was somewhat taller and not quite so fat as most of
the people. Her skin and hair and eyes were all of a rosy, pink
color, and her gown was of spiderweb gauze that nicely matched her
complexion. She did not seem very old, for her features were smiling
and attractive and pleasant to view. She held in her hand a slender
staff tipped with a lustrous pink jewel.

All the Pinkies present bowed very respectfully to Rosalie, who
returned the salutation with a dignified nod. Then Tourmaline began
to explain the presence of the three strangers and the difficulty of
deciding what to do with them.

"I have summoned you here that you may cast the deciding vote,"
added the Queen. "What shall we do, Rosalie, allow them to remain
here as honored guests, or toss them over the bushes into the sky?"

Rosalie, during Tourmaline's speech, had been attentively examining
the faces of the three Earth people. Now she said,

"Before I decide, I must see who these strangers are. I will follow
their adventures in a vision to discover if they have told you the
truth. And in order that you may all share my knowledge, you shall
see the vision as I see it." She then bowed her head and closed her
eyes.

"Rock-a-bye, baby, on a treetop;
Don't wake her up, or the vision will stop,"

muttered the parrot, but no one paid any attention to the noisy
bird.

Gradually, a pink mist formed in the air about the Witch, and in
this mist the vision began to appear.

First, there was Button-bright in the attic of his house, finding
the Magic Umbrella. Then his first flight was shown, and afterward
his trip across the United States until he landed on the bluff where
Trot sat. In rapid succession the scenes shifted and disclosed the
trial flights, with Trot and Cap'n Bill as passengers, then the trip
to Sky Island and the meeting with the Boolooroo. No sound was
heard, but it was easy from the gestures of the actors for the
Pinkies to follow all the adventures of the strangers in the Blue
Country. Button-Bright was greatly astonished to see in this vision
how the Boolooroo had tested the Magic Umbrella and in a fit of rage
cast it into a corner underneath the cabinet, with the seats and
lunch basket still attached to the handle by means of the rope. The
boy now knew why he could not find the umbrella in the Treasure
Chamber, and he was provoked to think he had several times been
quite close to it without knowing it was there. The last scene ended
with the trip through the Fog Bank and the assistance rendered them
by the friendly frog. After the three tumbled upon the grass of the
Pink Country, the vision faded away, and Rosalie lifted her head
with a smile of triumph at the success of her witchcraft.

"Did you see clearly?" she asked.

"We did, O Wonderful Witch!" they declared.

"Then," said Rosalie, "there can be no doubt in your minds that
these strangers have told you the truth."

"None at all," they admitted.

"What arguments are advanced by the six Counselors who voted to
allow them to remain here as guests?" inquired the Witch.

"They have done us no harm," answered Coralie, speaking for her
side, "therefore we should, in honor and justice, do them no harm."

Rosalie nodded. "What arguments have the others advanced?" she
asked.

"They interfere with our color scheme and do not harmonize with our
people," a man of the Sunrise Tribe answered.

Again Rosalie nodded, and Trot thought her eyes twinkled a little.

"I think I now fully comprehend the matter," said she, "and so I
will cast my vote. I favor taking the Earth people to the edge of
the island and casting them into the sky."

For a moment there was perfect silence in the room. All present
realized that this was a decree of death to the strangers. Trot was
greatly surprised at the decision, and for a moment she thought her
heart had stopped beating, for a wave of fear swept over her.
Button-Bright flushed red as a Pinky and then grew very pale. He
crept closer to Trot and took her hand in his own, pressing it to
give the little girl courage. As for Cap'n Bill, he was watching the
smiling face of the Witch in a puzzled but not hopeless way, for he
thought she did not seem wholly in earnest in what she had said.

"The case is decided," announced Tourmaline in a clear, cold voice.
"The three strangers shall be taken at once to the edge of the
island and thrown over the bushes into the sky."

"It's raining hard outside," announced Coralie, who sat near the
door. "Why not wait until this shower is over?"

"I have said 'at once,'" replied the little Queen with dignity, "and
so it must be at once. We are accustomed to rain, so it need not
delay us, and when a disagreeable duty is to be performed, the
sooner it is accomplished the better."

"May I ask, ma'am," said Cap'n Bill, addressing the Witch, "why you
have decided to murder of us in this cold-blooded way?"

"I did not decide to murder you," answered Rosalie.

"To throw us off the island will be murder," declared the sailor.

"Then they cannot throw you off," the Witch replied.

"The Queen says they will."

"I know," said Rosalie, "but I'm quite positive her people can't do
it."

This statement astonished all the Pinkies, who looked at the Witch
inquiringly. "Why not?" asked Tourmaline.

"It is evident to me," said the Witch, speaking slowly and
distinctly, "that these Earth people are protected in some way by
fairies. They may not be aware of this themselves, nor did I see any
fairies in my vision. But if you will think upon it carefully, you
will realize that the Magic Umbrella has no power in itself, but is
enchanted by fairy power so that it is made to fly and carry
passengers through the air BY FAIRIES. This being the case, I do not
think you will be allowed to injure these favored people in any way;
but I am curious to see in what manner the fairies will defend them,
and therefore I have voted to have them thrown off the island. I
bear these strangers no ill will, nor do I believe they are in any
danger. But since you, Tourmaline, have determined to attempt this
terrible thing at once, I shall go with you and see what will
happen."

Some of the Pinkies looked pleased and some troubled at this speech,
but they all prepared to escort the prisoners to the nearest edge of
the island. The rain was pouring down in torrents, and umbrellas
were unknown; but all of them, both men and women, slipped gossamer
raincoats over their clothing, which kept the rain from wetting
them. Then they caught up their sharp sticks and surrounding the
doomed captives commanded them to march to meet their fate.






THE ARRIVAL OF POLYCHROME

CHAPTER 17





Cap'n Bill had determined to fight desperately for their lives, but
he was a shrewd old sailorman, and he found much that was reasonable
in the Witch's assertion that fairies would protect them. He had
often wondered how the Magic Umbrella could fly and obey spoken
commands, but now he plainly saw that the thing must be directed by
some invisible power, and that power was quite likely to save them
from the cruel death that had been decreed. To be sure, the Magic
Umbrella was now in the Blue Country, and the fairies that directed
its flight might be with the umbrella instead of with them, yet the
old sailor had already experienced some strange adventures in Trot's
company and knew she had managed to escape every danger that had
threatened. So he decided not to fight until the last moment and
meekly hobbled along the street as he was commanded to do. Trot was
also encouraged by the Witch's suggestion, for she believed in
fairies and trusted them; but Button-Bright could find no comfort in
their situation, and his face was very sad as he marched along by
Trot's side.

If they had followed the corkscrew windings of the street, it would
have been a long journey to the outer edge of the Pink Country, but
Tourmaline took a shortcut, leading them through private gardens and
even through houses, so that they followed almost a bee line to
their destination. It rained all the way and the walking was very
disagreeable, but our friends were confronting an important crisis
in their strange adventures, and with possible death at their
journey's end, they were in no hurry to arrive there.

Once free of the City they traversed the open country, and here they
often stepped into sticky, pink mud up to their ankles. Cap'n Bill's
wooden leg would often go down deep and stick fast in this mud, and
at such times he would be helpless until two of the Pinkies--who
were a strong people--pulled him out again. The parrot was getting
its feathers sadly draggled in the rain, and the poor bird soon
presented a wet and woebegone appearance.

"Soak us again,
Drown us with rain!"

it muttered in a resigned tone; and then it would turn to Trot and
moan, "The rose is red, the violet's blue, The Pinkies are a beastly
crew!"

The country was not so trim and neatly kept near the edge, for it
was evident the people did not care to go too near to the dangerous
place. There was a row of thick bushes which concealed the gulf
below, and as they approached these bushes the rain abruptly ceased,
and the clouds began to break and drift away in the sky. "Two of you
seize the girl and throw her over," said Tourmaline in a calm,
matter-of-fact way, "and two others must throw the boy over. It may
take four, perhaps, to lift the huge and ancient man."

"More'n that," said Cap'n Bill grimly. "I'm pretty sure it'll take
all o' you, young lady, an' the chances are you won't do it then."

They had halted a short distance from the bushes, and now there
suddenly appeared through a rift in the clouds an immense Rainbow.
It was perfectly formed and glistened with a dozen or more superb
tintings that were so vivid and brilliant and blended into one
another so exquisitely that everyone paused to gaze enraptured upon
the sight. Steadily, yet with wonderful swiftness, the end of the
great bow descended until it rested upon the pink field--almost at
the feet of the little party of observers. Then they saw, dancing
gaily upon the arch, a score of beautiful maidens, dressed in fleecy
robes of rainbow tints which fluttered around them like clouds.

"The Daughters of the Rainbow!" whispered Tourmaline in an awed
voice, and the Witch beside her nodded and said, "Fairies of the
sky. What did I tell you, Tourmaline?"

Just then one of the maidens tripped lightly down the span of the
arch until near the very end, leaning over to observe the group
below. She was exquisitely fair, dainty as a lily and graceful as a
bough swaying in the breeze. "Why, it's Polychrome!" exclaimed
Button-Bright in a voice of mingled wonder and delight. "Hello,
Polly! Don't you remember me?"

"Of course I remember Button-Bright," replied the maiden in a sweet,
tinkling voice. "The last time I saw you was in the Land of Oz."

"Oh!" cried Trot, turning to stare at the boy with big, wide-open
eyes. "Were you ever in the Land of Oz?"

"Yes," he answered, still looking at the Rainbow's Daughter, and
then he said appealingly, "These people want to kill us, Polly.
Can't you help us?"

"Polly wants a cracker!
Polly wants a cracker!"

screeched the parrot.

Polychrome straightened up and glanced at her sisters. "Tell Father
to call for me in an hour or two," said she. "There is work for me
to do here, for one of my old friends is in trouble."

With this she sprang lightly from the rainbow and stood beside
Button-Bright and Trot, and scarcely had she left the splendid arch
when it lifted and rose into the sky. The other end had been hidden
in the clouds, and now the Rainbow began to fade gradually, like
mist, and the sun broke through the clouds and shot its cheering
rays over the Pink Country until presently the Rainbow had vanished
altogether and the only reminder of it was the lovely Polychrome
standing among the wondering band of Pinkies. "Tell me," she said
gently to the boy, "why are you here, and why do these people of the
sky wish to destroy you?"

In a few hurried words Button-Bright related their adventures with
the Magic Umbrella and how the Boolooroo had stolen it and they had
been obliged to escape into the Pink Country. Polychrome listened
and then turned to the Queen. "Why have you decreed death to these
innocent strangers?" she asked.

"They do not harmonize with our color scheme," replied Tourmaline.

"That is utter nonsense," declared Polychrome impatiently. "You're
so dreadfully pink here that your color, which in itself is
beautiful, had become tame and insipid. What you really need is some
sharp contrast to enhance the charm of your country, and to keep
these three people here would be a benefit rather than an injury to
you."

At this, the Pinkies looked downcast and ashamed, while only Rosalie
the Witch laughed and seemed to enjoy the rebuke. "But," protested
Tourmaline, "the Great Book of Laws says our country shall harbor
none but the Pinkies."

"Does it indeed?" asked the Rainbow's Daughter. "Come, let us return
at once to your City and examine your Book of Laws. I am quite sure
I can find in them absolute protection for these poor wanderers."

They dared not disobey Polychrome's request, so at once they all
turned and walked back to the City. As it was still muddy underfoot,
the Rainbow's Daughter took a cloak from one of the women, partly
rolled it, and threw it upon the ground. Then she stepped upon it
and began walking forward. The cloak unrolled as she advanced,
affording a constant carpet for her feet and for those of the others
who followed her. So, being protected from the mud and wet, they
speedily gained the City and in a short time were all gathered in
the low room of Tourmaline's palace, where the Great Book of Laws
lay upon a table.

Polychrome began turning over the leaves, while the others all
watched her anxiously and in silence. "Here," she said presently,
"is a Law which reads as follows: 'Everyone in the Pink Country is
entitled to the protection of the Ruler and to a house and a good
living, except only the Blueskins. If any of the natives of the Blue
Country should ever break through the Fog Bank, they must be driven
back with sharp sticks.' Have you read this Law, Tourmaline?"

"Yes," said the Queen, "but how does that apply to these strangers?"

"Why, being in the Pink Country, as they surely are, and not being
Blueskins, they are by this Law entitled to protection, to a home
and good living. The Law does not say 'Pinkies,' it says any who are
in the Pink Country."

"True," agreed Coralie, greatly pleased, and all the other Pinkies
nodded their heads and repeated, "True, true!"

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
The law's the thing, because it's true!"

cried the parrot.

"I am indeed relieved to have you interpret the Law in this way,"
declared Tourmaline. "I knew it was cruel to throw these poor people
over the edge, but that seemed to us the only thing to be done."

"It was cruel and unjust," answered Polychrome as sternly as her
sweet voice could speak. "But here," she added, for she had still
continued to turn the leaves of the Great Book, "is another Law
which you have also overlooked. It says, 'The person, whether man or
woman, boy or girl, living in the Pink Country who has the lightest
skin shall be the Ruler--King or Queen--as long as he or she lives,
unless someone of a lighter skin is found, and this Ruler's commands
all the people must obey.' Do you know this Law?"

"Oh yes," replied Tourmaline. "That is why I am the Queen. You will
notice my complexion is of a lighter pink than that of any other of
my people."

"Yes," remarked Polychrome, looking at her critically, "when you
were made Queen without doubt you had the lightest-colored skin in
all the Pink Country. But now you are no longer Queen of the
Pinkies, Tourmaline."

Those assembled were so startled by this statement that they gazed
at the Rainbow's Daughter in astonishment for a time. Then
Tourmaline asked, "Why not, your Highness?"

"Because here is one lighter in color than yourself," pointed to
Trot. "This girl is, by the Law of the Great Book, the rightful
Queen of the Pinkies, and as loyal citizens you are all obliged to
obey her commands. Give me that circlet from your brow, Tourmaline."
Without hesitation Tourmaline removed the rose-gold circlet with its
glittering jewel and handed it to Polychrome, who turned and placed
it upon Trot's brow. Then she called in a loud, imperative voice,
"Greet your new Queen, Pinkies!"

One by one they all advanced, knelt before Trot and pressed her hand
to their lips. "Long live Queen Mayre!" called out Cap'n Bill,
dancing around on his wooden leg in great delight. "Vive la--Vive
la--ah, ah, Trot!"

"Thank you, Polly," said Button-Bright gratefully. "This will fix us
all right, I'm sure."

"Why, I have done nothing," returned Polychrome, smiling upon him.
"It is the Law of the Country. Isn't it surprising how little people
know of their Laws? Are you all contented, Pinkies?" she asked,
turning to the people.

"We are!" they cried. Then several of the men ran out to spread the
news throughout the City and Country, so that a vast crowd soon
began to gather in the Court of the Statues.






MAYRE, QUEEN OF THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 18





Polychrome now dismissed all but Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill, Rosalie
the Witch and the new Queen of the Pinkies. Tourmaline hastened away
to her father's house to put on a beautiful gown all covered with
flounces and ribbons, for she was glad to be relieved of the duties
of the Queen and was eager to be gaily dressed and one of the people
again.

"I s'pose," said Trot, "I'll have to put on one of Tourmaline's
common pink dresses."

"Yes," replied Polychrome, "you must follow the customs of the
country, absurd though they may be. In the little sleeping chamber
adjoining this room you will find plenty of gowns poor enough for
the Queen to wear. Shall I assist you to put one on?"

"No," answered Trot, "I guess I can manage it alone."

When she withdrew to the little chamber, the Rainbow's Daughter
began conversing with the Witch, whom she urged to stay with the new
queen and protect her as long as she ruled the Pink Country.
Rosalie, who longed to please the powerful Polychrome, whose fairy
powers as Daughters of the Rainbow were far superior to her own
witchcraft, promised faithfully to devote herself to Queen Mayre as
long as she might need her services.

By the time Trot was dressed in pink and had returned to the room,
there was an excited and clamorous crowd assembled in the court, and
Polychrome took the little girl's hand and led her out to greet her
new subjects. The Pinkies were much impressed by the fact that the
Rainbow's Daughter was their new Queen's friend, and that Rosalie
the Witch stood on Trot's left hand and treated her with humble
deference. So they shouted their approval very enthusiastically and
pressed forward one by one to kneel before their new Ruler and kiss
her hand.

The parrot was now on Cap'n Bill's shoulder, for Trot thought a
Queen ought not to carry a bird around, but the parrot did not mind
the change and was as much excited as anyone in the crowd. "Oh, what
bliss to kiss a miss!" he shouted as Trot held out her hand to be
kissed by her subjects, and then he would scream,

"We're in the sky and flyin' high;
We're goin' to live instead of die,
It's time to laugh instead of cry;
Oh, my! Ki-yi! Ain't this a pie?"

Cap'n Bill let the bird jabber as he pleased, for the occasion was a
joyful one, and it was no wonder the parrot was excited. And while
the throng shouted greetings to the Queen, suddenly the great
Rainbow appeared in the sky and dropped its end right on the Court
of the Statues. Polychrome stooped to kiss Trot and Button-Bright,
gave Cap'n Bill a charming smile and Rosalie the Witch a friendly
nod of farewell. Then she sprang lightly upon the arch of the
Rainbow and was greeted by the bevy of dancing, laughing maidens who
were her sisters. "I shall keep watch over you, Button-Bright," she
called to the boy. "Don't despair, whatever happens, for behind the
clouds is always the Rainbow!"

"Thank you, Polly," he answered, and Trot also thanked the lovely
Polychrome, and so did Cap'n Bill. The parrot made quite a long
speech, flying high above the arch where Polychrome stood and then
back to Cap'n Bill's shoulder. Said he,

"We Pollys know our business, and we're all right!
We'll take good care of Cap'n Bill and Trot and Button-Bright.
You watch 'em from the Rainbow, and I'll watch day and night,
And we'll call a sky policeman if trouble comes in sight!"

Suddenly, the bow lifted and carried the dancing maidens into the
sky. The colors faded, the arch slowly dissolved and the heavens
were clear. Trot turned to the Pinkies. "Let's have a holiday
today," she said. "Have a good time and enjoy yourselves. I don't
jus' know how I'm goin' to rule this country yet, but I'll think it
over an' let you know." Then she went into the palace hut with Cap'n
Bill and Button-Bright and Rosalie the Witch, and the people went
away to enjoy themselves and talk over the surprising events of the
day.

"Dear me," said Trot, throwing herself into a chair, "wasn't that a
sudden change of fortune, though? That Rainbow's Daughter is a
pretty good fairy. I'm glad you know her, Button-Bright."

"I was sure something would happen to save you," remarked Rosalie,
"and that was why I voted to have you thrown off the edge. I wanted
to discover who would come to your assistance, and I found out. Now
I have made a friend of Polychrome, and that will render me more
powerful as a Witch, for I can call upon her for assistance whenever
I need her."

"But see here," said Cap'n Bill. "You can't afford to spend your
time a-rulin' this tucked-up country, Trot."

"Why not?" asked Trot, who was pleased with her new and important
position.

"It'd get pretty tiresome, mate, after you'd had a few quarrels with
the Pinkies, for they expec' their Queen to be as poor as poverty
an' never have any fun in life."

"You wouldn't like it for long, I'm sure," added Button-Bright
seriously.

Trot seemed thoughtful. "No, I don't know's I would," she admitted.
"But as long as we stay here, it seems a pretty good thing to be
Queen. I guess I'm a little proud of it. I wish mother could see me
rulin' the Pinkies, an' Papa Griffith, too. Wouldn't they open their
eyes?"

"They would, mate, but they can't see you," said Cap'n Bill. "So the
question is, what's to be done?"

"We ought to get home," observed the boy. "Our folks will worry
about us, and Earth's the best place to live, after all. If we could
only get hold of my Magic Umbrella, we'd be all right."

"The rose is red, the violet's blue,
But the umbrel's stolen by the Boolooroo!"

screamed the parrot.

"That's it," said Cap'n Bill. "The Boolooroo's got the umbrel, an'
that settles the question."

"Tell me," said Rosalie, "If you had your Magic Umbrella, could you
fly home again in safety?"

"Of course we could," replied Button-Bright.

"And would you prefer to go home to remaining here?"

"We would indeed!"

"Then why do you not get the umbrella?"

"How?" asked Trot eagerly.

"You must go into the Blue Country and force the Boolooroo to give
up your property."

"Through the Fog Bank?" asked Cap'n Bill doubtfully.

"And let the Boolooroo capture us again?" demanded Button-Bright
with a shiver.

"An' have to wait on the Snubnoses instead of bein' a Queen?" said
Trot.

"You must remember that conditions have changed, and you are now a
powerful Ruler," replied Rosalie. "The Pinkies are really a great
nation, and they are pledged to obey your commands. Why not assemble
an army, march through the Fog Bank, fight and conquer the Boolooroo
and recapture the Magic Umbrella?"

"Hooray!" shouted Cap'n Bill, pounding his wooden leg on the floor.
"That's the proper talk! Let's do it, Queen Trot."

"It doesn't seem like a bad idea," added Button-Bright.

"Do you think the Pinkies would fight the Blueskins?" asked Trot.

"Why not?" replied the sailorman. "They have sharp sticks an' know
how to use 'em, whereas the Blueskins have only them windin'-up
cords with weights on the ends."

"The Blueskins are the biggest people," said the girl.

"But they're cowards, I'm sure," declared the boy.

"Anyhow," the sailor remarked, "that's our only hope of ever gett'n'
home again. I'd like to try it, Trot."

"If you decide on this adventure," said Rosalie, "I believe I can be
of much assistance to you."

"That'll help," asserted Cap'n Bill.

"And we've one good friend among the Blueskins," said Button-Bright.
"I'm sure Ghip-Ghisizzle will side with us, and I've got the Royal
Record Book, which proves that the Boolooroo has already reigned his
lawful three hundred years."

"Does the book say that?" inquired Trot with interest.

"Yes, I've been reading it."

"Then Sizzle'll be the new Boolooroo," said the girl, "an' p'raps we
won't have to fight, after all."

"We'd better go prepared, though," advised Cap'n Bill, "fer that
awful ol' Boolooroo won't give up without a struggle. When shall we
start?"

Trot hesitated, so they all looked to Rosalie for advice. "Just as
soon as we can get the army together and ready," decided the Witch.
"That will not take long. Perhaps two or three days."

"Good!" cried Cap'n Bill, and the parrot screamed,

"Here's a lovely how-d'y'-do--
We're going to fight the Boolooroo!
We'll get the Six Snubnoses, too,
And make 'em all feel mighty blue."

"Either that or the other thing," said Trot. "Anyhow, we're in for
it."






THE WAR OF THE PINKS AND BLUES

CHAPTER 19





Much to the surprise of the Earth people, the Pinkies made no
objection whatever to undertaking the adventure. Their lives were so
monotonous and uninteresting that they welcomed anything in the way
of excitement. This march through the unknown Fog Bank to fight the
unknown Blueskins aroused them to enthusiasm, and although the
result of the expedition could not be foretold and some of them were
almost certain to get hurt, they did not hesitate to undertake the
war.

It appeared that Coralie was Captain of the Sunset Tribe and a man
named Tintint the Captain of the Sunrise Tribe. Tintint had a very
pink skin and eyes so faded in their pink color that he squinted
badly in order to see anything around him. He was a fat and pompous
little fellow and loved to strut up and down his line of warriors
twirling his long, pointed stick so that all might admire him.

By Rosalie's advice the Army of Conquest consisted of one hundred
Sunsets and one hundred Sunrises. Many more were eager to go, but
the Witch thought that would be enough. The warriors consisted of
both men and women, equally divided, and there was no need to
provide uniforms for them because their regular pink clothing was a
distinctive uniform in itself. Each one bore a long, pointed stick
as the main weapon and had two short, pointed sticks stuck in his
belt.

While the army was getting ready, Rosalie the Witch went to the
central edge of the Fog Bank and fearlessly entered it. There she
called for the King of the Giant Frogs, who came at her bidding, and
the two held an earnest and long talk together. Meantime, Cap'n Bill
had the army assembled in the Court of the Statues, where Queen
Mayre appeared and told the Pinkies that the sailorman was to be
Commander in Chief of the Expedition and all must obey his commands.
Then Cap'n Bill addressed the army and told them what the Fog Bank
was like. He advised them all to wear their raincoats over their
pretty pink clothes so they would not get wet, and he assured them
that all the creatures to be met with in the Fog were perfectly
harmless.

"When we come to the Blue Country, though," he added, "you're liable
to be pretty busy. The Blueskins are tall an' lanky, an' ugly an'
fierce, an' if they happen to capture you, you'll all be patched,
which is a deep disgrace an' a uncomfortable mix-up."

"Will they throw us over the edge?" asked Captain Tintint.

"I don't think so," replied Cap'n Bill. "While I was there I never
heard the edge mentioned. They're cruel enough to do
that--'specially the Boolooroo--but I guess they've never thought o'
throwin' folks over the edge. They fight with long cords that have
weights on the ends, which coil 'round you an' make you helpless in
a jiffy; so whenever they throw them cords you mus' ward 'em off
with your long sticks. Don't let 'em wind around your bodies, or
you're done for."

He told them other things about the Blueskins, so they would not be
frightened when they faced the enemy and found them so different in
appearance from themselves, and also he assured them that the
Pinkies were so much the braver and better armed that he had no
doubt they would easily conquer.

On the third day, just at sunrise, the army moved forward to the Fog
Bank, headed by Cap'n Bill, clad in an embroidered pink coat with
wide, flowing pink trousers, and accompanied by Trot and
Button-Bright and Rosalie the Witch, all bundled up in their pink
raincoats. The parrot was there, too, as the bird refused to be left
behind.

They had not advanced far into the deep fog when they were halted by
a queer barrier consisting of a long line of gigantic frogs,
crouching so close together that no Pinkie could squeeze between
them. As the heads of the frogs were turned the other way, toward
the Blue Country, the army could not at first imagine what the
barrier was. But Rosalie said to them, "Our friends the frogs have
agreed to help us through the Fog Bank. Climb upon their backs, as
many on each frog as are able to hold on, and then we shall make the
journey more quickly." Obeying this injunction, the Pinkies began
climbing upon the frogs, and by crowding close together, all were
able to find places. On the back of the King Frog rode Trot and her
parrot, besides Rosalie, Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill and the captains
of the two companies of the army.

When all were seated, clinging to one another so they would not
slide off, Cap'n Bill gave the word of command and away leaped the
frogs, all together. They bounded a long distance at this jump--some
farther than others--and as soon as they landed they jumped again,
without giving their passengers a chance to get their breaths. It
was a bewildering and exciting ride, but a dozen of the huge jumps
accomplished the journey, and at the edge of the Fog Bank each frog
stopped so suddenly that the Pinkies went flying over their heads to
tumble into the blue fields of the Blue Country, where they rolled
in a confused mass until they could recover and scramble to their
feet. No one was hurt, however, and the King Frog had been wise
enough to treat his passengers more gently by slowing down at the
edge and allowing his riders to slip to the ground very comfortably.

Cap'n Bill at once formed his army into line of battle and had them
all remove the cumbersome raincoats, which they piled in a heap at
the edge of the Fog Bank. It was a splendid array of warriors, and
from where they stood they could discover several Blueskins rushing
in a panic toward the Blue City as fast as their long, blue legs
could carry them.

"Well, they know we're here, anyhow," said Cap'n Bill, "and instead
of waitin' to see what'll they do, I guess we'll jus' march on the
City an' ask 'em to please surrender."






GHIP-GHISIZZLE HAS A BAD TIME

CHAPTER 20





The Boolooroo was quite busy at the time the Pinkies invaded his
country. He had discovered the loss of the Book of Records, and
after being frightened 'most to death at the prospect of his fraud
on the people's being made public, he decided to act boldly and hold
his position as Boolooroo at any cost.

Since Ghip-Ghisizzle was to be the next Boolooroo, the king
suspected him first of all, so he had the Majordomo bound with cords
and brought before him, when he accused him of stealing the Book of
Records. Of course, Ghip-Ghisizzle denied taking the Book, but he
became almost as nervous at its loss as had the Boolooroo. He
secretly believed that Button-Bright had taken the Book from the
Treasure Chamber, and if this were true it might prove as great a
misfortune as if the king had kept it locked up. For Button-Bright
had escaped into the Fog Bank, and Ghip-Ghisizzle was afraid the boy
would never again be seen in the Blue Country.

He did not tell the Boolooroo of this suspicion, because in that
case the king would realize he was secure and that his deception
could never be proved against him. The Majordomo simply denied
taking the Record Book, and the Boolooroo did not believe he spoke
truly. To prevent his rival from ever becoming the Ruler of the Blue
Country, the Boolooroo determined to have him patched, but for some
time he could find no other Blueskin to patch him with. No one had
disobeyed a command or done anything wrong, so the king was in a
quandary until he discovered that a servant named Tiggle had mixed
the royal nectar for Cap'n Bill, who had been ordered to do it at
the time of his capture. This was sufficient excuse for the
Boolooroo, who at once had Tiggle made a prisoner and brought before
him.

This servant was not so long-legged as Ghip-Ghisizzle, and his head
was thicker and his nose flatter. But that pleased the Boolooroo all
the more. He realized that when the great knife had sliced the
prisoners in two and their halves were patched together, they would
present a ridiculous sight and all the Blueskins would laugh at them
and avoid them. So on the very morning that the Pinkies arrived, the
Boolooroo had ordered his two prisoners brought into the room of the
palace where the Great Knife stood, and his soldiers were getting
ready to perform the operation of patching Ghip-Ghisizzle with
Tingle when a messenger came running to say that a great army of the
Pinkies had broken through the Fog Bank.

"Never mind," said the Boolooroo, "I'll attend to them in a minute.
I'm busy now."

"They are marching on the City," said the frightened messenger. "If
you delay, Most High and Mighty One, we shall all be captured. You'd
better save your City first and do your patching afterward."

"What!" roared the Boolooroo. "Dare you dictate to me?" But he was
impressed by the man's logic. After locking the prisoners, who were
still bound, in the Room of the Great Knife, the Ruler hurried away
to assemble his soldiers. By this time the Pinkies had advanced
halfway to the walls of the City, so the first thing the Boolooroo
did was to order all the gates closed and locked, and then he placed
a line of soldiers on the wall to prevent any of the Pinkies from
climbing over. Therefore, when Cap'n Bill's army reached the wall,
he was obliged to halt his ranks until he could find a way to enter
the City.

Now when the Boolooroo looked through the blue-steel bars of the
main gate and saw the enemy armed with sharp-pointed sticks, he
began to tremble; and when he thought how painful it would be to
have his body and arms and legs prodded and pricked by such weapons,
he groaned aloud and was very miserable. But the thought occurred to
him that if he could avoid being caught by the Pinkies, they would
be unable to harm him. So he went among his people and reminded them
how horrible it would feel to be punched full of holes by the
invaders and urged them to fight desperately and drive the Pinkies
back into the Fog Bank.

Only a few of the Blueskins were soldiers, and these all belonged to
the King's bodyguard, but the citizens realized that they must
indeed fight bravely to save themselves from getting hurt, so they
promised the Boolooroo to do all they could. They armed themselves
with long cords having weights fastened to the ends and practiced
throwing these weights in such a manner that the cords would wind
around their enemies. Also, they assembled in the streets in small
groups and told each other in frightened whispers that all their
trouble was due to the Boolooroo's cruel treatment of the Earth
people. If he had received them as friends instead of making them
slaves, they would never have escaped to the Pinkies and brought an
army into the Blue Country that they might be revenged. The
Blueskins had not liked their Boolooroo before this, and now they
began to hate him, forgetting they had also treated the strangers in
a very disagreeable manner.

Meantime, the Six Snubnosed Princesses had seen from their rooms in
a tower of the palace the army of the Pinkies marching upon them,
and the sight had served to excite them greatly. They had been
quarreling bitterly among themselves all morning, and strangely
enough this quarrel was all about which of them should marry
Ghip-Ghisizzle. They knew that some day the Majordomo would become
Boolooroo, and each one of the six had determined to marry him so as
to be Queen and thus force her sisters to obey her commands. They
paid no attention to the fact that Ghip-Ghisizzle did not want to
marry any of them, for they had determined that when it was agreed
who should have him, they would ask their father to force the man to
marry.

While they quarreled in one room of the palace, Ghip-Ghisizzle was
in danger of being patched in another room; but the Six Snubnosed
Princesses did not know that. The arrival of the Pinkies gave them
something new to talk about, so they hurried downstairs and along
the corridors so as to gain the courtyard and take part in the
exciting scenes. But as they passed the closed doors of the Room of
the Great Knife, they heard a low moan and stopped to listen. The
moan was repeated, and being curious, they unlocked the door--the
key having been left on the outside--and entered the room.

At once, the Pinkies were forgotten, for there upon the floor,
tightly bound, lay Ghip-Ghisizzle, and beside him poor Tiggle, who
had uttered the moans.

The six Princesses sat down in a circle facing the captives, and
Cerulia said, "Ghip, my dear, we will release you on one condition:
That you choose a wife from among us and promise to marry the one
selected as soon as the Pinkies are driven back into the Fog Bank."

Ghip-Ghisizzle managed to shake his head. Then he said, "Really,
ladies, you must excuse me. I'd rather be patched than mismatched,
as I would be with a lovely, snub-nosed wife. You are too beautiful
for me; go seek your husbands elsewhere."

"Monster!" cried Indigo. "If you choose me, I'll scratch your eyes
out!"

"If you choose me," said Cobalt in a rage, "I'll tear out your hair
by the roots!"

"If I am to be your wife," screamed Azure, "I'll mark your obstinate
face with my fingernails!"

"And I," said Turquoise passionately, "will pound your head with a
broomstick!"

"I'll shake him till his teeth rattle!" shrieked Sapphire.

"The best way to manage a husband," observed Cerulia angrily, "is to
pull his nose."

"Ladies," said Ghip-Ghisizzle when he had a chance to speak, "do not
anticipate these pleasures, I beg of you, for I shall choose none
among you for a wife."

"We'll see about that," said Indigo.

"I think you will soon change your mind," added Azure.

"I'm going to be patched to Tingle, here, as soon as the Boolooroo
returns," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and it's against the law for a
patched man to marry anyone. It's regarded as half-bigamy."

"Dear me!" cried Cerulia. "If he's patched, he never can be
Boolooroo."

"Then he musn't be patched," declared Sapphire. "We must save him
from that fate, girls, and force him to decide among us. Otherwise,
none of us can ever be the Queen."

This being evident, they proceeded to unbind the long legs of
Ghip-Ghisizzle, leaving his body and arms, however, tied fast
together. Then between them they got him upon his feet and led him
away, paying no attention to poor Tiggle, who whined to be released
so he could fight in the war. After a hurried consultation, the Six
Snubnosed Princesses decided to hide the Majordomo in one of their
boudoirs, so they dragged him up the stairs to their reception room
and fell to quarreling as to whose boudoir should be occupied by
their captive. Not being able to settle the question, they finally
locked him up in a vacant room across the hall and told him he must
stay there until he had decided to marry one of the Princesses and
could make a choice among them.






THE CAPTURE OF CAP'N BILL

CHAPTER 21





While this was transpiring in the palace, Cap'n Bill and the Pinkies
had encamped before the principal gate of the City and a tent had
been pitched for Trot and Button-Bright and Rosalie. The army had
been very fearful and weak-kneed when it first entered the Blue
Country, but perceiving that the Boolooroo and his people were
afraid of them and had locked themselves up in the City, the Pinkies
grew bolder and longed to make an attack.

One of them, in his curiosity to examine the Blue City, got a little
too near the wall, and a blue soldier threw his cord-and-weight at
him. The cord didn't wind around the Pinkie, as he was too far off,
but the weight hit him in the eye and made him howl lustily as he
trotted back to this comrades at full speed. After this experience,
the invaders were careful to keep a safe distance from the wall.

The Boolooroo, having made all preparations to receive the enemy,
was annoyed because they held back. He was himself so nervous and
excited that he became desperate, and after an hour of tedious
waiting, during which time he pranced around impatiently, he decided
to attack the hated Pinkies and rid the country of them.

"Their dreadful color makes me hysterical," he said to his soldiers,
"so if I am to have any peace of mind, we must charge the foe and
drive them back into the Fog Bank. But take all the prisoners you
can, my brave men, and tomorrow we will have a jolly time patching
them. Don't be afraid; those pink creatures have no blue blood in
their veins, and they'll run like rabbits when they see us coming."

Then he ordered the gate thrown open, and immediately the Blueskins
poured out into the open plain and began to run toward the Pinkies.
The Boolooroo went out, too, but he kept well behind his people,
remembering the sharp sticks with which the enemy were armed.

Cap'n Bill was alert and had told his army what to do in case of an
attack. The Pinkies did not run like rabbits, but formed a solid
line and knelt down with their long, sharp sticks pointed directly
toward the Blueskins, the other ends being set firmly upon the
ground. Of course, the Blueskins couldn't run against these sharp
points, so they halted a few feet away and began swinging their
cord-and-weights. But the Pinkies were too close together to be
caught in this manner, and now by command of Cap'n Bill they
suddenly rose to their feet and began jabbing their sticks at the
foe. The Blueskins hesitated until a few got pricked and began to
yell with terror, when the whole of the Boolooroo's attacking party
turned around and ran back to the gate, their Ruler reaching it
first of all. The Pinkies tried to chase them, but their round, fat
legs were no match for the long, thin legs of the Blueskins, who
quickly gained the gate and shut themselves up in the City again.

"It is evident," panted the Boolooroo, facing his defeated soldiers
wrathfully, "that you are a pack of cowards!"

"But we followed your own royal example in running," replied the
Captain.

"I merely ran back to the City to get a drink of water, for I was
thirsty," declared the Boolooroo.

"So did we! So did we!" cried the soldiers eagerly. "We were all
thirsty."

"Your High and Mighty Spry and Flighty Majesty," remarked the
Captain respectfully, "it occurs to me that the weapons of the
Pinkies are superior to our own. What we need in order to oppose
them successfully is a number of sharp sticks which are longer than
their own."

"True, true!" exclaimed the Boolooroo enthusiastically. "Get to work
at once and make yourselves long, sharp sticks, and then we will
attack the enemy again."

So the soldiers and citizens all set to work preparing long, sharp
sticks, and while they were doing this, Rosalie the Witch had a
vision in which she saw exactly what was going on inside the City
wall. Queen Trot and Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright saw the vision,
too, for they were all in the tent together, and the sight made them
anxious.

"What can be done?" asked the girl. "The Blueskins are bigger and
stronger than the Pinkies, and if they have sharp sticks which are
longer than ours, they will surely defeat us."

"I have one magic charm," said Rosalie thoughtfully, "that will save
our army; but I am allowed to work only one magic charm every three
days--not oftener--and perhaps I'll need the magic for other
things."

"Strikes me, ma'am," returned the sailor, "that what we need most on
this expedition is to capture the Blueskins. If we don't, we'll need
plenty of magic to help us back to the Pink Country; but if we do,
we can take care of ourselves without magic."

"Very well," replied Rosalie. "I will take your advice, Cap'n, and
enchant the weapons of the Pinkies." She then went out and had all
the Pinkies come before her, one by one, and she enchanted their
sharp sticks by muttering some cabalistic words and making queer
passes with her hands over the weapons. "Now," she said to them,
"you will be powerful enough to defeat the Blueskins whatever they
may do." The Pinkies were overjoyed at this promise, and it made
them very brave indeed, since they now believed they would surely be
victorious.

When the Boolooroo's people were armed with long, thin, lances of
bluewood all sharpened to fine points at one end, they prepared to
march once more against the invaders. Their sticks were twice as
long as those of the Pinkies, and the Boolooroo chuckled with glee
to think what fun they would have in punching holes in the round,
fat bodies of his enemies.

Out from the gate they marched very boldly and pressed on to attack
the Pinkies, who were drawn up in line of battle to receive them,
with Cap'n Bill at their head. When the opposing forces came
together, however, and the Blueskins pushed their points against the
Pinkies, the weapons which had been enchanted by Rosalie began to
whirl in swift circles--so swift that the eye could scarcely follow
the motion. The result was that the lances of the Boolooroo's people
could not touch the Pinkies, but were thrust aside with violence and
either broken in two or sent hurling through the air in all
directions. Finding themselves so suddenly disarmed, the amazed
Blueskins turned about and ran again, while Cap'n Bill, greatly
excited by his victory, shouted to his followers to pursue the
enemy, and hobbled after them as fast as he could make his wooden
leg go, swinging his sharp stick as he advanced.

The Blues were in such a frightened, confused mass that they got in
one another's way and could not make very good progress on the
retreat, so the old sailor soon caught up with them and began
jabbing at the crowd with his stick. Unfortunately, the Pinkies had
not followed their commander, being for the moment dazed by their
success, so that Cap'n Bill was all alone among the Blueskins when
he stepped his wooden leg into a hole in the ground and tumbled full
length, his sharp stick flying from his hand and pricking the
Boolooroo in the leg as it fell.

At this, the Ruler of the Blues stopped short in his flight to yell
with terror, but seeing that only the sailorman was pursuing them
and that this solitary foe had tumbled flat upon the ground, he
issued a command and several of his people fell upon poor Cap'n
Bill, seized him in their long arms, and carried him struggling into
the City, where he was fast bound.

Then a panic fell upon the Pinkies at the loss of their leader, and
Trot and Button-Bright called out in vain for them to rescue Cap'n
Bill. By the time the army recovered their wits and prepared to
obey, it was too late. And although Trot ran with them in her
eagerness to save her friend, the gate was found to be fast barred,
and she knew it was impossible for them to force an entrance into
the City.

So she went sorrowfully back to the camp, followed by the Pinkies,
and asked Rosalie what could be done.

"I'm sure I do not know," replied the Witch. "I cannot use another
magic charm until three days have expired, but if they do not harm
Cap'n Bill during that time, I believe I can then find a way to save
him."

"Three days is a long time," remarked Trot dismally.

"The Boolooroo may decide to patch him at once," added Button-Bright
with equal sadness, for he, too, mourned the sailor's loss.

"It can't be helped," replied Rosalie. "I am not a fairy, my dears,
but merely a witch, and so my magic powers are limited. We can only
hope that the Boolooroo won't patch Cap'n Bill for three days."

When night settled down upon the camp of the Pinkies, where many
tents had now been pitched, all the invaders were filled with gloom.
The band tried to enliven them by playing the "Dead March," but it
was not a success. The Pinkies were despondent in spite of the fact
that they had repulsed the attack of the Blues, for as yet they had
not succeeded in gaining the City or finding the Magic Umbrella, and
the blue dusk of this dread country--which was so different from
their own land of sunsets--made them all very nervous. They saw the
moon rise for the first time in their lives, and its cold, silvery
radiance made them shudder and prevented them from going to sleep.
Trot tried to interest them by telling them that on the Earth the
people had both the sun and the moon and loved them both; but
nevertheless it is certain that had not the terrible Fog Bank stood
between them and the Pink Land, most of the invading army would have
promptly deserted and gone back home.

Trot couldn't sleep, either, she was so worried over Cap'n Bill. She
went back to the tent where Rosalie and Button-Bright were sitting
in the moonlight and asked the Witch if there was no way in which
she could secretly get into the City of the Blues and search for her
friend. Rosalie thought it over for some time and then replied:

"We can make a rope ladder that will enable you to climb to the top
of the wall and descend into the City. But if anyone should see you,
you would be captured."

"I'll risk that," said the child, excited at the prospect of gaining
the side of Cap'n Bill in this adventurous way. "Please make the
rope ladder at once, Rosalie!"

So the Witch took some ropes and knotted together a ladder long
enough to reach the top of the wall. When it was finished, the
three--Rosalie, Trot and Button-Bright--stole out into the moonlight
and crept unobserved into the shadow of the wall. The Blueskins were
not keeping a very close watch, as they were confident the Pinkies
could not get into the City.

The hardest part of Rosalie's task was to toss up one end of the
rope ladder until it would catch on some projection on top of the
wall. There were few such projections, but after creeping along the
wall for a distance, they saw the end of a broken flagstaff near the
top edge. The Witch tossed up the ladder, trying to catch it upon
this point, and on the seventh attempt she succeeded.

"Good!" cried Trot. "Now I can climb up."

"Don't you want me to go with you?" asked Button-Bright a little
wistfully.

"No," said the girl. "You must stay to lead the army. And if you can
think of a way, you must try to rescue us. Perhaps I'll be able to
save Cap'n Bill by myself; but if I don't, it's all up to you,
Button-Bright."

"I'll do my best," he promised.

"And here, keep my polly till I come back," added Trot, giving him
the bird. "I can't take it with me, for it would be a bother, an' if
it tried to spout po'try, I'd be discovered in a jiffy."

As the beautiful Witch kissed the little girl goodbye, she slipped
upon her finger a curious ring. At once, Button-Bright exclaimed,
"Why, where has she gone?"

"I'm right here," said Trot's voice by his side. "Can't you see me?"

"No," replied the boy, mystified.

Rosalie laughed. "It's a magic ring I've loaned you, my dear," said
she, "and as long as you wear it, you will be invisible to all eyes,
those of Blueskins and Pinkies alike. I'm going to let you wear this
wonderful ring, for it will save you from being discovered by your
enemies. If at any time you wish to be seen, take the ring from your
finger; but as long as you wear it, no one can see you, not even
Earth people."

"Oh, thank you!" cried Trot. "That will be fine."

"I see you have another ring on your hand," said Rosalie, "and I
perceive it is enchanted in some way. Where did you get it?"

"The Queen of the Mermaids gave it to me," answered Trot. "But Sky
Island is so far away from the sea that the ring won't do me any
good while I'm here. It's only to call the mermaids to me if I need
them, and they can't swim in the sky, you see."

Rosalie smiled and kissed her again. "Be brave, my dear," she said,
"and I am sure you will be able to find Cap'n Bill without getting
in danger yourself. But be careful not to let any Blueskin touch
you, for while you are in contact with any person you will become
visible. Keep out of their way, and you will be perfectly safe.
Don't lose the ring, for you must give it back to me when you
return. It is one of my witchcraft treasures, and I need it in my
business."

The Trot climbed the ladder, although neither Button-Bright nor
Rosalie could see her do so, and when she was on top the broad wall
she pulled up the knotted ropes and began to search for a place to
let it down on the other side. A little way off she found a
bluestone seat near to the inner edge, and attaching the ladder to
this, she easily descended it and found herself in the Blue City. A
guard was pacing up and down near her, but as he could not see the
girl, he of course paid no attention to her. So after marking the
place where the ladder hung that she might know how to reach it
again, Trot hurried away through the streets of the city.






TROT'S INVISIBLE ADVENTURE

CHAPTER 22





All the Blueskins except a few soldiers had gone to bed and were
sound asleep. A blue gloom hung over the city, which was scarcely
relieved by a few bluish, wavering lights here and there, but Trot
knew the general direction in which the palace lay, and she decided
to go there first. She believed the Boolooroo would surely keep so
important a prisoner as Cap'n Bill locked up in his own palace.

Once or twice the little girl lost her way, for the streets were
very puzzling to one not accustomed to them, but finally she sighted
the great palace and went up to the entrance. There she found a
double guard posted. They were sitting on a bench outside the
doorway, and both stood up as she approached.

"We thought we heard footsteps," said one.

"So did we," replied the other, "yet there is no one in sight."

Trot then saw that the guards were the two patched men, Jimfred
Jonesjinks and Fredjim Jinksjones, who had been talking together
quite cheerfully. It was the first time the girl had seen them
together, and she marveled at the queer patching that had been so
strongly united here, yet so thoroughly separated them.

"You see," remarked Jimfred as they seated themselves again upon the
bench, "The Boolooroo has ordered the patching to take place
tomorrow morning after breakfast. The old Earth man is to be patched
to poor Tiggle instead of Ghip-Ghisizzle, who has in some way
managed to escape from the Room of the Great Knife--no one knows how
but Tiggle, and Tiggle won't tell."

"We're sorry for anyone who has to be patched," replied Fredjim in a
reflective tone, "for although it didn't hurt us as much as we
expected, it's a terrible mix-up to be in until we become used to
our strange combination. You and we are about alike, now, Jimfred,
although we were so different before."

"Not so," said Jimfred. "We are really more intelligent than you
are, for the left side of our brain was always the keenest before we
were patched."

"That may be," admitted Fredjim, "but we are much the strongest,
because our right arm was by far the best before we were patched."

"We are not sure of that," responded Jimfred, "for we have a right
arm, too, and it is pretty strong."

"We will test it," suggested the other, "by all pulling upon one end
of this bench with our right arms. Whichever can pull the bench from
the others must be the strongest."

While they were tussling at the bench, dragging it first here and
then there in the trial of strength, Trot opened the door of the
palace and walked in. It was pretty dark in the hall, and only a few
dim blue lights showed at intervals down the long corridors. As the
girl walked through these passages, she could hear snores of various
degrees coming from behind some of the closed doors and knew that
all the regular inmates of the place were sound asleep. So she
mounted to the upper floor, and thinking she would be likely to find
Cap'n Bill in the Room of the Great Knife, she went there and tried
the door. It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside.
She waited until the sentry who was pacing the corridor had his back
toward her, and then she turned the key and slipped within, softly
closing the door behind her.

It was pitch dark in the room, and Trot didn't know how to make a
light. After a moment's thought she began feeling her way to the
window, stumbling over objects as she went. Every time she made a
noise, someone groaned, and that made the child uneasy. At last she
found a window and managed to open the shutters and let the
moonlight in. It wasn't a very strong moonlight, but it enabled her
to examine the interior of the room. In the center stood the Great
Knife, which the Boolooroo used to split people in two when he
patched them, and at one side was a dark form huddled upon the floor
and securely bound.

Trot hastened to this form and knelt beside it, but was disappointed
to find it was only Tiggle. The man stirred a little and rolled
against Trot's knee, when she at once became visible to him. "Oh,
it's the Earth child," said he. "Are you condemned to be patched,
too, little one?"

"No," answered Trot. "Tell me where Cap'n Bill is."

"I can't," said Tiggle. "The Boolooroo has hidden him until tomorrow
morning, when he's to be patched to me. Ghip-Ghisizzle was to have
been my mate, but Ghip escaped, being carried away by the Six
Snubnosed Princesses."

"Why?" she asked.

"One of them means to marry him," explained Tiggle.

"Oh, that's worse than being patched!" cried Trot.

"Much worse," said Tiggle with a groan.

But now an idea occurred to the girl. "Would you like to escape?"
she asked the captive. "If I get you out of the palace, can you hide
yourself so that you won't be found?"

"Certainly!" he declared. "I know a house where I can hide so snugly
that all the Boolooroo's soldiers cannot find me."

"All right," said Trot. "I'll do it, for when you're gone, the
Boolooroo will have no one to patch Cap'n Bill to."

"He may find someone else," suggested the prisoner.

"But it will take him time to do that, and time is all I want,"
answered the child. Even while she spoke, Trot was busy with the
knots in the cords, and presently she had unbound Tiggle, who soon
got upon his feet. "Now I'll go to one end of the passage and make a
noise," said she, "and when the guard runs to see what it is, you
must run the other way. Outside the palace, Jimfred and Fredjim are
on guard, but if you tip over the bench they are seated on, you can
easily escape them."

"I'll do that, all right," promised the delighted Tiggle. "You've
made a friend of me, little girl, and if ever I can help you, I'll
do it with pleasure."

Then Trot started for the door, and Tiggle could no longer see her
because she was not now touching him. The man was much surprised at
her disappearance, but listened carefully, and when he heard the
girl make a noise at one end of the corridor, he opened the door and
ran in the opposite direction as he had been told to do.

Of course, the guard could not discover what made the noise, and
Trot ran little risk, as she was careful not to let him touch her.
When Tiggle had escaped, the little girl wandered through the palace
in search of Cap'n Bill, but soon decided such a quest in the dark
was likely to fail and she must wait until morning. She was tired,
too, and thought she would find a vacant room--of which there were
many in the big palace--and go to sleep until daylight. She
remembered there was a comfortable vacant room just opposite the
suite of the Six Snubnosed Princesses, so she stole softly up to it
and tried the door. It was locked, but the key was outside, as the
Blueskins seldom took a door key from its place. So she turned the
key, opened the door, and walked in.

Now this was the chamber in which Ghip-Ghisizzle had been confined
by the Princesses, his arms being bound tight to his body, but his
legs left free. The Boolooroo in his search had failed to discover
what had become of Ghip Ghisizzle, but the poor man had been worried
every minute for fear his retreat would be discovered or that the
terrible Princesses would come for him and nag him until he went
crazy. There was one window in his room, and the prisoner had
managed to push open the sash with his knees. Looking out, he found
that a few feet below the window was the broad wall that ran all
around the palace gardens. A little way to the right the wall joined
the wall of the City, being on the same level with it.

Ghip-Ghisizzle had been thinking deeply upon this discovery, and he
decided that if anyone entered his room, he would get through the
window, leap down upon the wall, and try in this way to escape. It
would be a dangerous leap, for as his arms were bound, he might
topple off the wall into the garden; but he resolved to take this
chance. Therefore, when Trot rattled at the door of his room,
Ghip-Ghisizzle ran and seated himself upon the window sill, dangling
his long legs over the edge. When she finally opened the door, he
slipped off and let himself fall to the wall, where he doubled up in
a heap. The next minute, however, he had scrambled to his knees and
was running swiftly along the garden wall.

Trot, finding the window open, came and looked out, and she saw the
Majordomo's tall form hastening along the top of the wall. The
guards saw him, too, outlined against the sky in the moonlight, and
they began yelling at him to stop, but Ghip-Ghisizzle kept right on
until he reached the city Wall, when he began to follow that. More
guards were yelling now, running along the foot of the wall to keep
the fugitive in sight, and people began to pour out of the houses
and join in the chase.

Poor Ghip realized that if he kept on the wall, he would merely
circle the city and finally be caught. If he leaped down into the
City, he would be seized at once. Just then he came opposite the
camp of the Pinkies and decided to trust himself to the mercies of
his Earth friends rather than be made a prisoner by his own people,
who would obey the commands of their detested but greatly feared
Boolooroo. So suddenly he gave a mighty leap and came down into the
field outside the city. Again he fell in a heap and rolled over and
over, for it was a high wall and the jump a dangerous one; but
finally he recovered and got upon his feet, delighted to find he had
broken none of his bones.

Some of the Blueskins had by now opened a gate, and out rushed a
crowd to capture the fugitive; but Ghip-Ghisizzle made straight for
the camp of the Pinkies, and his pursuers did not dare follow him
far in that direction. They soon gave up the chase and returned to
the City, while the runaway Majordomo was captured by Captain
Coralie and marched away to the tent of Rosalie the Witch, a
prisoner of the Pinkies.






THE GIRL AND THE BOOLOOROO

CHAPTER 23





Trot watched from the window the escape of Ghip-Ghisizzle but did
not know, of course, who it was. Then, after the City had quieted
down again, she lay upon the bed without undressing and was sound
asleep in a minute.

The blue dawn was just breaking when she opened her eyes with a
start of fear that she might have overslept, but soon she found that
no one else in the palace was yet astir. Even the guards had gone to
sleep by this time and were adding their snores to the snores of the
other inhabitants of the Royal Palace. So the little girl got up
and, finding a ewer of water and a basin upon the dresser, washed
herself carefully and then looked in a big mirror to see how her
hair was. To her astonishment, there was no reflection at all; the
mirror was blank so far as Trot was concerned. She laughed a little
at that, remembering she wore the ring of Rosalie the Witch, which
rendered her invisible. Then she slipped quietly out of the room and
found it was already light enough in the corridors for her to see
all objects distinctly.

After hesitating a moment which way to turn, she decided to visit
the Snubnosed Princesses and passed through the big reception room
to the sleeping room of Indigo. There this Princess, the crossest
and most disagreeable of all the disagreeable six, was curled up in
bed and slumbering cozily. The little blue dog came trotting out of
Indigo's boudoir and crowed like a rooster, for although he could
not see Trot, his keen little nose scented her presence. Thinking it
time the Princess awoke, Trot leaned over and gave her snub nose a
good tweak, and at once Indigo sprang out of her bed and rushed into
the chamber of Cobalt, which adjoined her own. Thinking it was this
sister who had slyly attacked her, Indigo rushed at the sleeping
Cobalt and slapped her face.

At once there was war. The other four Princesses, hearing the
screams and cries of rage, came running into Cobalt's room, and as
fast as they appeared, Trot threw pillows at them, so that presently
all six were indulging in a free-for-all battle and snarling like
tigers. The blue lamb came trotting into the room, and Trot leaned
over and patted the pretty little animal, but as she did so, she
became visible for an instant, each pat destroying the charm of the
ring while the girl was in contact with a living creature. These
flashes permitted some of the Princesses to see her, and at once
they rushed toward her with furious cries. But the girl realized
what had happened, and leaving the lamb, she stepped back into a
corner and her frenzied enemies failed to find her. It was a little
dangerous, though, remaining in a room where six girls were feeling
all around for her, so she went away and left them to their vain
search while she renewed her hunt for Cap'n Bill.

The sailorman did not seem to be in any of the rooms she entered, so
she decided to visit the Boolooroo's own apartments. In the room
where Rosalie's vision had shown them the Magic Umbrella lying under
a cabinet, Trot attempted to find it, for she considered that next
to rescuing Cap'n Bill this was the most important task to
accomplish; but the umbrella had been taken away and was no longer
beneath the cabinet. This was a severe disappointment to the child,
but she reflected that the umbrella was surely someplace in the Blue
city, so there was no need to despair.

Finally, she entered the King's own sleeping chamber and found the
Boolooroo in bed and asleep, with a funny nightcap tied over his
egg-shaped head. As Trot looked at him, she was surprised to see
that he had one foot out of bed and that to his big toe was tied a
cord that led out of the bedchamber into a small dressing room
beyond. Trot slowly followed this cord and in the dressing room came
upon Cap'n Bill, who was lying asleep upon a lounge and snoring with
great vigor. His arms were tied to his body, and his body was tied
fast to the lounge. The wooden leg stuck out into the room at an
angle, and the shoe on his one foot had been removed so that the end
of the cord could be fastened to the sailor's big toe.

This arrangement had been a clever thought of the Boolooroo. Fearing
his important prisoner might escape before he was patched as
Ghip-Ghisizzle had done, the cruel King of the Blues had kept Cap'n
Bill in his private apartments and had tied his own big toe to the
prisoner's big toe, so that if the sailor made any attempt to get
away, he would pull on the cord, and that would arouse the
Boolooroo.

Trot saw through this cunning scheme at once, so the first thing she
did was to untie the cord from Cap'n Bill's big toe and retie it to
the leg of the lounge. Then she unfastened her friend's hands and
leaned over to give his leathery face a smacking kiss. Cap'n Bill
sat up and rubbed his eyes. He looked around the room and rubbed his
eyes again, seeing no one who could have kissed him. Then he
discovered that his bonds had been removed, and he rubbed his eyes
once more to make sure he was not dreaming. The little girl laughed
softly.

"Trot!" exclaimed the sailor, recognizing her voice.

Then Trot came up and took his hand, the touch at once rendering her
visible to him. "Dear me!" said the bewildered sailor. "However did
you get here, mate, in the Boolooroo's own den? Is the Blue City
captured?"

"Not yet," she replied, "but YOU are, Cap'n, and I've come to save
you."

"All alone, Trot?"

"All alone, Cap'n Bill. But it's got to be done, jus' the same." And
then she explained about the magic ring Rosalie had lent her, which
rendered her invisible while she wore it--unless she touched some
living creature. Cap'n Bill was much interested.

"I'm willing to be saved, mate," he said, "for the Boolooroo is set
on patchin' me right after breakfas', which I hope the cook'll be
late with."

"Who are you to be patched to?" she asked.

"A feller named Tiggle, who's in disgrace 'cause he mixed the royal
necktie for me."

"That was nectar, not necktie," corrected Trot. "But you needn't be
'fraid of bein' patched with Tiggle, 'cause I've set him loose. By
this time he's in hiding, where he can't be found."

"That's good," said Cap'n Bill, nodding approval, "but the blamed
ol' Boolooroo's sure to find someone else. What's to be done, mate?"

Trot thought about it for a moment. Then she remembered how some
unknown man had escaped from the palace the night before by means of
the wall, which he had reached from the window of the very chamber
in which she had slept. Cap'n Bill might easily do the same. And the
rope ladder she had used would help the sailor down from the top of
the wall. "Could you climb down a rope ladder, Cap'n?" she asked.

"Like enough," said he. "I've done it many a time on shipboard."

"But you hadn't a wooden leg then," she reminded him.

"The wooden leg won't bother much," he assured her.

So Trot tied a small sofa cushion around the end of his wooden leg
so it wouldn't make any noise pounding upon the floor, and then she
quietly led the sailor through the room of the sleeping Boolooroo
and through several other rooms until they came to the passage. Here
a soldier was on guard, but he had fallen asleep for a moment in
order to rest himself. They passed the Blueskin without disturbing
him and soon reached the chamber opposite the suite of the Six
Snubnosed Princesses, whom they could hear still quarreling loudly
among themselves.

Trot locked the door from the inside so no one could disturb them,
and then led the sailor to the window. The garden was just below.

"But good gracious me! It's a drop o' ten feet, Trot," he exclaimed.

"And you've only one foot to drop, Cap'n," she said, laughing.
"Couldn't you let yourself down with one of the sheets from the
bed?"

"I'll try," he rejoined. "But can YOU do that circus act, Trot?"

"Oh, I'm goin' to stay here an' find the Magic Umbrella," she
replied. "Bein' invis'ble, Cap'n, I'm safe enough. What I want to do
is to see you safe back with the Pinkies, an' then I'll manage to
hold my own all right, never fear."

So they brought a blue sheet and tied one end to a post of the blue
bed and let the other end dangle out the blue window. "Goodbye,
mate," said Cap'n Bill, preparing to descend. "Don't get reckless."

"I won't, Cap'n. Don't worry."

Then he grasped the sheet with both hands and easily let himself
down to the wall. Trot had told him where to find the rope ladder
she had left and how to fasten it to the broken flagstaff so he
could climb down into the field outside the City. As soon as he was
safe on the wall, Cap'n Bill began to hobble along the broad top
toward the connecting wall that surrounded the entire City--just as
Ghip-Ghisizzle had done--and Trot anxiously watched him from the
window.

But the Blue City was now beginning to waken to life. One of the
soldiers came from a house, sleepily yawning and stretching himself,
and presently his eyes lit upon the huge form of Cap'n Bill
hastening along the top of the wall. The soldier gave a yell that
aroused a score of his comrades and brought them tumbling into the
street. When they saw how the Boolooroo's precious prisoner was
escaping, they instantly became alert and wide-awake, and every one
started in pursuit along the foot of the wall.

Of course, the long-legged Blueskins could run faster than poor
Cap'n Bill. Some of them soon got ahead of the old sailorman and
came to the rope ladder which Trot had left dangling from the stone
bench, where it hung down inside the City. The Blue soldiers
promptly mounted this ladder and so gained the wall, heading off the
fugitive. When Cap'n Bill came up, panting and all out of breath,
the Blueskins seized him and held him fast.

Cap'n Bill was terribly disappointed at being recaptured, and so was
Trot, who had eagerly followed his every movement from her window in
the palace. The little girl would have cried with vexation, and I
think she did weep a few tears before she recovered her courage; but
Cap'n Bill was a philosopher, in his way, and had learned to accept
ill fortune cheerfully. Knowing he was helpless, he made no protest
when they again bound him and carried him down the ladder like a
bale of goods.

Others were also disappointed by his capture. Button-Bright had
heard the parrot squawking, "Oh, there's Cap'n Bill! There's Cap'n
Bill! I see him still, up on that hill! It's Cap'n Bill!" So the boy
ran out of his tent to find the sailor scurrying along the top of
the wall as fast as he could go. At once Button-Bright aroused
Coralie, who got her Pinkies together and quickly marched them
toward the wall to assist in the escape of her Commander in Chief.
But they were too late. Before they could reach the wall, the
Blueskins had captured Trot's old friend and lugged him down in to
the City, so Coralie and Button-Bright were forced to return to
their camp discomfited. There Ghip-Ghisizzle and Rosalie were
awaiting them, and they all went into the Witch's tent and held a
council of war.

"Tell me," said Ghip-Ghisizzle, "did you not take the Royal Record
Book from the Treasure Chamber of the Boolooroo?"

"I did," replied the boy. "I remember that you wanted it, and so I
have kept it with me ever since that night. Here it is." And he
presented the little blue book to the Majordomo, the only friend the
adventurers had found among all the Blueskins.

Ghip-Ghisizzle took the book eagerly and at once began turning over
its leaves. "Ah!" he exclaimed presently. "It is just as I
suspected. The wicked Boolooroo had already reigned over the Blue
Country three hundred years last Thursday, so that now he has no
right to rule at all. I myself have been the rightful Ruler of the
Blues since Thursday, and yet this cruel and deceitful man has not
only deprived me of my right to succeed him, but he has tried to
have me patched so that I could never become the Boolooroo."

"Does the book tell how old he is?" asked Button-Bright.

"Yes. He is not five hundred years old, and has yet another hundred
years to live. He planned to rule the Blue Country until the last,
but I now know the deception he has practiced and have the Royal
Record Book to prove it. With this I shall be able to force him to
resign that I may take his place, for all the people will support me
and abide by the Law. The tyrant will perhaps fight me and my cause
desperately, but I am sure to win in the end."

"If we can help you," said Button-Bright, "the whole Pink Army will
fight for you. Only, if you win, you must promise to give me back my
Magic Umbrella and let us fly away to our own homes again."

"I will do that most willingly," agreed Ghip-Ghisizzle. "And now let
us consult together how best to take the Blue City and capture the
Boolooroo. As I know my own country much better than you or the
Pinkies do, I think I can find a way to accomplish our purpose."






THE AMAZING CONQUEST OF THE BLUES

CHAPTER 24





The shouting and excitement in the City following upon the recapture
of Cap'n Bill aroused the sleeping Boolooroo. He found the cord
still tied to his big toe and at first imagined his prisoner safe in
the dressing room. While he put on his clothes, the king
occasionally gave the cord a sudden pull, hoping to hurt Cap'n
Bill's big toe and make him yell; but as no response came to this
mean action, the Boolooroo finally looked into the room only to find
he had been pulling on a leg of the couch and that his prisoner had
escaped.

Then he flew into a mighty rage, and running out into the hall he
aimed a blow at the unfaithful guard, knocking the fellow off his
feet. Then he rushed downstairs into the courtyard, shouting loudly
for his soldiers and threatening to patch everybody in his dominions
if the sailorman was not recaptured.

While the Boolooroo stormed and raged, a band of soldiers and
citizens came marching in, surrounding Cap'n Bill, who was again
firmly bound.

"So-ho!" roared the monarch. "You thought you could defy me, Earth
Clod, did you? But you were mistaken. No one can resist the Mighty
Boolooroo of the Blues, so it is folly for you to rebel against my
commands. Hold him fast, my men, and as soon as I've had my coffee
and oatmeal I'll take him to the Room of the Great Knife and patch
him."

"I wouldn't mind a cup o' coffee myself," said Cap'n Bill. "I've had
consid'ble exercise this mornin', and I'm all ready for breakfas'."

"Very well," replied the Boolooroo, "you shall eat with me, for then
I can keep an eye on you. My guards are not to be trusted, and I
don't mean to let you out of my sight again until you are patched."

So Cap'n Bill and the Boolooroo had breakfast together, six
Blueskins standing in a row back of the sailorman to grab him if he
attempted to escape. But Cap'n Bill made no such attempt, knowing it
would be useless.

Trot was in the room, too, standing in a corner and listening to all
that was said while she racked her little brain for an idea that
would enable her to save Cap'n Bill from being patched. No one could
see her, so no one--not even Cap'n Bill--knew she was there.

After breakfast was over, a procession was formed, headed by the
Boolooroo, and they marched the prisoner through the palace until
they came to the Room of the Great Knife. Invisible Trot followed
soberly after them, still wondering what she could do to save her
friend.

As soon as they entered the Room of the great Knife, the Boolooroo
gave a yell of disappointment.

"What's become of Tiggle?" he shouted. "Where's Tiggle? Who has
released Tiggle? Go at once, you dummies, and find him, or it will
go hard with you!"

The frightened soldiers hurried away to find Tiggle, and Trot was
well pleased because she knew Tiggle was by this time safely hidden.

The Boolooroo stamped up and down the room, muttering threats and
declaring Cap'n Bill should be punished whether Tiggle was found or
not, and while they waited, Trot took time to make an inspection of
the place, which she now saw for the first time in broad daylight.

The Room of the Great Knife was high and big, and around it ran rows
of benches for the spectators to sit upon. In one place at the head
of the room was a raised platform for the royal family, with elegant
throne-chairs for the King and Queen and six smaller but richly
upholstered chairs for the Snubnosed Princesses. The poor Queen, by
the way, was seldom seen, as she passed all her time playing
solitaire with a deck that was one card short, hoping that before
she had lived her entire six hundred years she would win the game.
Therefore, her Majesty paid no attention to anyone and no one paid
any attention to her.

In the center of the room stood the terrible knife that gave the
place its name, a name dreaded by every inhabitant of the Blue City.
The knife was built into a huge framework like a derrick, that
reached to the ceiling, and it was so arranged that when the
Boolooroo pulled a cord the great blade would drop down in its frame
and neatly cut in two the person who stood under it. And in order
that the slicing would be accurate, there was another frame to which
the prisoner was tied so that he couldn't wiggle either way. This
frame was on rollers so that it could be placed directly underneath
the knife.

While Trot was observing this dreadful machine, the door opened and
in walked the Six Snubnosed Princesses, all in a row and with their
chins up as if they disdained everyone but themselves. They were
magnificently dressed, and their blue hair was carefully arranged in
huge towers upon their heads, with blue plumes stuck into the tops.
These plumes waved gracefully in the air with every mincing step the
Princesses took. Rich jewels of blue stones glittered upon their
persons, and the royal ladies were fully as gorgeous as they were
haughty and overbearing. They marched to their chairs and seated
themselves to enjoy the cruel scene their father was about to enact,
and Cap'n Bill bowed to them politely and said:

"Mornin', girls. Hope ye feel as well as ye look."

"Papa," exclaimed Turquoise angrily, "can you not prevent this vile
Earth Being from addressing us? It is an insult to be spoken to by
one about to be patched."

"Control yourselves, my dears," replied the Boolooroo. "The worst
punishment I know how to inflict on anyone this prisoner is about to
suffer. You'll see a very pretty patching, my royal daughters."

"When?" inquired Cobalt.

"When? As soon as the soldiers return with Tiggle," said he.

But just then in came the soldiers to say that Tiggle could not be
found anywhere in the City; he had disappeared as mysteriously as
had Ghip-Ghisizzle. Immediately, the Boolooroo flew into another
towering rage.

"Villains!" he shouted. "Go out and arrest the first living thing
you meet, and whoever it proves to be will be instantly patched to
Cap'n Bill."

The Captain of the Guards hesitated to obey this order. "Suppose
it's a friend?" he suggested.

"Friend!" roared the Boolooroo. "I haven't a friend in the country.
Tell me, sir, do you know of anyone who is my friend?"

The Captain shook his head. "I can't think of anyone just now, your
Spry and Flighty High and Mighty Majesty," he answered.

"Of course not," said the Boolooroo. "Everyone hates me, and I don't
object to that because I hate everybody. But I'm the Ruler here, and
I'll do as I please. Go and capture the first living creature you
see and bring him here to be patched to Cap'n Bill."

So the Captain took a file of soldiers and went away very sorrowful,
for he did not know who would be the victim, and if the Boolooroo
had no friends, the Captain had plenty and did not wish to see them
patched.

Meanwhile, Trot, being invisible to all, was roaming around the
room, and behind a bench she found a small end of rope, which she
picked up. Then she seated herself in an out-of-the-way place and
quietly waited.

Suddenly there was a noise in the corridor and evidence of scuffling
and struggling. Then the door flew open and in came the soldiers
dragging a great blue billygoat, which was desperately striving to
get free.

"Villains!" howled the Boolooroo. "What does this mean?"

"Why, you said to fetch the first living creature we met, and that
was this billygoat," replied the Captain, panting hard as he held
fast to one of the goat's horns.

The Boolooroo stared a moment, and then he fell back to his throne,
laughing boisterously. The idea of patching Cap'n Bill to a goat was
vastly amusing to him, and the more he thought of it the more he
roared with laughter. Some of the soldiers laughed, too, being
tickled with the absurd notion, and the Six Snubnosed Princesses all
sat up straight and permitted themselves to smile contemptuously.
This would indeed be a severe punishment, therefore the Princesses
were pleased at the thought of Cap'n Bill's becoming half a
billygoat, and the billygoat's being half Cap'n Bill.

"They look something alike, you know," suggested the Captain of the
Guards, looking from one to the other doubtfully, "and they're
nearly the same size if you stand the goat on his hind legs. They've
both got the same style of whiskers, and they're both of 'em
obstinate and dangerous, so they ought to make a good patch."

"Splendid! Fine! Glorious!" cried the Boolooroo, wiping the tears of
merriment from his eyes. "We will proceed with the Ceremony of
Patching at once."

Cap'n Bill regarded the billygoat with distinct disfavor, and the
billygoat glared evilly upon Cap'n Bill. Trot was horrified, and
wrung her little hands in sore perplexity, for this was a most
horrible fate that awaited her dear friend.

"First, bind the Earth Man in the frame," commanded the Boolooroo.
"We'll slice him in two before we do the same to the billygoat."

So they seized Cap'n Bill and tied him into the frame so that he
couldn't move a jot in any direction. Then they rolled the frame
underneath the Great Knife and handed the Boolooroo the cord that
released the blade. But while this was going on, Trot had crept up
and fastened one end of her rope to the frame in which Cap'n Bill
was confined. Then she stood back and watched the Boolooroo, and
just as he pulled the cord, she pulled on her rope and dragged the
frame on its rollers away, so that the Great Knife fell with a crash
and sliced nothing but the air.

"Huh!" exclaimed the Boolooroo. "That's queer. Roll him up again,
soldiers."

The soldiers again rolled the frame in position, having first pulled
the Great Knife once more to the top of the derrick. The immense
blade was so heavy that it took the strength of seven Blueskins to
raise it. When all was in readiness, the King pulled the cord a
second time, and Trot at the same instant pulled upon her rope. The
same thing happened as before. Cap'n Bill rolled away in his frame,
and the knife fell harmlessly.

Now, indeed, the Boolooroo was as angry as he was amazed. He jumped
down from the platform and commanded the soldiers to raise the Great
Knife into position. When this was accomplished, the Boolooroo
leaned over to try to discover why the frame rolled away--seemingly
of its own accord--and he was the more puzzled because it had never
done such a thing before.

As he stood, bent nearly double, his back was toward the billygoat,
which in their interest and excitement the soldiers were holding in
a careless manner. Before any could stop him, he butted his Majesty
so furiously that the King soared far into the air and tumbled in a
heap among the benches, where he lay moaning and groaning.

The goat's warlike spirit was roused by this successful attack.
Finding himself free, he turned and assaulted the soldiers, butting
them so fiercely that they tumbled down in bunches, and as soon as
they could rise again ran frantically from the room and along the
corridors as if a fiend was after them. By this time the goat was so
animated by the spirit of conquest that he rushed at the Six
Snubnosed Princesses, who had all climbed upon their chairs and were
screaming in a panic of fear. Six times the goat butted, and each
time he tipped over a chair and sent a haughty Princess groveling
upon the floor, where the ladies got mixed up in their long, blue
trains and flounces and laces and struggled wildly until they
recovered their footing. Then they sped in great haste for the door,
and the goat gave a final butt that sent the row of royal ladies all
diving into the corridor in another tangle, whereupon they shrieked
in a manner that terrified everyone within sound of their voices.

As the Room of the Great Knife was now cleared of all but Cap'n
Bill, who was tied in his frame, and of Trot and the moaning
Boolooroo, who lay hidden behind the benches, the goat gave a
victorious bleat and stood in the doorway to face any enemy that
might appear. Trot had been as surprised as anyone at this sudden
change of conditions, but she was quick to take advantage of the
opportunities it afforded. First she ran with her rope to the goat,
and as the animal could not see her, she easily succeeded in tying
the rope around its horns and fastening the loose end to a pillar of
the doorway. Next she hurried to Cap'n Bill and began to unbind him,
and as she touched the sailor she became visible. He nodded
cheerfully, then, and said, "I had a notion it was you, mate, as
saved me from the knife. But it were a pretty close call, an' I hope
it won't happen again. I couldn't shiver much, bein' bound so tight,
but when I'm loose I mean to have jus' one good shiver to relieve my
feelin's."

"Shiver all you want to, Cap'n," she said as she removed the last
bonds. "But first you've got to help me save us both."

"As how?" he asked, stepping from the frame.

"Come and get the Boolooroo," she said, going toward the benches.
The sailor followed and pulled out the Boolooroo, who, when he saw
the terrible goat was captured and tied fast, quickly recovered his
courage. "Hi, there!" he cried. "Where are my soldiers? What do you
mean, prisoner, by daring to lay hands upon me? Let me go this
minute or I'll--I'll have you patched TWICE!"

"Don't mind him, Cap'n," said Trot, "but fetch him along to the
frame." The Boolooroo looked around to see where the voice came
from, and Cap'n Bill grinned joyfully and caught up the king in both
his strong arms, dragging the struggling Monarch of the Blues to the
frame.

"Stop it! How dare you?" roared the frightened Boolooroo. "I'll have
revenge! I'll--I'll--"

"You'll take it easy, 'cause you can't help yourself," said Cap'n
Bill. "What next, Queen Trot?"

"Hold him steady in the frame, and I'll tie him up," she replied. So
Cap'n Bill held the Boolooroo, and the girl tied him fast in
position as Cap'n Bill had been tied, so that his Majesty couldn't
wiggle at all. Then they rolled the frame in position underneath the
Great Knife and Trot held in her hand the cord which would release
it.

"All right, Cap'n," she said in a satisfied tone. "I guess we can
run this Blue Country ourselves after this." The Boolooroo was
terrified to find himself in danger of being sliced by the same
knife he had so often wickedly employed to slice others. Like Cap'n
Bill, he had no room to shiver, but he groaned very dismally and was
so full of fear that his blue hair nearly stood on end.






THE RULER OF SKY ISLAND

CHAPTER 25





The girl now took off Rosalie's ring and put it carefully away in
her pocket. "It won't matter who sees me now," she remarked, "an' I
want 'em to know that you an' me, Cap'n, are running this kingdom.
I'm Queen o' the Pinkies an' Booloorooess o' the Blues, an'--"

"What's that?" asked the sailor. "You're--you're WHAT, Trot?"

"Booloorooess. Isn't that right, Cap'n?"

"I dunno, mate. It sounds bigger ner you are, an' I don't like the
word, anyhow. S'pose you jus' call yourself the Boss? That fills the
bill an' don't need pernouncin'."

"All right," she said. "Queen o' the Pinkies an' Boss o' the Blues.
Seems funny, don't it, Cap'n Bill?"

Just then they heard a sound of footsteps in the corridor. The
soldiers had recovered their courage, and fearful of the anger of
their dreaded Boolooroo, whom the Princesses declared would punish
them severely, had ventured to return to the room. They came rather
haltingly, though, and the Captain of the Guards first put his head
cautiously through the doorway to see if the coast was clear. The
goat discovered him and tried to make a rush, but the rope held the
animal back, and when the Captain saw this, he came forward more
boldly.

"Halt!" cried Trot. The Captain halted, his soldiers peering
curiously over his shoulders and the Six Snubnosed Princesses
looking on from behind, where they considered themselves safe. "If
anyone dares enter this room without my permission," said Trot,
"I'll pull this cord and slice your master that once was the
Boolooroo."

"Don't come in! Don't come in!" yelled the Boolooroo in a terrified
voice.

Then they saw that the sailor was free and the Boolooroo bound in
his place. The soldiers were secretly glad to observe this, but the
Princesses were highly indignant. "Release his Majesty at once!"
cried Indigo from the corridor. "You shall be severely punished for
this rebellion."

"Don't worry," replied Trot. "His Majesty isn't his Majesty any
longer. He's jus' a common Blueskin. Cap'n Bill and I perpose
runnin' this Island ourselves, after this. You've all got to obey
ME, for I'm the Booloorooess--no, I mean the Boss--o' the Blues, and
I've a notion to run things my own way."

"You can't," said Turquoise scornfully. "The Law says--"

"Bother the Law!" exclaimed Trot. "I'll make the Laws myself from
now on, and I'll unmake every Law you ever had before I conquered
you."

"Oh, have you conquered us, then?" asked the Captain of the Guards
in a surprised tone.

"Of course," said Trot. "Can't you see?"

"It looks like it," admitted the Captain.

"Cap'n Bill is goin' to be my General o' the Army an' the Royal
Manager o' the Blue Country," continued Trot, "so you'll mind what
he says."

"Nonsense!" shouted Indigo. "March in and capture them, Captain!
Never mind if they do slice the Boolooroo. I'm his daughter, and
I'LL rule the kingdom."

"You won't!" screamed Cobalt. "I'll rule it!"

"I'll rule it myself!" cried Cerulia.

"No, no!" yelled Turquoise. "I'll be the Ruler."

"That shall be MY privilege!" shouted Sapphire. Cobalt began to say,
"I'm the--"

"Be quiet!" said Trot sternly. "Would you have your own father
sliced so that you could rule in his place?"

"Yes, yes, of course!" rejoined the six Princesses without a
second's hesitation.

"Well, well! What d' ye think o' that, Mr. Boolooroo?" asked Cap'n
Bill.

"They're undutiful daughters. Don't pay any attention to them,"
replied the frightened Boolooroo.

"We're not goin' to," said Trot. "Now, you Blue Cap'n, who are you
and your soldiers going to obey, me or the snubnosed ones?"

"You!" declared the Captain of the Guards positively, for he hated
the Princesses, as did all the Blueskins.

"Then escort those girls to their rooms, lock 'em in, an' put a
guard before the door."

At once the soldiers seized the Princesses and notwithstanding their
snarls and struggles marched them to their rooms and locked them in.
While they were gone on this errand, the Boolooroo begged to be
released, whining and wailing for fear the knife would fall upon
him. But Trot did not think it safe to unbind him just then. When
the soldiers returned, she told their leader to put a strong guard
before the palace and to admit no one unless either she or Cap'n
Bill gave the order to do so. The soldiers obeyed readily, and when
Trot and Cap'n Bill were left alone, they turned the goat loose in
the Room of the Great Knife and then locked the animal in with the
Boolooroo.

"The billygoat is the very best guard we could have, for ever'body's
'fraid o' him," remarked Cap'n Bill as he put the key of the room in
his pocket. "So now, Queen Trot, what's next on the program?"

"Next," said Trot, "we're goin' to hunt for that umbrel, Cap'n. I
don't mean to stay in this dismal Blue Country long, even if I am
the Queen. Let's find the umbrel and go home as soon as we can."

"That suits me," the sailor joyfully exclaimed, and then the two
began a careful search through the palace. They went into every room
and looked behind the furniture and underneath the beds and in every
crack and corner, but no place could they spy the Magic Umbrella.
Cap'n Bill even ventured to enter the rooms of the Six Snubnosed
Princesses, who were by this time so thoroughly alarmed that they
had become meek and mild as could be. But the umbrella wasn't there,
either.

Finally, they returned to the great throne room of the palace, where
they seated themselves on the throne and tried to think what could
possibly have become of the precious umbrella. While they were
sitting and talking together, the Captain of the Guards entered and
bowed respectfully. "Beg pardon, your Small-Sized Majesty," said he
to Trot, "but it is my duty to report that the Pinkies are preparing
to attack the City."

"Oh! I'd forgotten the Pinkies!" exclaimed the girl. "Tell me,
Captain, have you such a thing as a Brass Band in this City?"

"We have two fine bands, but they are not brass," replied the
Captain. "Their instruments are made of blue metal."

"Well, order 'em out," commanded Trot. "And say, get all the
soldiers together and tell all the people there's going to be a high
time in the Blue City tonight. We'll have music and dancing and
eating and--"

"An' neckties to drink, Trot. Don't forget the royal neckties,"
urged Cap'n Bill.

"We'll have all the fun there is going," continued the girl, "for we
are to entertain the Army of the Pinkies."

"The Pinkies!" exclaimed the Captain of the Guards. "Why, they're
our enemies, your Short Highness."

"Not any more," replied Trot. "I'm Queen of the Pinkies, an' I'm
also Queen of the Blues, so I won't have my people quarreling. Tell
the Blue people we are to throw open the gates and welcome the
Pinkies to the City, where everybody will join in a grand
celebration. And jus' as soon as you've spread the news an' got the
bands tuned up and the soldiers ready to march, you let us know, and
we'll head the procession."

"Your Microscopic Majesty shall be obeyed," said the Captain, and
went away to carry out these commands.






TROT CELEBRATES THE VICTORY

CHAPTER 26





The Blue people were by this time dazed with wonder at all the
events that had transpired that eventful day, but they still had wit
enough to be glad the war was over, for in war someone is likely to
get hurt, and it is foolish to take such chances when one can remain
quietly at home. The Blues did not especially admire the Pinkies,
but it was easier to entertain them than to fight them, and above
all, the Blueskins were greatly rejoiced that their wicked Boolooroo
had been conquered and could no longer abuse them. So they were
quite willing to obey the orders of their girl Queen and in a short
time the blasts of trumpets and roll of drums and clashing of
cymbals told Trot and Cap'n Bill that the Blue Bands had assembled
before the palace.

So they went down and found that a great crowd of people had
gathered, and these cheered Trot with much enthusiasm--which was
very different from the scowls and surly looks with which they had
formerly greeted their strange visitors from the Earth.

The soldiers wore their best blue uniforms and were formed before
the palace in marching order, so Trot and Cap'n Bill headed the
procession, and then came the soldiers--all keeping step--and then
the bands, playing very loud noises on their instruments, and
finally the crowd of Blue citizens waving flags and banners and
shouting joyfully. In this order they proceeded to the main gate,
which Trot ordered the guards to throw wide open. Then they all
marched out a little way into the fields and found that the Army of
Pinkies had already formed and was advancing steadily toward them.

At the head of the Pinkies were Ghip-Ghisizzle and Button-Bright,
who had the parrot on his shoulder, and they were supported by
Captain Coralie and Captain Tintint and Rosalie the Witch. They had
decided to capture the Blue City at all hazards, that they might
rescue Trot and Cap'n Bill and conquer the Boolooroo, so when from a
distance they saw the Blueskins march from the gate with banners
flying and bands playing, they supposed a most terrible fight was
about to take place.

However, as the two forces came nearer together, Button-Bright spied
Trot and Cap'n Bill standing before the enemy, and the sight
astonished him considerably.

"Welcome, friends!" shouted Cap'n Bill in a loud voice; and
"Welcome!" cried Trot; and "Welcome!" roared the Blue soldiers and
the people of the Blue City.

"Hooray!" yelled the parrot,

"Welcome to our happy home
From which no longer will we roam!"

And then he flapped his wings and barked like a dog with pure
delight, and added as fast as his bird's tongue could speak,

"One army's pink and one is blue,
But neither one is in a stew
Because the naughty Boolooroo
Is out of sight, so what we'll do
Is try to be a jolly crew
And dance and sing our too-ral-loo
And to our friends be ever true
And to our foes--"

"Stop it!" said Button-Bright, "I can't hear myself think."

The Pinkies were amazed at the strange reception of the Blues and
hesitated to advance, but Trot now ran up in front of them and made
a little speech. "Pinkies," said she, "your Queen has conquered the
Boolooroo and is now the Queen of the Blues. All of Sky Island
except the Fog Bank is now my kingdom, so I welcome my faithful
Pinkies to my Blue City, where you are to be royally entertained and
have a good time. The war is over an' ever'body must be sociable an'
happy or I'll know the reason why!"

Now, indeed, the Pinkies raised a great shout of joy, and the Blues
responded with another joyful shout, and Rosalie kissed the little
girl and said she had performed wonders, and everybody shook hands
with Cap'n Bill and congratulated him upon his escape, and the
parrot flew to Trot's shoulder and screeched,

"The Pinkies are pink, the Blues are blue,
But Trot's the Queen, so too-ral-loo!"

When the Blueskins saw Ghip-Ghisizzle, they raised another great
shout, for he was the favorite of the soldiers and very popular with
all the people. But Ghip-Ghisizzle did not heed the shouting. He was
looking downcast and sad, and it was easy to see he was disappointed
because he had not conquered the Boolooroo himself. But the people
called upon him for a speech, so he faced the Blueskins and said, "I
escaped from the City because the Boolooroo tried to patch me as you
all know, and the Six Snubnosed Princesses tried to marry me, which
would have been a far greater misfortune. But I have recovered the
Book of Royal Records, which has long been hidden in the Treasure
Chamber, and by reading it I find that the Boolooroo is not your
lawful Boolooroo at all, having reigned more than his three hundred
years. Since last Thursday, I, Ghip-Ghisizzle, have been the lawful
Boolooroo of the Blue Country, but now that you are conquered by
Queen Trot, I suppose I am conquered, too, and you have no Boolooroo
at all."

"Hooray!" cried the parrot.

"Here's a pretty howdy-do--
You haven't any Boolooroo!"

Trot had listened carefully to the Majordomo's speech. When he
finished, she said cheerfully, "Don't worry, Sizzle dear, it'll all
come right pretty soon. Now then, let's enter the City an' enjoy the
grand feast that's being cooked. I'm nearly starved, myself, for
this conquerin' kingdoms is hard work."

So the Pinkies and the Blues marched side by side into the City, and
there was great rejoicing and music and dancing and feasting and
games and merrymaking that lasted for three full days. Trot carried
Rosalie and Captain Coralie and Ghip-Ghisizzle to the palace, and of
course Button-Bright and Cap'n Bill were with her. They had the
Royal chef serve dinner at once, and they ate in great state, seated
in the Royal Banquet Hall, where they were waited on by a hundred
servants. The parrot perched upon the back of Queen Trot's chair,
and the girl fed it herself, being glad to have the jolly bird with
her again.

After they had eaten all they could and the servants had been sent
away, Trot related her adventures, telling how with the assistance
of the billygoat she had turned the tables on the wicked Boolooroo.
Then she gave Rosalie back her magic ring, thanking the kind Witch
for all she had done for them. "And now," said she, "I want to say
to Ghip-'Sizzle that jus' as soon as we can find Button-Bright's
umbrel we're going to fly home again. I'll always be Queen of Sky
Island, but the Pink and Blue Countries must each have a Ruler. I
think I'll make 'Sizzle the Boolooroo of the Blues, but I want you
to promise me, Ghip, that you'll destroy the Great Knife and its
frame and clean up the room and turn it into a skating rink an'
never patch anyone as long as you rule the Blueskins."

Ghip-Ghisizzle was overjoyed at the prospect of being Boolooroo of
the Blues, but he looked solemn at the promise Trot exacted. "I'm
not cruel," he said, "and I don't approve of patching in general, so
I'll willingly destroy the Great Knife. But before I do that, I want
the privilege of patching the Snubnosed Princesses to each
other--mixing the six as much as possible--and then I want to patch
the former Boolooroo to the billygoat, which is the same punishment
he was going to inflict upon Cap'n Bill."

"No," said Trot positively. "There's been enough patching in this
country, and I won't have any more of it. The old Boolooroo and the
six stuck-up Princesses will be punished enough by being put out of
the palace. The people don't like 'em a bit, so they'll be outcasts
and wanderers, and that will make 'em sorry they were so wicked an'
cruel when they were powerful. Am I right, Cap'n Bill?"

"You are, mate," replied the sailor.

"Please, Queen Trot," begged Ghip-Ghisizzle, "let me patch just the
Boolooroo. It will be such a satisfaction."

"I have said no, an' I mean it," answered the girl. "You let the
poor old Boolooroo alone. There's nothing that hurts so much as a
come-down in life, an' I 'spect the old rascal's goin' to be pretty
miser'ble by'm'by."

"What does he say to his reversal of fortune?" asked Rosalie.

"Why, I don't b'lieve he knows about it," said Trot. "Guess I'd
better send for him an' tell him what's happened."

So the Captain of the Guards was given the key and told to fetch the
Boolooroo from the Room of the Great Knife. The guards had a
terrible struggle with the goat, which was loose in the room and
still wanted to fight, but finally they subdued the animal, and then
they took the Boolooroo out of the frame he was tied in and brought
both him and the goat before Queen Trot, who awaited them in the
throne room of the palace. When the courtiers and the people
assembled saw the goat, they gave a great cheer, for the beast had
helped to dethrone their wicked Ruler.

"What's goin' to happen to this tough ol' warrior, Trot?" asked
Cap'n Bill. "It's my idee as he's braver than the whole Blue Army
put together."

"You're right, Cap'n," she returned. "I'll have 'Sizzle make a fine
yard for the goat, where he'll have plenty of blue grass to eat. An'
I'll have a pretty fence put around it an' make all the people honor
an' respec' him jus' as long as he lives."

"I'll gladly do that," promised the new Boolooroo, "and I'll feed
the honorable goat all the shavings and leather and tin cans he can
eat, besides the grass. He'll be the happiest goat in Sky Island, I
assure you."

As they led the now-famous animal from the room, the Boolooroo
shuddered and said, "How dare you people give orders in my palace?
I'm the Boolooroo!"

"'Scuse me," said Trot. "I neglected to tell you that you're not the
Boolooroo any more. We've got the Royal Record Book, an' it proves
you've already ruled this country longer than you had any right to.
'Sides all that, I'm the Queen o' Sky Island--which means Queen o'
the Pinkies an' Queen o' the Blues, both of 'em. So things are run
as I say, an' I've made Ghip-Ghisizzle Boolooroo in your place.
He'll look after this end of the Island hereafter, an' unless I'm
much mistaken, he'll do it a heap better than you did."

The former Boolooroo groaned. "What's going to become of me, then?"
he asked. "Am I to be patched, or what?"

"You won't be hurt," answered the girl, "but you'll have to find
some other place to stay besides this palace, an' perhaps you'll
enjoy workin' for a livin' by way of variety."

"Can't I take any of the treasure with me?" he pleaded.

"Not even a bird cage," said she. "Ever'thing in the palace now
belongs to Ghip-Ghisizzle."

"Except the Six Snubnosed Princesses," exclaimed the new Boolooroo
earnestly. "Won't you please get rid of them, too, your Majesty?
Can't they be discharged?"

"Of course," said Trot. "They must go with their dear father an'
mother. Isn't there some house in the City they can all live in,
Ghip?"

"Why, I own a little cabin at the end of the town," said
Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and I'll let them use that, as I won't need it any
longer. It isn't a very pretty cabin, and the furniture is cheap and
common, but I'm sure it is good enough for this wicked man and his
family."

"I'll not be wicked any more," sighed the old Boolooroo. "I'll
reform. It's always best to reform when it is no longer safe to
remain wicked. As a private citizen, I shall be a model of
deportment, because it would be dangerous to be otherwise."

Trot now sent for the Princesses, who had been weeping and wailing
and fighting among themselves ever since they learned that their
father had been conquered. When first they entered the throne room,
they tried to be as haughty and scornful as ever, but the Blues who
were assembled there all laughed at them and jeered them, for there
was not a single person in all the Blue Country who loved the
Princesses the least little bit.

Trot told the girls that they must go with their father to live in
Ghip-Ghisizzle's little old cabin, and when they heard this dreadful
decree, the six snubnosed ones began to scream and have hysterics,
and between them they managed to make so much noise that no one
could hear anything else. So Ghip-Ghisizzle ordered the Captain to
take a file of soldiers and escort the raving beauties to their new
home.

This was done, the once-royal family departing from the palace with
shamed and downcast looks. Then the Room of the Great Knife was
cleared of its awful furniture. The frames were split into small
pieces of bluewood and the benches chopped into kindling and the
immense sharp knife broken into bits. All the rubbish was piled into
the square before the palace and a bonfire made of it, while the
Blue people clustered around and danced and sang with joy as the
blue flames devoured the dreadful instrument that had once caused
them so much unhappiness.

That evening Trot gave a grand ball in her palace, to which the most
important of the Pinkies and the Blueskins were invited. The
combined bands of both the countries played the music, and a fine
supper was served. The Pinkies would not dance with the Blues,
however, nor would the Blues dance with the Pinkies. The two nations
were so different in all ways that they were unable to agree at all,
and several times during the evening quarrels arose and there was
fighting between them, which Trot promptly checked.

"I think it would be best for us to go back to our own country as
soon as possible," suggested Rosalie the Witch, "for if we stay here
very long, the Blueskins may rise against us and cause the Pinkies
much trouble."

"Jus' as soon as we find that umbrel," promised Trot, "we'll dive
into the Fog Bank an' make tracks for the Land of Sunrise an'
Sunset."






THE FATE OF THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

CHAPTER 27





Next morning the search for the Magic Umbrella began in earnest.
With many to hunt for it and the liberty of the whole palace to aid
them, every inch of the great building was carefully examined. But
no trace of the umbrella could be found. Cap'n Bill and
Button-Bright went down to the cabin of the former Boolooroo and
tried to find out what he had done with the umbrella, but the old
Boolooroo said,

"I had it brought from the Treasure Chamber and tried to make it
work, but there was no magic about the thing. So I threw it away. I
haven't any idea what became of it."

The six former Princesses were sitting upon a rude bench, looking
quite bedraggled and untidy. Said Indigo:

"If you will make Ghip-Ghisizzle marry me, I'll find your old
umbrella."

"Where is it?" asked Button-Bright eagerly.

"Make Ghip-Ghisizzle marry me, and I'll tell you," repeated Indigo.
"But I won't say another word about it until after I am married."

So they went back to the palace and proposed to the new Boolooroo to
marry Indigo so they could get their Magic Umbrella. But
Ghip-Ghisizzle positively refused.

"I'd like to help you," said he, "but nothing will ever induce me to
marry one of those snubnoses."

"They're very pretty--for Blueskins," said Trot.

"But when you marry a girl, you marry the inside as well as the
outside," declared Ghip-Ghisizzle, "and inside these Princesses
there are wicked hearts and evil thoughts. I'd rather be patched
than marry the best of them."

"Which IS the best?" asked Button-Bright.

"I don't know, I'm sure," was the reply. "Judging from their actions
in the past, there is no best."

Rosalie the Witch now went to the cabin and put Indigo into a deep
sleep by means of a powerful charm. Then, while the Princess slept,
the Witch made her tell all she knew, which wasn't a great deal, to
be sure; but it was soon discovered that Indigo had been deceiving
them and knew nothing at all about the umbrella. She had hoped to
marry Ghip-Ghisizzle and become Queen, after which she could afford
to laugh at their reproaches. So the Witch woke her up and went back
to the palace to tell Trot of her failure.

The girl and Button-bright and Cap'n Bill were all rather
discouraged by this time, for they had searched high and low and had
not found a trace of the all-important umbrella. That night none of
them slept much, for they all lay awake wondering how they could
ever return to the Earth and to their homes.

In the morning of the third day after Trot's conquest of the Blues,
the little girl conceived another idea. She called all the servants
of the palace to her and questioned them closely. But not one could
remember having seen anything that looked like an umbrella.

"Are all the servants of the old Boolooroo here?" inquired Cap'n
Bill, who was sorry to see Trot looking so sad and downcast.

"All but one," was the reply. "Tiggle used to be a servant, but he
escaped and ran away."

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed Trot. "Tiggle is in hiding somewhere. Perhaps
he doesn't know there's been a revolution and a new Boolooroo rules
the country. If he did, there's no need for him to hide any longer,
for he is now in no danger."

She now dispatched messengers all through the City and the
surrounding country, who cried aloud for Tiggle, saying that the new
Boolooroo wanted him. Tiggle, hiding in the cellar of a deserted
house in a back street, at last heard these cries and joyfully came
forth to confront the messengers. Having heard of the old
Boolooroo's downfall and disgrace, the old man consented to go to
the palace again, and as soon as Trot saw him she asked about the
umbrella.

Tiggle thought hard for a minute and then said he remembered
sweeping the King's rooms and finding a queer thing--that might have
been an umbrella--lying beneath a cabinet. It had ropes and two
wooden seats and a wicker basket all attached to the handle.

"That's it!" cried Button-Bright excitedly, and "That's it! That's
it!" cried both Trot and Cap'n Bill.

"But what did you do with it?" asked Ghip-Ghisizzle.

"I dragged it out and threw it on the rubbish heap in an alley back
of the palace," said Tiggle. At once they all rushed out to the
alley and began digging in the rubbish heap. By and by Cap'n Bill
uncovered the lunch basket, and pulling on this he soon drew up the
two seats, and finally the Magic Umbrella.

"Hurrah!" shouted Button-Bright, grabbing the umbrella and hugging
it tight in his arms.

"Hooray!" shrieked the parrot.

"Cap'n Bill's a lucky fellah,
'Cause he found the old umbrella!"

Trot's face was wreathed in smiles. "This is jus' the best luck that
could have happened to us," she exclaimed, "'cause now we can go
home whenever we please."

"Let's go now--this minute--before we lose the umbrella again," said
Button-Bright.

But Trot shook her head. "Not yet," she replied. "We've got to
straighten out things in Sky Island first of all. A Queen has some
duties, you know, and as long as I'm Queen here, I've got to live up
to the part."

"What has to be did, mate?" inquired Cap'n Bill.

"Well, we've fixed the Blue Country pretty well by makin' 'Sizzle
the Boolooroo of it; but the Pinkies mus' be looked after, too,
'cause they've stood by us an' helped us to win. We must take 'em
home again safe an' sound and get a new Queen to rule over 'em. When
that's done, we can go home any time we want to."

"Quite right, Trot," said the sailor approvingly. "When do we
march?"

"Right away," she replied. "I've had enough of the Blue Country,
haven't you?"

"We have, mate."

"We've had plenty of it," observed Button-Bright.

"And the Pinkies are anxious to get home," added Rosalie, who was
present.

So Cap'n Bill unhooked the seats from the handle of the umbrella and
wound the ropes around the two boards and made a package of them,
which he carried under his arm. Trot took the empty lunch basket,
and Button-Bright held fast to the precious umbrella. Then they
returned to the palace to bid goodbye to Ghip-Ghisizzle and the
Blues.

The new Boolooroo seemed rather sorry to lose his friends, but the
people were secretly glad to get rid of the strangers, especially of
the Pinkies. They maintained a sullen silence while Coralie and
Captain Tintint formed their ranks in marching order, and they did
not even cheer when Trot said to them in a final speech:

"I'm the Queen of Sky Island, you know, and the new Boolooroo has to
carry out my orders and treat you all nicely while I'm away. I don't
know when I'll come back, but you'd better watch out an' not make
any trouble, or I'll find a way to make you sorry for it. So now,
goodbye!"

"And good riddance!" screamed the Six Snubnosed Girls who had once
been Princesses and who were now in the crowd that watched the
departure.

But Trot paid no attention to them. She made a signal to the Pinkie
Band, which struck up a fine Pink March, and then the Army stepped
out with the left foot first, and away went the conquerors down the
streets of the Blue City, out of the blue-barred gateway and across
the country toward the Fog Bank.






THE ELEPHANT'S HEAD COMES TO LIFE

CHAPTER 28





When they reached the edge of the Fog Bank, the Pinkies all halted
to put on their raincoats, and Button-Bright put up his umbrella and
held it over himself and Trot. Then, when everybody was ready, they
entered the Fog and Rosalie the Witch made a signal to call the Frog
King and his subjects to aid them as they had done before.

Pretty soon the great frogs appeared, a long line of them facing
Trot and her Pink Army and sitting upon their haunches close
together.

"Turn around so we can get upon your backs," said Rosalie.

"Not yet," answered the Frog King in a gruff, deep voice. "You must
first take that insulting umbrella out of my dominions."

"Why, what is there about my umbrella that seems insulting?" asked
Button-Bright in surprise.

"It is an intimation that you don't like our glorious climate and
object to our delightful fog and are trying to ward off its soulful,
clinging kisses," replied the Frog King in an agitated voice. "There
has never been an umbrella in my kingdom before, and I'll not allow
one in it now. Take it away at once!"

"But we can't," explained Trot. "We've got to take the umbrella with
us to the Pink Country. We'll put it down if you like, an' cross the
bank in this drizzle--which may be clingin' an' soulful, but is too
wet to be comfort'ble. But the umbrella's got to go with us."

"It can't go another inch," cried the obstinate frog with an angry
croak, "nor shall any of your people advance another step while that
insulting umbrella is with you."

Trot turned to Rosalie. "What shall we do?" she asked.

"I really do not know," replied the Witch, greatly perplexed.

"Can't you MAKE the frogs let us through?" inquired the boy.

"No, I have no power over the frogs," Rosalie answered. "They
carried us before as a favor, but if the king now insists that we
cannot pass with the umbrella, we must go back to the Blue Country
or leave your umbrella behind us."

"We won't do that!" said Button-Bright indignantly. "Can't we fight
the frogs?"

"Fight!" cried Trot. "Why, see how big they are. They could eat up
our whole army if they wanted to."

But just then, while they stood dismayed at this unfortunate
position, a queer thing happened. The umbrella in Button-Bright's
hand began to tremble and shake. He looked down at the handle and
saw that the red eyes of the carved elephant's head were rolling
fiercely and sending out red sparks of anger in all directions. The
trunk swayed from side to side, and the entire head began to swell
and grow larger.

In his fright, the boy sprang backward a step and dropped the
umbrella to the ground, and as he did so, it took the form of a
complete elephant, growing rapidly to a monstrous size. Then,
flapping its ears and wagging its tail--which was merely the covered
frame of the umbrella--the huge elephant lifted its trunk and
charged the line of astonished frogs.

In a twinkling the frogs all turned and made the longest leaps their
powerful legs enabled them to. The King jumped first of all, and in
a panic of fear the others followed his example. They were out of
sight in an instant, and then the elephant turned its head and
looked at Button-Bright and at once trotted into the depths of the
fog.

"He wants us to follow," said the boy, gasping in amazement at this
wonderful transformation. So immediately they began marching through
the fog behind the elephant, and as the great beast advanced the
frogs scrambled out of his way and hid themselves in the moist banks
until he had passed them by.

Cap'n Bill had to mind his wooden leg carefully, and the old sailor
was so excited that he mumbled queer sentences about "Araby Ann
Knights" and "ding-donged magic" and the "fool foolishness of
fussin' with witches an' sich," until Trot wondered whether her old
friend had gone crazy or was only badly scared.

It was a long journey, and all the Pinkies were dripping water from
their raincoats, and their fat little legs were tired and aching
when the pink glow showing through the fog at last announced that
they were nearing the Pink Country.

At the very edge of the Fog Bank the elephant halted, winked at
Button-Bright, lowered its head and began to shrink in size and
dwindle away. By the time the boy came up to it, closely followed by
Trot and Cap'n Bill, the thing was only the well-known Magic
Umbrella, with the carved elephant's head for a handle, and it lay
motionless upon the ground. Button-Bright picked it up, and as he
examined it he thought the tiny eyes still twinkled a little, as if
with triumph and pride.

Trot drew a long breath.

"That was SOME magic, I guess!" she exclaimed. "Don't you think so,
Rosalie?"

"It was the most wonderful thing I ever saw," admitted the Witch.
"The fairies who control Button-Bright's umbrella must be very
powerful indeed!"






TROT REGULATES THE PINKIES

CHAPTER 29





The Pinkies were rejoiced to find themselves again in their beloved
land of sunrises and sunsets. They sang and shouted with glee, and
the Band uncovered its pink instruments and played the National Pink
Anthem, while the parrot flew from Trot's shoulder to Cap'n Bill's
shoulder and back again, screaming ecstatically,

"Hooray! We're through the wetful fogs
Where the elephant scared the fretful frogs!"

There was a magnificent sunset in the sky just then, and it cheered
the Pinkies and gave them renewed strength. Away they hastened
across the pink fields to the Pink City, where all the Pink people
who had been left behind ran out to welcome them home again.

Trot and Button-Bright, with Cap'n Bill and Rosalie the Witch, went
to the humble palace, where they had a simple supper of coarse food
and slept upon hard beds. In the houses of the City, however, there
was much feasting and merrymaking, and it seemed to Trot that the
laws of the country which forbade the Queen from enjoying all the
good things the people did were decidedly wrong and needed changing.

The next morning Rosalie said to the little girl, "Will you make
Tourmaline the Queen again when you go away?"

"I'll send for her and see about it," replied Trot.

But when Tourmaline arrived at the palace, dressed all in lovely,
fluffy robes and with a dainty pink plume in her pink hair, she
begged most earnestly not to be made the Queen again.

"I'm having a good time just now after years of worry and
uncomfortable living in this uncomfortable old hut of a palace,"
said the poor girl, "so it would be cruel for you to make me the
servant of the people again and condemn me to want and misery."

"That seems reason'ble," replied Trot thoughtfully.

"Rosalie's skin is just as light a pink as my own," continued
Tourmaline. "Why don't you make her the Queen?"

"I hadn't thought of that," said Trot. Then she turned to Rosalie
and asked, "How would you like to rule the Pinkies?"

"I wouldn't like it," replied the Witch with a smile. "The Queen is
the poorest and most miserable creature in all the kingdom, and I'm
sure I don't deserve such a fate. I've always tried to be a good
witch and to do my duty."

Trot thought this over quite seriously for a time. Then one of her
quaint ideas came to her--so quaint that it was entirely sensible.
"I'm the Queen of the Pinkies just now, am I not?" she asked.

"Of course," answered Rosalie. "None can dispute that."

"Then I've the right to make new laws, haven't I?"

"I believe so."

"In that case," said the girl, "I'm goin' to make a law that the
Queen shall have the same food an' the same dresses an' the same
good times that her people have; and she shall live in a house jus'
as good as the houses of any of her people, an' have as much money
to spend as anybody. But no more. The Queen can have her share of
ever'thing 'cordin' to the new law, but if she tries to get more
than her share, I'll have the law say she shall be taken to the edge
an' pushed off. What do you think of THAT law, Rosalie?"

"It's a good law and a just one," replied the Witch approvingly.

So Trot sent for the Royal Scribbler, who was a very fat Pinky with
large, pink eyes and curly pink hair, and had him carefully write
the new law into the Great Book of Laws. The Royal Scribbler wrote
it very nicely in pink ink, with a big capital letter at the
beginning and a fine flourish at the end. After Trot had signed her
name to it as Queen, she called all of the important people of the
land to assemble in the Court of the Statues and ordered the Royal
Declaimer to read to them the new law. The Pinkies seemed to think
it was a just law and much better than the old one, and Rosalie
said:

"Now no one can object to becoming Queen, since the Ruler of the
Pinkies will no longer be obliged to endure suffering and
hardships."

"All right," said Trot. "In that case, I'll make you the Queen,
Rosalie, for you've got more sense than Tourmaline has and your
powers as a witch will help you protect the people."

At once she made the announcement, telling the assembled Pinkies
that by virtue of her high office as Queen of Sky Island she would
leave Rosalie the Witch to rule over the Pink Country while she
returned to the Earth with her friends. As Rosalie was greatly loved
and respected, the people joyfully accepted her as their Queen, and
Trot ordered them to tear down the old hut and build a new palace
for Rosalie--one which would be just as good as any other house in
the City, but no better. She further ordered a pink statue of
Tourmaline to be set up in the Court, and also a pink statue of
herself, so that the record of all the rulers of the Pinkies should
be complete.

The people agreed to do all this as soon as possible, and some of
the leaders whispered together and then asked Coralie to be their
spokesman in replying to Queen Trot's speech.

Coralie stood on a chair and made a bow, after which she thanked
Trot in the name of the Pinkies for leading them safely into the
Blue Country and out again, and for giving them so good a Queen as
Rosalie. The Pinkies would be sorry to have their new friends, the
Earth people, leave them, but asked the Queen of Sky Island to carry
with her the royal band of pink gold which she now wore upon her
brow, together with the glistening pink jewel set in its center. It
would remind her, Coralie declared, of the Beautiful Land of Sunset
and Sunrise and of the fact that the Pinkies would always be glad to
welcome her back.

Trot knew she would never return to Sky Island, but she did not tell
them that. She merely thanked Coralie and the Pinkies and said they
might all come to the Court after dinner and see her and her
comrades fly away through the sky.






THE JOURNEY HOME

CHAPTER 30





After the Pinkies had been dismissed, their new Queen Rosalie, by
means of a clever charm, conjured up a dinner table set with very
nice things to eat. They all enjoyed a hearty meal and afterward sat
and talked over their adventures.

"Will you take the parrot home with you, Trot?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"Guess not, Cap'n," she answered. "Mother wouldn't like to have him
hangin' 'round an' screechin' bad po'try ev'ry minute. I'll give him
to Rosalie, for I'm sure she'll take good care of him."

Rosalie accepted the gift with pleasure, but the parrot looked sober
for a while and then said,

"This looks to me like a giveaway;
But here I am, and here I'll stay.
The country's pink, but we'll all be blue
When Trot goes home as she says she'll do."

They now packed the lunchbasket with the remains of the feast, for
they knew a long journey was before them and feared they might be
hungry before they landed again. Cap'n Bill straightened out the
ropes and adjusted the seats, while Button-Bright examined the
umbrella to see if it had been injured in any way when the elephant
tramped through the Fog Bank.

The boy looked into the small red eyes of the carved elephant's-head
handle with some misgivings, but as seen in the strong sunshine the
eyes were merely red stones, while the handle plainly showed the
marks of the tool that had carved it.

When all was ready, they went into the Court of the Statues, where
all the Pinkies were assembled--together with their Pink Band--and
Cap'n Bill hooked the swinging seats onto the handle of the Magic
Umbrella.

Trot kissed Rosalie and Coralie and Tourmaline goodbye and said to
them:

"If you ever happen to come to Earth, you must be sure to visit me,
and I'll try to give you a good time. But p'raps you'll stay here
all your lives."

"I think we shall," replied Rosalie, laughing, "for in all Sky
Island there will be no Magic Umbrella for us to fly with."

"And when you see Polychrome," added Trot, "jus' give her my love."

Then she and Button-Bright seated themselves in the double seat,
which was flat upon the pink ground, and Cap'n Bill sat before them
on his own seat, to which the lunch basket had been fastened by
means of a stout cord.

"Hold fast!" said the sailor man, and they all held fast to the
ropes while the boy, glancing up toward the open umbrella he held,
said solemnly and distinctly:

"Take us to Trot's house on the Earth." The umbrella obeyed, at once
mounting into the air. It moved slowly at first, but gradually
increased its speed. First it lifted the seat of the boy and the
girl, then Cap'n Bill's seat, and finally the lunch basket.

"Fly high!--Mind your eye!
Don't cry!--Bye-bye!"

shouted the parrot from the Pink Witch's shoulder.

Trot leaned over and waved her hand. The Pink Band played as loud as
it could--in order that the travelers might hear it as long as
possible--and Rosalie and Coralie and Tourmaline threw kisses to
their vanishing friends as long as they remained in sight.

* * * * * * * * *

"Seems good to be on the way home again," remarked Trot as the
umbrella bumped into a big, black cloud.

"It reely does, mate," answered the sailorman joyously.

Fast through the cloud the umbrella swept, and then suddenly it
sailed into a clear, blue sky, across which a great and gorgeous
Rainbow spread its radiant arch. Upon the bow danced the dainty
Daughters of the Rainbow, and the umbrella passed near enough to it
for the passengers to observe Polychrome merrily leading her
sisters, her fleecy robes waving prettily in the gentle breeze.

"Goodbye, Polly!" cried Button-Bright, and Trot and Cap'n Bill both
called out, "Goodbye!"

Polychrome heard and nodded to them smilingly, never halting in her
graceful dance. Then the umbrella dropped far below the arch, which
presently faded from view.

It was an exciting ride. Scenes presented themselves entirely
different from those they had seen on their former voyage, for the
sky changes continually, and the clouds of a moment ago are not the
clouds of an hour ago. Once they passed between two small stars as
brilliant as diamonds, and once an enormous bird whose wings spread
so wide that they shadowed the sun soared directly over them and
lost itself in the vague distance of the limitless sky.

They rode quite comfortably, however, and were full of eager
interest in what they saw. The rush of air past them made them
hungry, so Cap'n Bill drew up the lunchbasket and held it so that
Button-Bright and Trot could help themselves to the pink food, which
tasted very good. And finally a dark rim appeared below them, which
the sailor declared must be the Earth. He proved to be correct, and
when they came nearer, they found themselves flying over the waves
of the ocean. Pretty soon a small island appeared, and Trot
exclaimed,

"That's the Sky Island we thought we were goin' to--only we didn't."

"Yes, an' there's the mainland, mate!" cried Cap'n Bill excitedly,
pointing toward a distant coast.

On swept the Magic Umbrella. Then its speed gradually slackened; the
houses and trees on the coast could be seen, and presently--almost
before they realized it--they were set down gently upon the high
bluff near the giant acacia. A little way off stood the white
cottage where Trot lived.

It was growing dusk as Cap'n Bill unhooked the seats and
Button-Bright folded up the umbrella and tucked it under his arm.
Trot seized the lunchbasket and ran to the house, where she found
her mother busy in the kitchen.

"Well, I'm back again," said the little girl. "Is supper ready,
mama?"

Button-Bright stayed all night with them, but next morning, bright
and early, he hooked one of the seats to his Magic Umbrella, said
goodbye to Trot and Cap'n Bill, and flew into the air to begin his
journey to Philadelphia. Just before he started, Trot said:

"Let me know if you get home safe, Button-Bright, an' come an' see
me again as quick as you can."

"I'll try to come again," said the boy. "We've had a good time,
haven't we, Trot?"

"The bes' time I EVER had!" she replied enthusiastically. Then she
asked, "Didn't you like it, too, Cap'n Bill?"

"Parts o' it, mate," the sailor answered as he thoughtfully made
marks in the sand with the end of his wooden leg, "but seems to me
the bes' part of all was gett'n' home again."

After several days Trot received a postal card from Button-Bright.
It was awkwardly scrawled, for the boy was not much of a writer, but
Trot managed to make out the words. It read as follows:

"Got home safe, Trot, and the folks were so worried they forgot to
scold me. Father has taken the Magic Umbrella and locked it up in
the big, strong chest in the attic. He put the key in his own
pocket, so I don't know as I'll ever be able to see you again. But
I'll never forget the Queen of Sky Island, and I send my love to you
and Cap'n Bill.

"Your friend,

"Button-Bright."

THE END






This etext was produced by Geoffrey Cowling.





Ethel Turner:  Seven Little Australians



CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I     Chiefly Descriptive
II    Fowl for Dinner
III   Virtue Not Always Rewarded
IV    The General Sees Active Service
V     "Next Monday Morning"
VI    The Sweetness of Sweet Sixteen
VII   "What Say You to Falling in Love?"
VIII  A Catapult and a Catastrophe
IX    Consequences
X     Bunty in the Light of a Hero
XI    The Truant
XII   Swish, Swish!
XIII  Uninvited Guests
XIV   The Squatter's Invitation
XV    Three Hundred Miles in the Train
XVI   Yarrahappini
XVII  Cattle-Drafting at Yarrahappini
XVIII The Picnic at Krangi-Bahtoo
XIX   A Pale-Blue Hair Ribbon
XX    Little Judy
XXI   When the Sun Went Down
XXII  And Last



  To
MY MOTHER














Chapter I  Chiefly Descriptive



Before you fairly start this story I should like to give you just a
word of warning.

If you imagine you are going to read of model children, with
perhaps; a naughtily inclined one to point a moral, you had better lay
down the book immediately and betake yourself to 'Sandford and Merton'
or similar standard juvenile works.  Not one of the seven is really
good, for the very excellent reason that Australian children never are.

In England, and America, and Africa, and Asia, the little folks may
be paragons of virtue, I know little about them.

But in Australia a model child is--I say it not without
thankfulness--an unknown quantity.

It may be that the miasmas of naughtiness develop best in the
sunny brilliancy, of our atmosphere.  It may be that the land and
the people are young-hearted together, and the children's spirits not
crushed and saddened by the shadow of long years' sorrowful
history.

There is a lurking sparkle of joyousness and rebellion and mischief
in nature here, and therefore in children.

Often the light grows dull and the bright colouring fades to
neutral tints in the dust and heat of the day.  But when it
survives play-days and school-days, circumstances alone determine
whether the electric sparkle shall go to play will-o'-the-wisp
with the larrikin type, or warm the breasts of the spirited,
single-hearted, loyal ones who alone can "advance Australia."

Enough of such talk.  Let me tell you about my seven select
spirits.  They are having nursery tea at the present moment with
a minimum of comfort and a maximum of noise, so if you can bear a
deafening babel of voices and an unmusical clitter-clatter of
crockery I will take you inside the room and introduce them to
you.

Nursery tea is more an English institution than an Australian one;
there is a kind of _bon camaraderie_ feeling between parents and
young folks here, and an utter absence of veneration on the part of
the latter.  So even in the most wealthy families it seldom
happens that the parents dine in solemn state alone, while the
children are having a simple tea in another room: they all
assemble around the same board, and the young ones partake of the
same dishes, and sustain their parts in the conversation right
nobly.

But, given a very particular and rather irritable father, and
seven children with excellent lungs and tireless tongues, what
could you do but give them separate rooms to take their meals in?

Captain Woolcot, the father, in addition to this division, had had
thick felt put over the swing door upstairs, but .the noise used to
float down to the dining-room in cheerful, unconcerned manner
despite it.

It was a nursery without a nurse, too, so that partly accounted
for it.  Meg, the eldest, was only sixteen, and could not be
expected to be much of a disciplinarian, and the slatternly but
good-natured girl, who was supposed to combine the duties of
nursery-maid and housemaid, had so much to do in her second
capacity that the first suffered considerably.  She used to lay
the nursery meals when none of the little girls could be found to
help her, and bundle on the clothes of the two youngest in the
morning, but beyond that the seven had to manage for themselves.

The mother? you ask.

Oh, she was only twenty---just a lovely, laughing-faced girl, whom
they all adored, and who was very little steadier and very
little more of a housekeeper than Meg.  Only the youngest of the
brood was hers, but she seemed just as fond of the other six as
of it, and treated it more as if it were a very entertaining
kitten than a real live baby, and her very own.

Indeed at Misrule--that is the name their house always went by,
though I believe there was a different one painted above the
balcony--that baby seemed a gigantic joke to everyone.  The
Captain generally laughed when he saw it, tossed it in the air,
and then asked someone to take it quickly.

The children dragged it all:  over the country with them, dropped
it countless times, forgot its pelisse on wet days, muffled it up
when it was hot, gave it the most astounding things to eat, and yet
it was the if healthiest; prettiest, and most sunshiny baby that
ever sucked a wee fat thumb.

It was never called "Baby," either; that was the special name of
the next youngest.  Captain Woolcot had said, "Hello, is this the
General?" when the little, red, staring-eyed morsel had been put
into his arms, and the name had come into daily use, though I
believe at the christening service the curate did say something
about Francis Rupert Burnand Woolcot.

Baby was four, and was a little soft fat thing with pretty
cuddlesome ways, great smiling eyes, and lips very kissable when
they were free from jam.

She had a weakness, however, for making the General cry, or she
would have been really almost a model child.  Innumerable times
she had been found pressing its poor little chest to make it
"squeak;" and even pinching its tiny arms, or pulling its
innocent nose, just for the strange pleasure of hearing the yells
of despair it instantly set up.  Captain Woolcot ascribed the
peculiar tendency to the fact that the child had once had a
dropsical-looking woolly lamb, from which the utmost pressure would
only elicit the faintest possible squeak: he said it was only
natural that now she had something so amenable to squeezing she
should want to utilize it.

Bunty was six, and was fat and very lazy.  He hated scouting at
cricket, he loathed the very name of a paper-chase, and as for
running an errand, why, before anyone could finish saying something
was wanted he would have utterly disappeared.  He was rather small
for his age;-and I don't think had ever been seen with a clean face.
Even at church, though the immediate front turned to the minister
might be passable, the people in the next pew had always an
uninterrupted view of the black rim where washing operations had
left off.

The next on the list--I am going from youngest to oldest, you
see--was the "show" Woolcot, as Pip, the eldest boy, used to say.
You have seen those exquisite child-angel faces on Raphael Tuck's
Christmas cards?  I think the artist must just have dreamed of
Nell, and then reproduced the vision imperfectly.  She was ten,
and had a little fairy-like figure, gold hair clustering in wonderful
waves and curls around her face, soft hazel eyes, and a little
rosebud of a mouth.  She was not conceited either, her family took
care of that--Pip would have nipped such a weakness very sternly
in its earliest bud; but in some way if there was a pretty ribbon
to spare, or a breadth of bright material; just enough for one little
frock, it fell as a matter of course to her.

Judy was only three years older, but was the greatest contrast
imaginable.  Nellie used to move rather slowly about, and would
have made a picture in any attitude.  Judy I think, was never
seen to walk, and seldom looked picturesque.  If she did not dash
madly to the place she wished to get to, she would progress by a
series of jumps, bounds, and odd little skips.  She was very thin,
as people generally are who have quicksilver instead of blood in
their veins; she had a small, eager, freckled face, with very,
bright dark eyes, a small, determined mouth, and a mane of untidy,
curly dark hair that was: the trial of her life.

Without doubt she was the worst of the seven, probably because she
was the cleverest.  Her brilliant inventive powers plunged them all
into ceaseless scrapes, and though she often bore the brunt of the
blame with equanimity, they used to turn round, not infrequently,
and upbraid her for suggesting the mischief.  She had been
christened "Helen," which in no way account's for "Judy," but
then nicknames are rather unaccountable things sometimes, are they
not?  Bunty said it was because she was always popping and
jerking herself about like the celebrated wife of Punch, and
there really is something in that.  Her other name, "Fizz," is
easier to understand; Pip used to say he never yet had seen the
ginger ale that effervesced and bubbled and made the noise that
Judy did,

I haven't introduced you to Pip yet, have I?  He was a little like
Judy, only handsomer and taller, and he was fourteen, and had as
good an opinion, of himself and as poor a one of girls as boys of
that age generally have.

Meg was the eldest of the family, and had a long, fair plait that
Bunty used to delight in pulling; a sweet, rather dreamy face,
and a powdering of pretty freckles that occasioned her much
tribulation of spirit.

It was generally believed in the family that she wrote poetry
and stories, and even kept a diary, but no one had ever seen a
vestige of her papers, she kept them so carefully locked up in
her, old tin hat-box.  Their father, had you asked them they would
all have replied with considerable pride, was "a military man,"
and much from home.  He did not understand children at all, and was
always grumbling at the noise they made, and the money they cost.
Still, I think he was rather proud of Pip, and sometimes, if Nellie
were prettily dressed, he would take her out with him in his dogcart.

He had offered to send the six of hem to boarding school when he
brought home his young girl-wife, but she would not hear of it.

At first they had tried living in the barracks, but after a time
every one in the officers' quarters rose in revolt at the pranks
of those graceless children, so Captain Woolcot took a house some
distance up the Parramatta River, and in considerable bitterness
of spirit removed his family there.

They liked the change immensely; for there was a big wilderness
of a garden, two or three paddocks, numberless sheds for
hide-and-seek, and, best of all, the water.  Their father kept
three beautiful horses, one at he barracks and a hunter and a
good hack at Misrule; so, to make up, the children--not that they
cared in the slightest--went about in shabby, out-at-elbow clothes,
and much-worn boots.  They were taught--all but Pip, who went to
the grammar school--by a very third-class daily governess, who
lived in mortal fear of her ignorance being found out by her
pupils.  As a matter of fact, they had found her out long ago, as
children will, but it suited them very well not to be pushed on
and made to work, so they kept the fact religiously to
themselves.



CHAPTER II Fowl for Dinner


"Oh, don't the days seem lank and long
 When all goes right and nothing wrong;
 And isn't your life extremely flat
 With nothing whatever to grumble at?"

I hope you are not quite deafened yet, for though I have got
through the introductions, tea is not nearly finished, so we must
stay in the nursery a little longer: All the time I have been
talking Pip has been grumbling at the lack of good things.  The
table was not very tempting, certainly; the cloth looked as if it
had been flung on, the china was much chipped and battered, the tea
was very weak, and there was nothing to eat but great thick slices
of bread and butter.  Still, it was the usual tea, and everyone
seemed surprised at Pip's outburst.

"My father and Esther" (they all called their young stepmother
by her Christian name) "are having roast fowl, three vegetables,
and four kinds of pudding," he said angrily; "it isn't fair!"

"But we had dinner at one o'clock, Pip, and yours is saved as
usual," said Meg, pouring out tea with a lavish allowance of hot
water and sugar.

"Boiled mutton and carrots and rice pudding!" returned her brother
witheringly.  "Why shouldn't we have roast fowl and custard and
things?"

"Yes, why shouldn't we?" echoed little greedy Bunty; his eyes
lighting up.

"What a lot it would take for all of us!" said Meg, cheerfully
attacking the bread loaf.

"We're only children--let us be thankful for this nice thick bread
and this abundance of melting butter," said Judy, in a good little
tone.

Pip pushed his chair back from the table.

"I'm going down to ask for some roast fowl," he said, with a look
of determination in his eyes.  "I can't forget the smell of it,
and they'd got a lot on the table--I peeped in the door." '

He took up his plate and proceeded downstairs, returning presently,
to the surprise of everyone, with quite a large portion on his plate.

"He couldn't very well refuse," he chuckled.  "Colonel Bryant
is there; but he looked a bit mad here, Fizz, I'll, go you halves."

Judy pushed up her plate eagerly at this unusually magnanimous
offer, and received a very small division, a fifth part, perhaps,
with great gratitude.

"I just LOVE fowl," said Nell longingly; "I've a great mind to go
down and ask for a wing--I believe he'd give it to me."

These disrespectful children, as I am afraid you will have noticed,
always alluded to their father as "he."

Nell took up another plate, and departed slowly to the lower
regions.  She followed into the dining-room at the heels of the
housemaid, and stood by the side of her father, her plate well
behind her.

"Well, my little maid, won't you shake hands with me?  What is
your name?" said Colonel Bryant, tapping her cheek playfully.

Nell looked up with shy, lovely eyes.

"Elinor Woolcot, but they call me Nell," she said, holding out
her left hand, since her right was occupied with the plate.

"What a little barbarian you are, Nell!" laughed her father; but
he gave her a quick, annoyed glance.  "Where is your right hand?"

She drew it slowly from behind and held out the cracked old plate.
"I thought perhaps you would give me some fowl too," she said--
"just a leg or a wing, or bit of breast would do."

The Captain's brow darkened.  "What is the meaning of this?  Pip
has just been to me, too.  Have you nothing to eat in the
nursery?"

"Only bread and butter, very thick," sighed Nellie.

Esther suppressed a smile with difficulty.

"But you had dinner, all of you, at one o'clock."

"Boiled mutton and carrots and rice pudding," said Nell mournfully.

Captain Woolcot severed a leg almost savagely and put it on her
plate.

"Now run away; I don't know what has possessed you two to-night."

Nellie reached the door, then turned back.

"Oh, if you would just give me a wing for poor Meg--Judy had some
of Pip's, but Meg hasn't any," she said, with a beautiful look of
distress that quite touched Colonel Bryant.

Her father bit his lip, hacked off a wing in ominous silence, and
put it upon her plate.

"Now run away,--and don't let me have any more of this nonsense,
dear."  The last word was a terrible effort.

Nell's appearance with the two portions of fowl was hailed with
uproarious applause in the nursery; Meg was delighted with her
share; cut apiece off for Baby, and the meal went on merrily.

"Where's Bunty? ", said Nell, pausing suddenly with a very clean
drumstick in her fingers, "because I HOPE he hasn't gone
too; someway I don't think Father was very pleased, especially
as that man was there."

But that small youth had done so, and returned presently
crestfallen.

"He wouldn't give me any--he told me to go away, and the man
laughed, and Esther said we were very naughty--I got some
feathered potatoes, though, from the table outside the door."

He opened his dirty little hands and dropped the uninviting
feathered delicacy out upon the cloth.

"Bunty, you're a pig," sighed Meg, looking up from her book.
She always read at the table, and this particular story was
about some very refined, elegant girls.

"Pig yourself all of you've had fowl but me, you greedy things!"
retorted Bunty fiercely, and eating, his potato very fast.

"No, the General hasn't," said Judy and the old mischief light
sprang up suddenly into her dark eyes.

"Now, Judy!" said Meg warningly; she knew too well what that
particular sparkle meant.

"Oh, I'm not going to hurt you, you dear old thing," said Miss Judy,
dancing down the room and bestowing a pat on her sister's fair head
as she passed.  "It's only the General, who's after havin' a bit
o' fun."

She lifted him up out of the high chair, where he had been sitting
drumming on the table with a spoon and eating sugar in the
intervals.

"It's real action you're going for to see, General," she said,
dancing to the door with him.

"Oh, Judy, what are you going to do?" said Meg entreatingly.

"Ju-Ju!" crowed the General, leaping almost out of Judy's arms,
and scenting fun with the instinct of a veteran.

Down the passage they went, the other five behind to watch
proceedings.  Judy sat down with him on the last step.

"Boy want chuck-chuck, pretty chuck-chuck?" she said insidiously.

"Chuck-chuck, chuck-a-chuck," he gurgled, looking all around
for his favourite friends.

"Dad got lots--all THIS many," said Judy, opening her arms very
wide to denote the number in her father's possession.  "Boydie,
go get them!"

"Chuck-chuck," crowed the General delightedly, and struggling
to his feet--"find chuck-chuck."

"In there," whispered Judy, giving him a gentle push into the
half-open dining-room door; "ask Dad."

Right across the room the baby tottered on fat, unsteady little
legs.

"Are the children ALL possessed to-night, Esther?" said the
Captain, as his youngest-son clutched wildly at his leg and
tried to climb up it.

He looked down into the little dirty, dimpling face.  "Well,
General, and to what do we owe the honour of your presence?"

"Chuck-chuck, chuck-a-chuck, chuck, chuck, chuck," said the.
General, going down promptly upon all fours to seek for the
feathered darlings Judy had said were here.

But Esther gathered up the dear, dirty-faced young rascal and
bore him struggling out of the room.  At the foot of the stairs
she nearly stumbled over the rest of the family.

"Oh, you scamps, you bad, wicked imps!" she said, reaching out
to box all their ears, and of course failing.

She sat down on the bottom stair to laugh for a second, then she
handed the General to Pip.  "To-morrow," she said, standing up
and hastily smoothing the rich hair that the General's hands had
clutched gleefully--"to-morrow I shall beat every one of you
with the broomstick."

They watched the train of her yellow' silk dress disappear into
the dining-room again, and returned slowly to the nursery and
their interrupted tea.



CHAPTER III  Virtue Not Always Rewarded


It was not to be expected that such an occurrence could be passed
entirely over, but then again it is difficult to punish seven
children at the same time.  At first Captain Woolcot had requested
Esther to ask Miss Marsh, the governess, to give them all ten
French verbs to learn; but, as Judy pointed out, the General
and Baby and Bunty and Neil had not arrived at the dignity of
French verbs yet, so such a punishment would be iniquitous.
The sentence therefore had not been quite decided upon as yet,
and everyone felt in an uncomfortable state of suspense.

"Your father says you're a disgraceful tribe," said the young
stepmother slowly, sitting down on the nursery rocking-chair
a day later.  She had on a trailing morning wrapper of white
muslin with cherry ribbons, but there was a pin doing duty
for a button in one or two places and the lace was hanging
off a bit at the sleeve.

"Meg, dear, you're very untidy, you know, and Judy's absolutely
hopeless."

Meg was attired in an unbecoming green cashmere, with the elbows
out and the plush torn off in several places, while Judy's
exceedingly scant and faded pink zephyr had rents in several
places, and the colour was hardly to be seen for fruit-stains.

Meg coloured a little.  "I know, Esther, and I'd like to be
nicely-dressed as well as anyone, but it really isn't worth
mending these old things."

She picked up her book about the elegant girls who were
disturbing her serenity and went over to the armchair with it.

"Well, Judy, you go and sew up those rents, and put some buttons
on your frock."  Esther spoke with unusual determination.

Judy's eyes snapped and sparkled.

"'Is that a dagger that I see before me, the handle to my hand?
Come, let me grasp it,'" she said saucily, snatching one of the
pins from Esther's dress, fastening her own with it, and dropping
a curtsey.

Esther reddened a little now.

"That's the General, Judy: he always pulls the buttons off my
wrappers when I play with him.  But I'm forgetting.  Children,
I have bad news for you."

There was a breathless silence.  Everyone crowded round her knees.

"Sentence has been proclaimed," said Judy dramatically: "let us
shave our heads and don sackcloth."

"Your father says he cannot allow such conduct to go unpunished,
especially as you have all been unusually tiresome lately;
therefore: you are all--"

"To be taken away and hanged by the neck until we are dead!"

"Be quiet, Judy.  I have tried my best to beg you off, but it
only makes him more vexed.  He says you are the untidiest, most
unruly lot of children in Sydney, and he will punish you each time
you do anything, and--"

"There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

"Oh, shut up, Judy!  Can't you let us hear?"  Pip put his hand
over her mouth and held her by the hair while Esther told the
news.

"None of you are to go to the pantomime.  The seats were taken for
Thursday night, and now, you very foolish children, you will all
have to stay at home."

There was a perfect howl of dismay for a minute or two.  They had
all been looking forward to this treat for nearly a month, and the
disappointment was a really bitter one to them all.

"Oh, I say, Esther, that's too bad, really!  All the fellows at
school have been."  Pip's handsome face flushed angrily.  "And for
such a little thing, too!"

"Just because you had roast fowl for dinner," said Judy, in a
half-choked voice.  "Oh, Esther, why couldn't you have had cow,
or horse, or hippopotamus--anything but roast fowl?"

"Couldn't you get round him, Esther?"  Meg looked anxiously at
her.

"Dear Esther, do!"

"Oh, you sweet, beautiful Essie, do try!"

They clung round her eagerly.  Baby flung her arms round her neck
and nearly choked her; Nell stroked her cheek; Pip patted her
back, and besought her to "be a good fellow"; Bunty buried his
nose in her back hair and wept a silent tear; Meg clasped her hand
in an access of unhappiness; the General gave a series of delighted
squeaks; and Judy in her wretchedness smacked him for his pains.

Esther would do her best, beg as she had never done before, coax,
beseech, wheedle, threaten; and they let her go at last with that
assurance.

"Only I'd advise you all to be preternaturally good and quiet
all day," she said, looking back from the doorway.  "That would
have most effect with him, and he is going to be at home all day."

GOOD!  It was absolutely painful to witness the virtue of those
children for the rest of the day.

It was holiday-time, and Miss Marsh was away, but not once did
the sound of quarrelling, or laughing, or crying fly down
to the lower regions.

"'Citizens of Rome, the eyes of the world are upon you!'"
Judy had said solemnly, and all had promised so to conduct
themselves that their father's heart could not fail to be melted.

Pip put on his school jacket, brushed his hair, took a pile of
school books, and proceeded to the study where his father was
writing letters, and where he was allowed to do his home-lessons.

"Well, what do you want?" said the Captain, with a frown.  "No,
it's no good coming to the about that pup, sir--I won't have you
keep it."

"I came to study, sir," said Pip mildly.  "I feel I'm a bit
backward with my mathematics, so I won't waste all the holidays,
when I'm costing you so much in school fees."

The Captain gave a little gasp and looked hard at Pip; but the
boy's face was so unsmiling and earnest that he was disarmed,
and actually congratulated himself that his eldest son was at
last seeing the error of his ways.

"There are those sets of problems in that drawer that I did when
I was at school," he said graciously.  "If they are of any use
to you, you can get them out."

"Thanks awfully--they will be a great help," said Pip gratefully.

He examined them with admiration plainly depicted upon his face.

"How very clearly and correctly you worked, Father," he said
with a sigh.  "I wonder if ever I'll get as good as this!  How
old were you, Father, when you did them?"

"About your age," said the Captain, picking up the papers.

He examined them with his head on one side.  He was rather proud
of them, seeing he had utterly forgotten now how to work decimal
fractions, and could not have done a quadratic equation to save his
life.

"Still, I don't think you need be quite discouraged, Pip.  I was
rather beyond the other boys in my class in these subjects, I
remember.  We can't all excel in the same thing, and I'm glad to
see you are beginning to realize the importance of work."

"Yes, Father."

Meg had betaken herself to the drawing-room, and was sitting on the
floor before the music canterbury with scissors, thimble, and a
roll of narrow blue ribbon on her knee, and all her father's songs,
that he so often complained were falling to pieces, spread out
before her.

He saw her once as he passed the door, and looked surprised and
pleased.

"Thank you, Margaret: they wanted it badly.  I am glad you can
make yourself useful, after all," he said.

"Yes, Father."

Meg stitched on industriously.

He went batik to his study, where Pip's head was at a studious,
absorbed angle, and pyramids of books and sheaves of paper were
on the table.  He wrote two more letters, and there came a little
knock at the door.

"Come in," he called; and there entered Nell.

She was carrying very carefully a little tray covered with a
snow-white doyley, and on it were a glass of milk and a plate
of mulberries.  She placed it before him.

"I thought perhaps you would like a little lunch, Father," she
said gently; and Pip was seized with a sudden coughing fit.

"My DEAR child!" he said.

He looked at it very thoughtfully.

"The last glass of milk I had, Nellie, was when I was Pip's age,
and was Barlow's fag at Rugby.  It made me ill, and I have never
touched it since."

"But this won't hurt you.  You will drink this?"  She gave him one
of her most beautiful looks.

"I would as soon drink the water the maids wash up in, my child."
He took a mulberry, ate it, and made a wry face.  "They're not,
fit to eat."

"After you've eaten about six you don't notice they're sour,"
she said eagerly.  But he pushed them away.

"I'll take your word for it."  Then he looked at her curiously.
"What made you think of bringing me anything, Nellie?  I don't
ever remember you doing so before."

"I thought you might be hungry writing here so long," she said
gently; and Pip choked again badly, and she withdrew.

Outside in the blazing sunshine Judy was mowing the lawn.

They only kept one man, and, as his time was so taken up with the
horses and stable work generally, the garden was allowed to fall
into neglect.  More than once the Captain had spoken vexedly of
the untidy lawns, and said he was ashamed for visitors to come to
the house.

So Judy, brimming over with zeal, armed herself with an abnormally
large scythe, and set to work on the long, long grass.

"Good heavens, Helen! you'll cut your legs off!" called her
father, in an agitated tone.

He had stepped out on to the front veranda for a mild cigar after
the mulberry just as she brought her scythe round with an
admirable sweep and decapitated a whole army of yellow-helmeted
dandelions.

She turned and gave him a beautiful smile.  "Oh, no, Father!--why,
I'm quite a dab at mowing."

She gave it another alarming but truly scientific sweep.

"See that--and th-a-at--and tha-a-a-at!"

"Th-a-at" carried off a fragment of her dress, and "tha-a-a-at"
switched off the top of a rose-bush; but there are details to
everything, of course.

"Accidents WILL happen, even to the best regulated grass-cutters,"
she said composedly, and raising the scythe for a fresh circle.

"Stop immediately, Helen!  Why ever can't you go and play quietly
with your doll, and not do things like this?" said her father
irascibly.

"An' I was afther doin' it just to pleasure him," she said,
apparently addressing the dandelions.

"Well, it won't 'pleasure him' to have to provide you with cork
legs and re-stock the garden," he said dryly: "Put it down."

"Sure, an' it's illigence itsilf this side: you wouldn't be
afther leaving half undone, like a man with only one cheek shaved."

Judy affected an Irish brogue at some occult reason of her own.

"Sure an' if ye'd jist stip down and examine it yirself, it's
quite aisy ye'd be in yer moind."

The Captain hid a slight smile in his moustache.  The little girl
looked so comical, standing there in her short old pink frock, a
broken-brimmed hat on her tangle of dark curls, her eyes
sparkling, her face flushed, the great scythe in her hands, and the
saucy words on her lips.

He came down and examined it: it was done excellently well, like
most of the things miss Judy attempted--mischief always included:
and her little black-stockinged legs were still in a good state of
preservation.

"Hum!  Well, you can finish it then, as Pat's busy.  How did you
learn to mow, young lady of wonderful accomplishments?" (he looked
at her questioningly); "and what made you set yourself such a task?"

Judy gave her curls a quick push off her hot forehead.

"(A) Faix, it was inborn in me," she answered instantly; "and
 (B)--sure, and don't I lo-o-ove you and delaight to plaize you?"

He went in again slowly, thoughtfully.  Judy always mystified
him.  He understood her the least of any of his children, and
sometimes the thought of her worried him.  At present she was only
a sharp, clever, and frequently impertinent child; but he felt
she was utterly different from the other six, and it gave him
an aggrieved kind of feeling when he thought about it, which was
not very often.

He remembered her own mother had often said she trembled for
Judy's future.  That restless fire of hers that shone out of her
dancing eyes, and glowed scarlet on her cheeks in excitement, and
lent amazing energy and activity to her young, lithe body, would
either make a noble, daring, brilliant woman of her, or else she
would be shipwrecked on rocks the others would never come to, and
it would flame up higher and higher and consume her.

"Be careful of Judy" had been almost the last words of the anxious
mother when, in the light that comes when the world's is going out,
she had seen with terrible clearness the stones and briars in the
way of that particular pair of small, eager feet.

And she had died, and Judy was stumbling right amongst them now,
and her father could not "be careful" of her because he
absolutely did not know how.

As he went up the veranda steps again and through the hall, he was
wishing almost prayerfully she had not been cast in so different a
mould from the others, wishing he could stamp out that strange
flame in her that made him so uneasy at times.  He gave a great
puff at his cigar, and sighed profoundly; then he turned on his
heel and went off toward the stables to forget it all.

The man was away, exercising one of the horses in the long paddock;
but there was something stirring in the harness-room, so he went
in.

There was a little, dripping wet figure standing over a great
bucket, and dipping something in and out with charming vigour.
At the sound of his footsteps, Baby turned round and lifted a
perspiring little face to his.

"I'se washing the kitsies for you, and Flibberty-Gibbet," she said
beamingly.

He took a horrified step forward.

There were two favourite kittens of his, shivering, miserable,
up to their necks in a lather of soapy water; and Flibberty-Gibbet,
the beautiful little fox terrier he had just bought for his wife,
chained to a post, also wet, miserable, and woebegone, also
undergoing the cleansing process, and being scrubbed and
swilled till his very reason was tottering.

"They'se SO clean and nicey--no horrid ole fleas 'n them now.
AREN't you glad?  You can let Flibberty go on your bed now, and
Kitsy Blackeye is---"

Poor Baby never finished her speech.  She had a confused idea of
hearing a little "swear-word" from her father, of being shaken in
a most ungentle fashion and put outside the stable, while the
unfortunate animals were dried and treated with great consideration.

But the worst was yet to come, and the results were so exceedingly
bad that the young Woolcots determined never again to assume virtues
that they had not.

Bunty, of course, desired to help the cause as strongly as the
others, and to that end his first action was to go into his
bedroom and perform startling ablutions with his face, neck, and
hands.  Then he took his soap-shiny countenance and red, much
bescrubbed hands downstairs, and sunned himself under his
father's very nose, hoping to attract favourable comment.

But he was bidden irritably "go and play," and saw he would
have to find fresh means of appeasement.

He wandered into the study, with vague thoughts of tidying
the tidy bookshelves; but Pip vas there, surrounded with books
and whittling a stick for a catapult, so he went out again.
Then he climbed the stairs and explored his father's bedroom
and dressing-room.  In the latter there was a wide field for his
operations.  A full-dress uniform was lying across a chair, and it
struck Bunty the gold buttons were looking less bright than they
should, so he spent a harmless quarter of an hour in polishing
them up.  Next, he burnished some spurs, which also was harmless.
Then he east about for fresh employment.

There was quite a colony of dusty boots in one corner of the
room, and there was a great bottle of black, treacly looking
varnish on the mantelpiece.  Bunty conceived the brilliant idea of
cleaning the whole lot and standing them in a neat row to meet his
father's delighted eyes.  He found a handkerchief on the floor, of
superfine cambric, though dirty, poured upon it a liberal allowance
of varnish, and attacked the first pair.

A bright polish rewarded him, for they were patent leather ones;
but the next and the next and the next would not shine, however
hard he rubbed.  There was a step on the stair, the firm, well-known
step of his father, and he paused a moment with a look of
conscious virtue on his small shiny face.

But it fled all at once, and a look of horror replaced it.  He had
stuck the bottle on a great armchair for convenience, as he was
sitting on the floor, and now he noticed it had fallen on its side
and a black, horrid stream was issuing from its neck.

And it was the chair with the uniform on, and one of the sleeves
was soaked with the stuff, and the beautiful white shirt that
lay there, too, waiting for a button, was sticky, horrible!
Bunty gave a wild, terrified look round the room for some place
to efface himself, but there were no sheltering corners or curtains,
and there was not time to get into the bedroom and under the bed.
Near the window was a large-sized medicine chest, and in despair
Bunty crushed himself into it, his legs huddled up, his head
between his knees, and an ominous rattle of displaced bottles
in his ears.  The next minute his father was in the room.

"Great Heavens!  God bless my soul!" he said, and Bunty shivered
from head to foot.

Then he said a lot of things very quickly--"foreign language" as
Judy called it; kicked something over, and shouted "Esther!" in a
terrifying tone.  But Esther was down in one of the paddocks with
the General, so there was no reply.

More foreign language, more stomping about.

Bunty's teeth chattered noisily; he put up his hand to hold
his mouth together, and the cupboard, overbalanced, fell right
over, precipitating its occupant right at his father's feet,
and the bottles everywhere.

"I didn't--I haven't--'twasn't me--'twasn't my fault!" he
howled, backing towards the door.  "Hoo--yah--boo-hoo-ooo!
Esther--boo--yah--Judy--oh--oh--h! oh--oh--h--h--h--h!"
As might be expected, his father had picked up a strap that
lay conveniently near, and was giving his son a very fair
taste of it.

"Oh--h--h--h! o--o--h! o--o--h! ah--h--h! 'twasn't me--
'twasn't my fault--its Pip and Judy--oh--h--h--h! hoo--the
pant'mime! boo-hoo! ah--h--h--h--you're killing me! hoo-boo!
I was only d--doin' it--oh--hoo--ah--h--h! d--oin' it to
p--please--boo--oo--oo! to p--please you!"

His father paused with uplifted strap.  "And that's why all
the others are behaving in so strange a fashion?  Just for me
to take them to the pantomime?"

Bunty wriggled himself free.  "Boo--hoo--yes! but not me--I
didn't--I never--true's faith--oh-h-h-hoo-yah! it wasn't my
fault, it's all the others--boo--hoo--hoo! hit them the rest."

He got three more smart cuts, and then fled howling and yelling
to the nursery, where he fell on the floor and kicked and rolled
about as if he were half killed.

"You sn--n--n--n--neaks!" he sobbed, addressing the others,
who had flown from all parts at his noisy outcry, "you m-m---
mean p--p--p--pigs! I h--hadn't n--n--no fo--o--ow-l, and I've
h--h--had all the b--b--b--beating! y--you s--s--sn--n-neaks!
oh--h--h--h! ah--h--h--h! oh--h--h--h! oh--h--h-h! I'm b--b--
bleeding all over, I kno--o--o--ow!"

They couldn't help laughing a bit; Bunty was always so
irresistibly comic when he was hurt ever so little; but still
they comforted him as well as they could, and tried to find out
what had happened.

Esther came in presently, looking very worried.  "Well?" they
said in a breath.

"You really are the most exasperating children," she said
vexedly.

"But he pantomime--quick, Esther--have you asked him?" they
cried impatiently.

"The pantomime!  He says he would rather make it worth Mr.
Rignold's while to take it off the boards than that one of you
should catch a glimpse of it--and it serves you very well right!
Meg, for goodness' sake give Baby some dry clothes--just look
at her; and, Judy, if you have any feeling for me, take off
that frock.  Bunty, you wicked boy, I'll call your father if
you don't stop that noise.  Nell, take the scissors from the
General, he'll poke his eyes out, bless him."

The young stepmother leaned back in her chair and looked round
her tragically.  She had never seen her husband so thoroughly
angered, and her beautiful lips quivered when she remembered how
he had seemed to blame her for it all.

Meg hadn't moved; the water was trickling slowly off Baby's
clothes and making a pool on the floor, Bunty was still giving
vent to spasmodic boos and hoos, Judy was whistling stormily,
and the General, mulcted of the scissors, was licking his own
muddy shoe all over with his dear little red tongue.

A sob rose in her throat, two tears welled up in her eyes and
fell down her smooth, lovely cheeks.  "Seven of you, and I'm only
twenty!" she said pitifully.  "Oh! it's too bad--oh dear! it
is too bad."



CHAPTER IV  The General Sees Active Service

   "My brain it teems
    With endless schemes,
    Both good and new."


It was a day after "the events narrated in the last chapter,"
as story-book parlance has it.  And Judy, with a wrathful look in
her eyes, was sitting on the nursery table, her knees touching her
chin and her thin brown hands clasped round them.

"It's a shame," she said, "it's a burning, wicked shame!
What's the use of fathers in the world, I'd like to know!"

"Oh, Judy!" said Meg, who was curled up in an armchair, deep in
a book.  But she said it mechanically, and only as a matter of
duty, being three years older than Judy.

"Think of the times we could have if he didn't live with us,"
Judy continued, calmly disregardful.  "Why, we'd have fowl
three times a day, and the pantomime seven nights a week."

Nell suggested that it was not quite usual to have pantomimic
performances on the seventh day, but Judy was not daunted.

"I'd have a kind of church pantomime," she said thoughtfully--
"beautiful pictures and things about the Holy Land, and the
loveliest music, and beautiful children in white, singing hymns,
and bright colours all about, and no collection plates to take
your only threepenny bit-oh! and no sermons or litanies, of course."

"Oh, Judy!" murmured Meg, turning a leaf.  Judy unclasped her
hands, and then clasped them again more tightly than before.
"Six whole tickets wasted--thirty beautiful shillings--just
because we have a father!"

"He sent them to the Digby-Smiths," Bunty volunteered, "and wrote
on the envelope, 'With compts. J. C. Woolcot.'"

Judy moaned.  "Six horrid little Digby-Smiths sitting in the
theatre watching our fun with their six horrid little eyes," she
said bitterly.

Bunty, who was mathematically inclined, wanted to know why they
wouldn't look at it through their twelve horrid little eyes, and
Judy laughed and came down from the table, after expressing a
wicked wish that the little Digby-Smiths might all tumble over the
dress-circle rail before the curtain rose.  Meg shut her book with
a hurried bang.

"Has Pip gone yet?  Father'll be awfully cross.  Oh dear, what a
head I've got!" she said.  "Where's Esther?  Has anyone seen Esther?"

"My DEAR Meg!" Judy said; "why, it's at least two hours since
Esther went up the drive before your very nose.  She's gone to
Waverly--why, she came in and told you, and said she trusted you
to see about the coat, and you said, 'M--'m! all right.'"

Meg gave a startled look of recollection.  "Did I have to clean
it?" she asked in a frightened tone, and pushing her fair hair
back from her forehead.  "Oh, girls! what WAS it I had to do?"

"Clean with benzine, iron while wet, put in a cool place to keep
warm, and bake till brown," said Judy promptly.  "SURELY you
heard, Margaret?  Esther was at such pains to explain."

Meg ruffled her hair again despairingly.  "What shall I do?" she
said, actual tears springing to her eyes.  "What will Father
say?  Oh, Judy, you might have reminded me."

Nell slipped an arm round her neck.  "She's only teasing,
Megsie; Esther did it and left it ready in the hall--you've only
to give it to Pip.  Pat has to take the dogcart into town this
afternoon to have the back seat mended, and Pip's going in it,
too, that's all, and they're putting the horse in now; you're
not late."

It was the coat Bunty had done his best to spoil that all
the trouble was about.  It belonged, as I said, to the Captain's
full-dress uniform, and was wanted for a dinner at the Barracks
this same evening.  And Esther had been sponging and cleaning
at it all the morning, and had left directions that it was to be
taken to the Barracks in the afternoon.

Presently the dogcart came spinning round to the door in great
style, Pip driving and Pat looking sulkily on.  They took the
coat parcel and put it carefully under the seat, and were
preparing to start again, when Judy came out upon the veranda,
holding the General in an uncomfortable position in her arms.

"You come, too, Fizz, there's heaps of room--there's no reason you
shouldn't," Pip said suddenly.  "Oh--h--h!" said Judy, her eyes
sparkling.  She took a rapid step forward and lifted her foot to
get in.

"Oh, I say!" remonstrated Pip, "you'll have to put on something
over that dress, old girl--it's all over jam and things."

Judy shot herself into the hall and returned with her ulster; she
set the General on the floor for a minute while she donned it,
then picked him up and handed him up to Pip.

"He'll have to come, too," she said; "I promised Esther I
wouldn't let him out of my sight for a minute; she's getting
quite nervous about him lately--thinks he'll get broken."

Pip grumbled a minute or two, but the General gave a gurgling,
captivating laugh and held up his arms, so he took him up and
held him while Judy clambered in.

"We can come back in the tram to the Quay, and then get a boat
back," she said, squeezing the baby on the seat between them.
"The General loves going on the water."

Away they sped; down the neglected carriage drive, out of the
gates, and away down the road.  Pip, Judy of the shining eyes,
the General devouring his thumb, and Pat smiling-faced once more
because in possession of the reins.

A wind from the river swept through the belt of gum trees on the
Crown lands, and sent the young red blood leaping through their
veins; it played havoc with Judy's curls, and dyed her brown
cheeks a warm red; it made the General kick and laugh and grow
restive, and caused Pip to stick his hat on the back of his head
and whistle joyously.

Until town was reached, when they were forced to yield
somewhat to the claims of conventionality.  On the way to
Paddington a gentleman on horseback slackened pace a little.
Pip took off his hat with a flourish, and Judy gave a frank,
pleased smile, for it was a certain old Colonel they had known
for years, and had cause to remember his good-humour and
liberality.

"Well, my little maid--well, Philip, lad," he said, smiling
genially, while his horse danced round the dogcart--"and the
General too--where are you all off to?"

"The Barracks--I'm taking something up for the governor," Pip
answered, Judy was watching the plunging horse with admiring eyes.
"And then we're going back home."

The old gentleman managed, in spite of the horse's tricks, to
slip his hand in his pocket.  "Here's something to make yourselves
ill with on the way," he said, handing them two half-crowns; "but
don't send me the doctor's bill."

He flicked the General's cheek with his whip, gave Judy a nod, and
cantered off.

The children looked at each other with sparkling eyes.

"Coconuts," Pip said, "and tarts and toffee, and save the rest for
a football?"  Judy shook her head.  "Where do I come in?" she said.
"You'd keep the football at school.  I vote pink jujubes, and icecreams,
and a wax doll."

"A wax grandmother!" Pip retorted; "you wouldn't be such a girl, I
hope."  Then he added, with almost pious fervour, "Thank goodness
you've always hated dolls, Fizz."

Judy gave a sudden leap in her seat, almost upsetting the General,
and bringing down upon her head a storm of reproaches from the
coachman.  "I know!" she said; "and we're almost halfway there
now.  Oh--h--h! it will be lovely."

Pip urged her to explain herself.

"Bondi Aquarium--skating, boats, merry-go-round, switchback
threepence a go!" she returned succinctly.

"Good iron," Pip whispered softly, while he revolved the thing
in his mind.  "There'd be something over, too, to get some tucker
with, and perhaps something for the football, too."  Then his
brow clouded.

"There's the kid--whatever did you go bringing him for?  Just
like a girl to spoil everything!" Judy looked nonplussed.

"I quite forgot him," she said, vexedly.  "Couldn't we leave
him somewhere?  Couldn't we ask someone to take care of him
while we go?  Oh, it would be TOO bad to have to give it up
just because of him.  It's beginning to rain, too; we couldn't
take him with us."

They were at the foot of Barrack Hill now, and Pat told them
they must get out and walk the rest of the way up, or he would
never get the dogcart finished to take back that evening.

Pip tumbled out and took the General, all in a bunched-up heap,
and Judy alighted carefully after him, the precious coat parcel
in her arms.  And they walked up the asphalt hill to the
gate leading to the officers' quarters in utter silence.

"Well?" Pip said querulously, as they reached the top.  "Be
quick; haven't you thought of anything?"

That levelling of brows, and pursing of lips, always meant deep
and intricate calculation on his sister's part, as he knew full
well.

"Yes," Judy said quietly.  "I've got a plan that will do, I think."
Then a sudden fire entered her manner.

"Who is the General's father?  Tell me that," she said, in a
rapid, eager way; "and isn't it right and proper fathers should
look after their sons?  And doesn't he deserve we should get
even with him for doing us out of the pantomime?  And isn't the
Aquarium too lovely to miss?"

"Well?"  Pip said; his slower brain did not follow such rapid
reasoning.

"Only I'm going to leave the General here at the Barracks for a
couple of hours till we come back, his father being the proper
person to watch over him."  Judy grasped the General's small.
fat hand in a determined way, and opened the gate.

"Oh, I say," remarked Pip, "we'll get in an awful row, you know,
Fizz.  I don't think we'd better--I don't really, old girl."

"Not a bit," said Judy, stoutly--"at least, only a bit, and
the Aquarium's worth that.  Look how it's raining; the child will
get croup, or rheumatism, or something if we take him; there's
Father standing over on the green near the tennis-court talking to
a man.  I'll slip quietly along the veranda and into his own room,
and put the coat and the General on the bed; then I'll tell a
soldier to go and tell Father his parcels have come; and while
he's gone I'll fly back to you, and we'll catch the tram
and go to the Aquarium."

Pip whistled again softly.  He was used to bold proposals from
this sister of his, but this was beyond everything.  "B--b--but,"
he said uneasily, "but, Judy, whatever would he do with that kid for
two mortal hours?"

"Mind him," Judy returned promptly.  "It's a pretty thing if a
father can't mind his own child for two hours.  Afterwards, you
see, when we've been to the Aquarium, we will come back and fetch
him, and we can explain to Father how it was raining, and that we
thought we'd better not take him with us for fear of rheumatism,
and that we were in a hurry to catch the tram, and as he wasn't
in his room we just put him on the bed till he came.  Why, Pip,
it's beautifully simple!"

Pip still looked uncomfortable.  "I don't like it, Fizz," he said
again; "he'll be in a fearful wax."

Judy gave him one exasperated look.  "Go and see if that's the
Bondi tram coming," she said; and glad of a moment's respite,
he went down the path again to the pavement and looked down
the hill.  When he turned round again she had gone.

He stuck his hands in his pockets and walked up and down the path
a few times.  "Fizz'll get us hanged yet," he muttered, looking
darkly at the door in the wall through which she had disappeared.
He pushed his hat to the back of hiss head and stared gloomily
at his boots, wondering what would be the consequences of this
new mischief.  There was a light footfall beside him.

"Come on," said Judy, pulling his sleeve; "it's done now, come on,
let's go and have our fun; have you got the money safe?"

It was two o'clock as they passed out of the gate and turned
their faces up, the hill to the tram stopping-place.  And it was
half-past four when they jumped out of a town-bound tram and
entered the gates again to pick up their charge.

Such an afternoon as they had had!  Once inside the Aquarium,
even Pip had put his conscience qualms on one side, and bent all
his energies to enjoying himself thoroughly.  And Judy was like
a little mad thing.  She spent a shilling of her money on the
switchback railway, pronouncing the swift, bewildering motion
"heavenly."  The first journey made Pip feel sick, so he
eschewed a repetition of it, and watched Judy go off from time to
time, waving gaily from the perilous little car, almost with his
heart in his mouth.  Then they hired a pair of roller skates each,
and bruised themselves black and blue with heavy falls on the
asphalt.  After that they had a ride on the merry-go-round, but
Judy found it tame after the switchback, and refused to squander
a second threepence upon it, contenting herself with watching Pip
fly round, and madly running by his side, to keep up as long as
she could.  They finished the afternoon with a prolonged
inspection of the fish-tanks, a light repast of jam tarts of
questionable freshness, and twopennyworth of peanuts.  And, as
I said, it was half-past four as they hastened up the path again
to the top gate of the Barracks.

"I hope he's been good," Judy said, as she turned the handle.
"Yes, you come, too, Pip"--for that young gentleman hung back one
agonized second.  "Twenty kicks or blows divided by two only make
ten, you see."

They went up the long stone veranda and stopped at one door.

There was a little knot of young officers laughing and talking
close by.

"Take my word, 'twas as good as a play to see Wooly grabbing his
youngster, and stuffing it into a cab, and getting in himself, all
with a look of ponderous injured dignity," one said, and laughed
at the recollection.

Another blew away a cloud of cigar smoke.  "It was a jolly little
beggar," he said.  "It doubled its fists and landed His High
Mightiness one in the eye; and then its shoe dropped off, and
we all rushed to pick it up, and it was muddy and generally
dilapidated, and old Wooly went red slowly up to his ear-tips as
he tried to put it on."

A little figure stepped into the middle of the group--a little
figure with an impossibly short and shabby ulster, thin
black-stockinged legs, and a big hat crushed over a tangle of
curls.

"It is my father you are speaking of," she said, her head very
high, her tone haughty, "and I cannot tell where your amusement is.
Is my father here, or did I hear you say he had gone away?"

Two of the men looked foolish, the third took off his cap.

"I am sorry you should have overheard us, Miss Woolcot," he
said pleasantly.  "Still, there is no irreparable harm done, is
there?  Yes, your father has gone away in a cab.  He couldn't
imagine how the little boy carne on his bed, and, as he couldn't
keep him here very well, I suppose he has taken him home."

Something like a look of shame came into Judy's bright eyes,

"I am afraid I must have put my father to some inconvenience,"
she said quietly.  "It was I who left the Gen--my brother here,
because I didn't know what to do with him for an hour or two.
But I quite meant to take him home myself.  Has he been gone
long?"

"About half an hour," the officer said, and tried not to look
amused at the little girl's old-fashioned manner.

"Ah, thank you.  Perhaps we can catch him up.  Come on, Pip,"
and, nodding in a grave, distant manner, she turned away, and
went down the veranda and through the gate with her brother.

"A nice hole we're in," he said.

Judy nodded.

"It's about the very awfullest thing we've ever done in our lives.
Fancy the governor carting that child all the way from here!  Oh,
lor'!"

Judy nodded again.

"Can't you speak?" he said irritably.  "You've got us into this--
I didn't want to do it; but I'll stand by you, of course.  Only
you'll have to think of something quick."

Judy bit three finger-tips off her right-hand glove, and looked
melancholy.

"There's absolutely nothing to do, Pip," she said slowly.  "I
didn't think it would turn out like this.  I suppose we'd better
just go straight back and hand ourselves over for punishment.
He'll be too angry to hear any sort of an excuse, so we'd better
just grin and hear whatever he does to us.  I'm really sorry, too,
that I made a laughing-stock of him up there."

Pip was explosive.  He called her a little ass and a gowk and a
stupid idiot for doing such a thing, and she did not reproach him
or answer back once.

They caught a tram and went into Sydney, and afterwards to the
boat.  They ensconced themselves in a corner at the far end, and
discussed the state of affairs with much seriousness.  Then Pip got
up and, strolled about a little to relieve his feelings, coming
back in a second with a white, scared face.

"He's on the boat," he said, in a horrified whisper.

"Where-where--where? what--what--what?" Judy cried, unintentionally
mimicking a long-buried monarch.

"In the cabin, looking as glum as a boiled wallaby, and hanging
on to the poor little General as if he thinks he'll fly away."

Judy looked a little frightened for the first time.  "Can't we
hide?  Don't let him see us.  It wouldn't be any good offering to
take the General now.  We're in for it now, Pip--there'll be no
quarter."

Pip groaned; then Judy stood up.

"Let's creep down as far as the engine," she said, "and see if he
does look very bad."

They made their way cautiously along the deck, and took up a
position where they could see without being seen.  The dear
little General was sitting on the seat next to his stern father,
who had a firm hold of the back of his woolly-pelisse.  He was
sucking his little dirty hand, and casting occasional longing
glances at his tan shoe, which he knew was delicious to bite.
Once or twice he had pulled it off and conveyed it to his mouth,
but his father intercepted it, and angrily buttoned it on again
in its rightful place.  He wanted, too, to slither off the horrid
seat, and crawl all over the deck, and explore the ground under
the seats, and see where the puffing noise came from; but there
was that iron grasp on his coat that no amount of wriggling would
move.  No wonder the poor child looked unhappy!

At last the boat stopped at a wharf not far from Misrule, and the
Captain alighted, carrying his small dirty son gingerly in his
arms.  He walked slowly up the red road along which the dogcart
had sped so blithesomely some six or seven hours ago, and Judy
and Pip followed at a respectful--a very respectful--distance.
At the gate he saw them, and gave a large, angry beckon for them
to come up.  Judy went very white, but obeyed instantly, and Pip,
pulling himself together, brought up the rear.

Afterwards Judy only had a very indistinct remembrance of what
happened during the next half-hour.  She knew there was a stormy
scene, in which Esther and the whole family came in for an
immense amount of vituperation.

Then Pip received a thrashing, in spite of Judy's persistent avowal
that it was all her fault, and Pip hadn't done anything.  She
remembered wondering whether she would be treated as summarily as
Pip, so angry was her father's face as he pushed the boy aside
and stood looking at her, riding whip in hand.  But he flung
it, down and laid a heavy hand on her shrinking shoulder.

"Next Monday," he said slowly--"next Monday morning you will
go to boarding school.  Esther, kindly see Helen's clothes are
ready for boarding school--next Monday morning."



CHAPTER V  "Next Monday Morning"


There was a trunk standing in the hall, and a large, much-travelled
portmanteau, and there were labels on them that said: "Miss Helen
Woolcot, The Misses Burton, Mount Victoria."

In the nursery breakfast was proceeding spasmodically.  Meg's
blue eyes were all red and swollen with crying, and she was still
sniffing audibly as she poured out the coffee.  Pip had his hands
in his pockets and stood on the hearthrug, looking gloomily at a
certain plate, and refusing breakfast altogether; the General was
crashing his own mug and plate joyously together; and Bunty
was eating bread and butter in stolid silence.

Judy, white-faced and dry-eyed, was sitting at the table, and Nell
and Baby were clinging to either arm.  All the three days between
that black Thursday and this doleful morning she had been obstinately
uncaring.  Her spirits had never seemed higher, her eyes brighter,
her tongue sharper, than during that interval of days; and she had
pretended to everyone, and her father, that she especially thought
boarding school must be great fun, and that she should enjoy it
immensely.

But this morning she had collapsed altogether.  All the time before,
her hot childish heart had been telling her that her father could
not really be so cruel, that he did not really mean to send her
away among strangers, away from dear, muddled old Misrule and all
her sisters and brothers; he was only saying it to frighten her,
she kept saying to herself, and she would show him she was not
a chickenhearted baby.

But on Sunday night, when she saw a trunk carried downstairs
and filled with her things and labelled with her name, a cold
hand seemed to close about her heart.  Still, she said to herself,
he was doing all this to make it seem more real,

But now it was morning, and she could disbelieve it no longer.
Esther had come to her bedside and kissed her sorrowfully, her
beautiful face troubled and tender.  She had begged as she had
never done before for a remission of poor Judy's sentence, but
the Captain was adamant.  It was she and she only who was always
ringleader in everything; the others would behave when she was not
there to incite them to mischief and go she should.  Besides, he
said, it would be the making of her.  It was an excellent school
he had chosen for her; the ladies who kept it were kind, but very
firm, and Judy was being ruined for want of a firm hand.  Which,
indeed, was in a measure true.

Judy sat bolt upright in bed at the sight of Esther's sorrowful
face.

"It's no good, dear; there's no way out of it," she said gently.
"But you'll go like a brave girl, won't you, Ju-Ju?  You always
were the sort to die game, as Pip says."

Judy gulped down a great lump in her throat, and her poor little
face grew white and drawn.

"It's all right, Essie.  There, you go on down to breakfast,"
she said, in a voice that, only shook a little; "and please
leave the General, Esther; I'll bring him down with me."

Esther deposited her little fat son on the pillow, and with one
loving backward glance went out of the door.

And Judy pulled the little lad down into her arms, and covered the
bedclothes right over both their heads, and held him in a fierce,
almost desperate clasp for a minute or two, and buried her face
in his soft, dimpled neck, and kissed it till her dips ached.

He fought manfully against these troublesome proceedings, and at
last objected, with an angry scream, to being suffocated.  So she
flung back the clothes and got out of bed, leaving him to burrow
about among the pillows, and pull feathers out of a hole in one
of them.

She dressed in a quick nervous fashion, did her hair with more
care than usual, and then picked up the General and took him along
the passage into the nursery.  All the others were here, and, with
Esther, were evidently discussing her.  The three girls looked
tearful and protesting; Pip had just been brought to book for
speaking disrespectfully of his father, and was looking sullen;
and Bunty, not knowing what else to do at such a crisis, had fallen
to catching flies, and was viciously taking off their wings.

It was a wretched meal: The bell sounded for the downstairs
breakfast, and Esther had to go.  Everyone offered Judy everything
on the table, and spoke gently and politely to her.  She seemed
to be apart from them, a person not to be lightly treated in the
dignity of this great trouble.  Her dress, too, was quite new--
a neat blue serge fresh from the dressmaker's hands; her boots
were blacked and bright, her stockings guiltless of ventilatory
chasms.  All this helped to make her a Judy quite different from
the harum-scarum one of a few days back, who used to come to
breakfast looking as if her clothes had been pitchforked upon her.

Baby addressed herself to her porridge for one minute, but the
next her feelings overcame her, and, with a little wail, she rushed
round the table to Judy, and hung on her arm sobbing.  This
destroyed the balance of the whole company.  Nell got the other arm
and swayed to and fro in an excess of misery. Meg's tears rained
down into her teacup; Pip dug his heel in the hearthrug, and
wondered what was the matter with his eyes; and even Bunty's
appetite for bread and butter diminished.

Judy sat there silent; she had pushed back her unused plate, and
sat regarding it with an expression of utter despair on her
young face.  She looked like a miniature tragedy queen going to
immediate execution.

Presently Bunty got off his chair, covered up his coffee with his
saucer to keep the flies out, and solemnly left the room.  In a
minute he returned with a pickle bottle, containing an enormous
green frog.

"You can have it to keep for your very own, Judy," he said, in a
tone of almost reckless sadness.  "It'll, keep you amused, perhaps,
at school."  Self-sacrifice could go no further, for this frog was
the darling of Bunty's heart.

This stimulated the others; everyone fetched some offering to lay
at Judy's shrine for a keepsake.  Meg brought a bracelet, plaited
out of the hair of a defunct pet pony.  Pip gave his three-bladed
pocketknife.  Nell a pot of musk that she had watered and cherished
for a year, Baby had a broken-nosed doll, that was the Benjamin of
her large family.

"Put them in the trunk, Meg--there's room on top, I think," Judy
said in a choking voice, and deeply touched by these gifts.  "Oh!
and, Bunty, dear! put a cork over the f--f--frog, will you? it
might get lost, poor thing! in that b--b--big box."

"All right," said Bunty, "You'll take c--c--care of it, w--won't
you, Judy?  Oh dear, oh--h--h!--boo-hoo!"

Then Esther came in, still troubled-looking.  "The dogcart is
round," she said.  "Are you ready, Ju, dearest?  Dear little Judy!
be brave, little old woman."

But Judy was white as death, and utterly limp.  She suffered
Esther to put her hat on, to help her into her new jacket, to put
her gloves into her hand.  She submitted to being kissed by the
whole family, to be half carried downstairs by Esther, to be
kissed again by the girls, then by the two good-natured domestics,
who, in spite of her peccadilloes, had a warm place in their hearts
for her.

Esther and Pip lifted her into the dogcart; and she sat in a
little, huddled-up way, looking down at the group on the veranda
with eyes that were absolutely tragic in their utter despair.  Her
father came out, buttoning his overcoat, and saw the look.

"What foolishness is this?" he said irascibly--"Esther-great
heavens! are you making a goose of yourself, too?"--there were
great tears glistening in his wife's beautiful eyes.  "Upon my
soul, one would think I was going to take the child to be hanged,
or at least was going to leave her in a penitentiary."

A great dry sob broke from Judy's white lips.

"If you'll let me stay, Father, I'll never do another thing to vex
you; and you can thrash me instead, ever so hard."

It was her last effort, her final hope, and she bit her poor
quivering lip till it bled while she waited for his answer.

"Let her stay--oh! do letter stay, we'll be good always," came
in a chorus from the veranda.  And, "Let her stay, John, PLEASE!"
Esther called in a tone as entreating as any of the children.

But the Captain sprang into the dogcart and seized the reins from
Pat in a burst of anger.

"I think you're all demented!" he cried.  "She's going to a
thoroughly good home, I've paid a quarter in advance already,
and I can assure you good people I'm not going to waste it."

He gave the horse a smart touch with the whip, and in a minute
the dogcart had flashed out of the gate, and the small, unhappy
face was lost to sight.



CHAPTER VI  The Sweetness of Sweet Sixteen

"She is not yet so old
But she may learn: happier than this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn."


Meg's hair had always been pretty, but during the last two months
she had cut herself a fringe, and begun to torture it up in curl
papers every night.  And in her private, drawer she kept a jam tin
filled with oatmeal, that she used in the water every time she
washed, having read it was a great complexion beautifier.  And
nightly she rubbed vaseline on her hands and slept in old kid
gloves.  And her spare money went in the purchase of "Freckle
Lotion," to remove that slight powdering of warm brown sun-kisses
that somehow lent a certain character to her face.

All these things were the outcome of being sixteen, and having
found a friend of seventeen.

Aldith MacCarthy learnt French from the same teacher that Meg
was going to twice a week, and after an exchange of chocolates,
hair-ribbons, and family confidences a friendship sprang up.

Aldith had three grown-up sisters, whom she aped in everything,
and was considerably wiser in the world than simple-minded,
romantic Meg.

She lent Meg novels, "Family Herald Supplements", "Young Ladies'
Journals", and such publications, and the young girl took to them
with avidity, surprised at the new world into which they took her;
for Charlotte Yonge and Louisa Alcott and Miss Wetherall had hitherto
formed her simple and wholesome fare.

Meg began to dream rose-coloured dreams of the time when her fair,
shining hair should be gathered up into "a simple knot at the back
of her head" or "brushed into a regal coronet," these being the
styles in which the heroines in the novels invariably dressed
their hair.  A pigtail done in three was very unromantic.  That
was why, as a sort of compromise, she cut herself a fringe and
began to frizz out the end of her plait.  Her father stared at her,
and said she looked like a shop-girl, when first he noticed it,
and Esther told her she was a stupid child; but the looking-glass
and Aldith reassured her.

The next thing was surreptitiously to lengthen her dresses, which
were at the short-long stage.  In the privacy of her own bedroom
she took the skirts of two or three of her frocks off the band,
inserted a piece of lining for lengthening purposes, and then
added a frill to the waists of her bodices to hide the join.  This
dropped the skirts a good two inches, and made her look quite a
tall, slim figure, as she was well aware.

And none of these things were very harmful.

But Aldith gradually grew dissatisfied with her waist.

"You're at least twenty-three, Marguerite," she said once, quite in
a horrified way. She never called her friend Meg, pronouncing that
name to be "too domestic and altogether unlovely."

Meg glanced from her own waist to her friend's slender, beautiful
one, and sighed profoundly.  "What ought I to be?" she said in a
low tone; and Aldith had answered, "Eighteen--or nineteen,
Marguerite, at the most; true symmetrical grace can never he
obtained with a waist twenty-three inches round."

Aldith had not only made statements and comparisons, she had given
her friend practical advice, and shown her how the thing was to be
done.  And every night and morning Meg pulled away ruthlessly
at her corset laces, and crushed her beautiful little body into
narrower space.  She had already brought it within a girdle of
twenty-one inches, which was a clear saving of two, and she had
taken in all her dresses at the seams.

But she gave up the evening game of cricket, and she never made one
at rounders now, much to the others' disgust.  No one, to look at
the sweet blossom-like face, and soft, calm eyes, could have
guessed what torture was being felt beneath the now pretty,
welt-fitting dress body.  To walk quickly was positive pain; to
stoop, almost agony; but she endured it all with a heroism
worthy of a truly noble cause.

"How long shall I have to go on like this, Aldith?" she asked
once faintly, after a French lesson that she had scarcely been
able to sit through.

And the older girl answered carelessly, "Oh, you mustn't leave
it off, of course, but you don't feel it at all after a bit."

With which assurance Meg pursued her painful course.

Esther, the only person in a position to exercise any authority
in the matter, had not noticed at all, and, indeed, had she done,
so would not have thought very gravely of it, for it was only
four years since she, too, had been sixteen, and a "waist" had
been the most desirable thing on earth.

Once she had said unwittingly,

"What a nice little figure you are getting, Meg; this new
dressmaker certainly fits better than Miss Quinn"; and foolish
Meg, with a throb of delight, had redoubled her efforts.

Lynx-eyed Judy would have found her out long ago, and laughed her
to utter shame, but unfortunately for Meg's constitution she
was still at school, it being now the third month of her
absence.

Aldith only lived about twenty minutes' walk from Misrule, so
the two girls were always together.  Twice a week they went down
to town in the river-boat to learn how to inquire, in polite
French, "Has the baker's young daughter the yellow hat, brown
gloves, and umbrella of the undertaker's niece?" And twice a
week, after they had answered irrelevantly, "No, but the surgeon
had some beer, some mustard, and the dinner-gong," Aldith conducted
her friend slowly up and down that happy hunting-ground of
Sydney youth and fashion--the Block.  "Just see how many hats
I'll get taken off," Miss Aldith would say as they started; and
by the end of the time Meg would say longingly, "How lovely it must
be to know crowds of gentlemen like you do."

Sometimes one or two of them would stop and exchange a word or two,
and then Aldith would formally introduce Meg; often, however, the
latter, who was sharp enough for all her foolishness, would fancy
she detected a patronizing, amused air in these gentlemen's
manners.  As, indeed, there often was; they were chiefly men
whom Aldith had met at dances and tennis in her own home; and
who thought that young lady a precocious child who wanted keeping
in the schoolroom a few more years.

One day Aldith came to Misrule brimming over with mysterious
importance.  "Come down the garden, Marguerite," she said,
taking no notice whatever of Baby, who had, with much difficulty,
beguiled her eldest sister into telling her the ever delightful
legend of the three little pigs.

"Oh, no, by the hair of my chiny-chin-chin, then I'll huff and
I'll puff and I'll blow your house in," had only been said twice,
and the exciting part was still to come.

Baby looked up with stormy eyes.

"Go away, Aldiff," she said.

"Miss MacCarthy,--Baby, dear," Meg suggested, gently, catching Aldith's
half-scornful smile.

"ALDIFF," repeated Baby obstinately.  Then she relented, and put
one caressing little arm round her sister's neck.

"I will say Miff MacCarfy iss you will say ze uzzer little pig,
too."

"Oh, send her away, Marguerite, do," Aldith said impatiently,
"I have an enthralling secret to tell you, and I'll have to go soon."

Meg looked interested immediately.

"Run away, Baby, dear," she said, kissing the disappointed little
face; "go and play Noah's Ark with Bunty, and I'll finish the
piggies to-night or to-morrow."

"But I want them NOW" Baby said insistently.

Meg pushed her gently aside.  "No, run away, pet--run away at once
like a good girl, and I'll tell you Red Riding Hood, too, to-morrow."

Baby looked up at her sister's guest."

"You are a horrid old pig, Aldiff MacCatfy," she said, with slow
emphasis, "an' I hates you hard, an' we all hates you here, 'ceps Meg;
and Pip says you're ze jammiest girl out, an' I wis' a drate big ziant
would come and huff and puff and blow you into ze middlest part of
ze sea."

Aldith laughed, a little aggravating grown-up laugh, that put the
finishing touch to Baby's auger.  She put out her little hand and
gave the guest's arm in its muslin sleeve a sharp, scientific pinch
that Pip had taught her.  Then she fled madly away down the long
paddocks, to the bit of bush beyond.

"Insufferable," Aldith muttered angrily, and it needed all Meg's
apologies and coaxings to get her into an amiable frame of mind
again, and to induce her to communicate the enthralling secret.

At last, however, it was imparted, with great impressiveness.
Aldith's eldest sister was engaged, engaged to be married!  Oh!
wasn't it heavenly?  Wasn't it romantic?--and to the gentleman with
the long fair moustache who had been so much at their house lately.

"I knew it would come--I have seen it coming for a long time.
Oh! I'm not easily blinded;" Aldith said.  "I know true love when
I see it.  Though certainly for myself I should prefer a dark
moustache, should not you, Marguerite?"

"Ye--es," said Meg.  Her views were hardly formed yet on the
subject.

"Jet black, with waxed ends, very stiff," Aldith continued
thoughtfully, "and a soldierly carriage, and very long black
lashes."

"So should I," Meg said, fired in a moment.  "Like Guy Deloraine
in 'Angelina's Ambition'."  Aldith put her arm more tightly round
her friend.

"Wouldn't it be HEAVENLY, Marguerite, to be engaged--you and I?"
she said, in a tone of dreamy rapture.  "To have a dark,
handsome man with proud black eyes just dying with love for you,
going down on his knees, and giving you presents, and taking you
out and all--oh, Marguerite, just think of it!"

Melt's eyes looked wistful.  "We're not old enough, though, yet,"
she said with a sigh.

Aldith tossed her head.  "That's nonsense; why, Clara Allison is
only seventeen, and look at your own stepmother.  Plenty of girls
are actually married at sixteen, Marguerite, and a man proposed
my sister Beatrice when she was only fifteen."  Meg looked
impressed and thoughtful.

Then Aldith rose to go.  "Mind you're in time for the boat
to-morrow," she said, as they reached the gate; "and, Marguerite,
be sure you make yourself look very nice--wear your cornflower
dress, and see if Mrs. Woolcot will lend you a pair of her gloves,
your grey ones are just a little shabby, aren't they, dear?"

"H'm," said Meg, colouring.

"And Mr. James Graham always comes back on that boat, and the two
Courtney boys--Andrew Courtney told Beatrice he thought you seemed
a nice little thing; he often notices you, he says, because you
blush so."

"I can't help it," Meg said, unhappily.  "Aldith, how ought the
ribbon to go on my hat?  I'm going to retrim it again."

"Oh, square bows, somewhat stiff, and well at the side," the oracle,
said.  "I'm glad you're going to, dear, it looked just a wee bit
dowdy, didn't it?"  Meg coloured again.

"Have you done your French?" she said, as she pulled open the
gate.

"In a way," Aldith said carelessly.  Then she put up her chin,
"Those frowzy-looking Smiths always make a point of having no
mistakes; and, Janet Green, whose hats are always four seasons
behind the fashions; I prefer to have a few errors, just to show
I haven't to work hard and be a teacher after I---"

But just here she stumbled and fell down her full length in a most
undignified manner, right across the muddy sidewalk.

It was a piece of string and Baby's vengeance.



CHAPTER VII  "What Say You to Falling in Love?"


Meg was looking ill, there was no doubt about it.  Her pretty
pink-and-white complexion was losing its fresh look, a slightly
irritable expression had settled round a mouth that a few months
back had seemed made for smiles only.  And terribly unromantic
fact, her nose was quite florid-looking at times. Now a heroine
may have the largest, deepest, and most heavily lashed eyes
imaginable; she may have hair in very truth like the gold "mown
from a harvest's middle floor"; she may have lips like cherries
and teeth like pearls, and a red nose will be so utterly fatal
that all these other charms will pass unnoticed.  It cost Meg real
anguish of spirit. She carefully read all the Answers to Correspondents
in the various papers Aldith lent her in search of a remedy, but
nearly everyone seemed to be asking for recipes to promote the
growth of the eyelashes or to prevent _embonpoint_.  Not one she
chanced on said, "A red nose in a girl is generally caused by
indigestion or tight-lacing."  She asked Aldith to suggest something,
and that young person thought that vaseline and sulphur mixed
together, and spread over the afflicted member, would have the
desired effect.  So every night Meg fastened her bedroom door
with a wedge of wood, keys being unknown luxuries at Misrule,
and anointed her, poor little nose most carefully with the
greasy mixture, lying all night on her back to prevent it
rubbing off on the pillow.

Once Pip had forced his way into demand a few stitches for his
braces which had split, and she had been compelled to wrap her
whole face hastily up in a towel and declare she had violent
neuralgia, and he must go to Esther or one of the servants.  Had
he seen and known the cause there would have been no end to the
teasing.

Nowadays Meg spent a great deal of time in her bedroom, that she
had all to herself while Judy was away.  In its privacy she
trimmed and retrimmed her hats, altered her dresses, read her
novels, and sat in front of the looking-glass with her hair down,
dreaming of being quite grown up and in love.  For just now both
to Aldith, and herself that state of life seemed the only one
altogether lovely and desirable.  Meg used to curl herself up in a
big easy-chair that had drifted to her room because its springs
were broken, and dream long, beautiful, hopeless dreams of a lover
with "long black lashes and a soldierly carriage."  Of course it
was highly reprehensible to have such thoughts at the tender age
of sixteen, but then the child had no mother to check that erring
imagination, and she was a daughter of the South.

Australian girls nearly always begin to think of "lovers and
nonsense," as middlefolks call it, long before their English aged
sisters do.  While still in the short-frock period of existence,
and while their hair is still free-flowing, they take the keenest
interest in boys--boys of neighbouring schools, other girls' brothers,
young bank clerks, and the like.  Not because they would be good
playmates, but because they look at them in the light of possible
"sweethearts."  I do not say English girl children are free from this.
By no means; in every school there may be found one or two this way
inclined, giggling, forward young things who want whipping and
sending to play cricket or dolls again.  But in this land of
youthfulness it is the rule more frequently than the exception, and
herein lies the chief defect of the very young Australian girl.
She is like a peach, a beautiful, smooth, rich peach, that has come
to ripeness almost in a day, and that hastens to rub off the soft,
delicate bloom that is its chief charm, just to show its bright,
warm colouring more clearly.  Aldith had, to her own infinite
satisfaction, brushed away her own "bloom," and was at present
busily engaged in trying to remove Meg's, which was very soft
and lovely before she touched it.  The novels had taken away a
little, and the "Block" a little more, but, Meg was naturally
freshminded, and it took time to make much difference.  Just now,
under her friend's tutelage, she was being inducted into the
delightful mysteries of sweethearting, and for the time, it quite
filled her some what purposeless young life.  But it all ended
with an adventure that years afterwards used to make her cheeks
tingle painfully at the thought.

After the bi-weekly French lesson, as I have said, the two friends
used to come back together in the river-boat at five o'clock.
And by this boat there always came two boys by the name of Courtney,
and a third boy, Aldith's particular property, James Graham.  Now
the young people had become known to each other at picnics and the
like in the neighbourhood, but the acquaintance, instead of
ripening on frequent meeting into a frank, pleasant friendship,
had taken the turn of secrecy and silly playing at love.  James
Graham was in a lawyer's office, a young articled cleric of
seventeen in undue haste to be that delightful thing, a man.
He carried a cane, and was very particular about his hat and
necktie and his boots, which generally were tan.  And he had
the faintest possible moustache, that he caressed with great
frequency; and that privately Aldith thought adorable.  Aldith's
pert, sprightly manner pleased him, and in a very short time
they had got to the period of passing notes into each other's
hands and sighing sentimentally.  Not that the notes contained
much harm, they were generally of rather a formal character.

"My dear' Miss MacCarthy," one would run--

"Why were you not on the boat yesterday?  I looked for you till
it was no use looking longer, and then the journey was blank.
How charmingly that big hat suits you, and those jonquils at
your neck.  Might l beg one of the flowers? just one, please,
Aldith.

Your devoted friend,
James Graham."

And Aldith's, written on a sheet of her note-book with a pink
programme pencil that she always kept in her purse, might be
no worse than:

"Dear Mr. Graham,
"What EVER can you want these flowers at my neck for?  They have
been there all day, and are dead and spoiled.  I can't IMAGINE what
good they'll be to you.  Still, of course, if you REALLY care for
them you shall have them.  I am so glad you like this hat.  I shall
always like it NOW.  Did you REALLY miss me yesterday?  I had gone
to have my photo taken.  Marguerite thinks it very good indeed,
but I am SURE it flatters me TOO much.

 Yours truly,
L. Aldith Evelyn MacCarthy."

Now Mr. James Graham had a great friend in one of the before-mentioned
Courtney boys, Andrew by name.  He was a handsome lad of eighteen,
still a schoolboy, but possessed of fascinating manners and a pair
of really beautiful eyes.

And, since his friend and companion Jim had taken to "having fun"
with "the girl MacCarthy," he objected to being left out in the
cold.  So he began to pay marked attentions to Meg, who blushed
right up to her soft, pretty fringe every time he spoke to her,
and looked painfully conscious and guilty if he said anything at
all complimentary to her.

The other boy, Alan Courtney, was very tall and broad-shouldered,
and not at all good-looking.  He had a strong, plain face, grey
eyes deeply set, and brown hair that looked as if he was in a
constant state of rumpling it up the wrong way.  He was a University
student, and a great footballer, and he never diverted himself on
the long homeward journey in the way Andrew and his friend did.

He used generally to give a half-contemptuous nod as he passed
the little group, uncovering his head for the shortest possible
period consistent with civility, and making his way to the far
end of the boat.  One time as he passed them Aldith was drooping
her lashes and using her eyes with great effect, and Meg was almost
positive she heard him mutter under his breath, "Silly young fools!"
He used to smoke at his end of the boat--cigars at the beginning
of term and a short, black, villainous-looking pipe at the end--
and Meg used secretly to think how manly he looked, and to sigh
profoundly.

For I may as well tell you now as later what this foolish little
thing had done after a few months' course of Aldith and novels.
She had fallen in love as nearly as it is possible for sweet sixteen
to do; and it was with Alan, who had no good looks nor pleasant
manners--not Andrew, who had speaking eyes, and curls that "made
his forehead like the rising sun"; not Andrew, who gave her tender
glances and conversation peppermints that said "My heart is thine,"
but Alan, who took no notice whatever of her beyond an occasional
half-scornful bow.

Poor little Meg!  She was very miserable in these days, and yet it
was a kind of exquisite misery that she hugged to her to keep it
warm.  No one guessed her secret.  She would have died rather than
allow even Aldith to get a suspicion of it, and accepted Andrew's
notes and smiles as if there was nothing more she wanted.  But she
grew a trifle thin and large-eyed, and used to make copious notes
in her diary every night, and to write a truly appalling quantity
of verses, in which "heart" and "part," "grieve" and "leave,"
"weep" and "keep," and "sigh" and "die," were most often the
concluding words of the lines.  She endured Andrew for several
reasons.  He was Alan's brother for one thing, and was always
saying things about "old Al," and recording his prowess on the
football field; and Aldith might discover her secret if she gave
him the cold shoulder altogether.  Besides this Andrew had the
longest eyelashes she had ever seen and she must have somebody
to say pretty things to her, even if it was not the person she
would have wished it to be.

One day things came to a crisis.

"No more trips on the dear old boat for a month," Aldith remarked,
from her corner of the cabin.

"This is appalling! Whatever do you mean, Miss MacCarthy?" James
Graham said, with exaggerated despair in his voice.

"Monsieur H--- has given the class a month's holiday.  He is going
to Melbourne," Aldith returned, with a sigh.

Meg echoed it as in duty bound, and Andrew said fiercely that
hanging was too good for Monsieur H---.  What did he mean by
such inhuman conduct, he should like to know; and however were Jim
and himself to maintain life in the meantime?

"It was James who speedily thought of a way out."

"Couldn't we go for a walk somewhere one evening--just we four?"
he said insinuatingly.

Aldith and Andrew thought the proposal a brilliant one; and though
Meg had at first shaken her head decidedly, in the end she was
prevailed upon, and promised faithfully to go.

They were to meet in a bush paddock adjoining the far one belonging
to Misrule, to walk for about an hour, returning by half-past seven,
before it grew dusk.

"I am going to ask you for something that day, Meg," Andrew whispered
just as they were parting.  "I wonder if I shall get it."

Meg flushed in her nervous, conscious way, and wondered to herself
for a moment whether he intended to ask for a lock of her hair, a
thing Graham had already obtained from Aldith.

"What?" she said unwillingly.

"A kiss," he whispered.

The next minute the others had joined them, and there was no chance
for the indignant answer that trembled on her lips.  She had even
to shake hands, to appear as if nothing had happened, and to part
apparently good friends.

"Half-past six sharp, Marguerite.  I will never forgive you if you
don't come," Aldith said, as they parted at her gate.

"I--you---Oh, Aldith, I don't see how I can come," Meg faltered,
the crimson in her cheeks again.  "I've never done anything like it
before.  I'm sure it's not right."

But the curl, in Aldith's lip made her ashamed of herself.

"You're just twelve, Marguerite;" the young lady said calmly:
"you're not a bit more than twelve.  You'd better get a roll again,
and a picture-book with morals.  I'll ask Andrew to buy you one
and a bit of cord, too, to tie you in your high chair in the
nursery."

Such sarcasm was too much for Meg.  She promised hastily and
unconditionally to be on the spot at the time mentioned, and fled
away up the path to obey the summons of the wildly clanging
tea-bell.

But for the two intervening days her secret hung upon her like a
burden of guilt, and she longed inexpressibly for a confidante
who would advise her what to do at this distressing issue.  Not
Judy: that young person was too downright, too sensible, too much
of a child and a boy--she would never dare to tell her anything of
the sort.   She could fancy the scorn in her sister's large clear
eyes, the ringing laughter such a tale would evoke, the scathing,
clever ridicule that would fall on her shrinking shoulders.  Not
Esther: her very position as stepmother precluded such an idea,
and, besides that, the General's gums were gradually disclosing
wee white double pearls, and his health thereby was affected,
and causing her too much anxiety to allow her, to notice Meg's
oppression of mind.

By the night decided upon, the child had worked herself up into a
strong state of excitement.  Half-past six was the time settled
upon, and, as she knew, it was broad daylight even then.  She
felt she really dare not, could not go.  Suppose her father or
Esther, some of her scornful young sisters or brothers, should
be about and see the meeting, or any of the neighbours--why, she
could never survive the shame of it!  Yet go she must, or Aldith
would despise her.  Besides, she had made up her mind fully to tell
Andrew plainly she could not allow him to talk to her as he had
been doing.  After that last terrible whisper, she felt it
necessary that she should let him understand clearly that she did
not approve of his conduct, and would be "his friend," but
nothing more.

But why had they not thought of deciding on an hour when it would
be darker? she kept saying to herself: there would be no danger
of being seen then; she could slip out of the house without any
difficulty, and run through the paddocks under cover of the
kindly dusk; whereas if it was light, and she tried to creep away,
at least two or three of the children would fly after her and
offer generously to "come too."

At last, too afraid to go in the light, and unwilling for Aldith
to reproach her for not going at all, she did in her excitement
and desperation a thing so questionable that for long after she
could not think of it without horror.

"Dear Mr. Courtney," she wrote, sitting down at her dressing-table,
and scribbling away hurriedly in pencil:

"It would be horrid going for the walk so early.  Let us go later,
when it is quite dark.  It will be EVER so much nicer, for no one
will be able to see us.  And let us meet at the end of the paddocks
where the bush grows thickly, it will be more private.  I am writing
to Aldith to tell her to go at that time, she will tell Mr. Graham.

Yours sincerely,
M. Woolcot.

"P.S.--I must ask you, please, not to kiss me.  I should be very
angry indeed if you did.  I don't like kissing at all."

She wrote the last paragraph in a nervous hurry for she had a dread
that he might fulfil his promise, if she did not forbid him as soon
as they met.  Then she slipped it into an envelope and addressed it
to A. Courtney, Esq., it never having even occurred to her for a
moment that there was anything at all strange or unconventional in
a young girl making such a point that the meeting should be in the
dark.

Next she wrote a few lines of explanation to Aldith, and told her
to be sure to be in the paddock by half-past eight, and she (Meg)
would slip out when the children were going to bed and unlikely
to notice.

And then she went out into the garden to find messengers for
her two notes.  Little Flossie Courtney had been spending the
afternoon with Nellie, and Meg called her back from the gate
just as she was going home, and, unseen by the children, entrusted
the note to her.

"'Give it to your brother Andrew the minute he comes from school,"
she whispered, popping a big chocolate at the same time into
the little girl's mouth.  Bunty was next bribed, with a promise of
the same melting delicacies, to run up to Aldith's with the other
letter, and Meg breathed freely ago feeling she had skilfully
averted the threatening danger attendant on the evening
meeting.

But surely the notes were fated!  Bunty delivered his safely
enough to the housemaid at the MacCarthys', and in answer to
the girl's question "s'posed there was an answer, girls always
'spected one to nothing."

Aldith was confined to her room with a sudden severe cold, and
wrote a note to her friend, telling her how she was too ill to be
allowed out, and had written to Mr. Graham, and Mr. Courtney,
too, postponing the walk for a week.

Now this note, in its pale pink triangular envelope, was
transferred to Bunty's pocket among his marbles and peanuts and
string.  And, as might be expected, he fell in with some other
choice spirits on the return journey, and was soon on his knees
by the roadside playing marbles.

He lost ten, exclusive of his best agate, fought a boy who had
unlawfully possessed himself of his most cherished "conny," and
returned home with saddened spirits an hour later, only to find
as he went through the gate that he had lost Aldith's dainty
little note.

Now Meg had promised him eight chocolate walnuts on his return,
and if this same boy had one weakness more pronounced than others,
it was his extreme partiality for this kind of confectionery, and
he had not tasted one for weeks, so no wonder it almost broke his
heart to think they would be forfeited.

"I know she'll be stingy enough to say I haven't earned them, just
'cause I dropped that girl's stupid letter," he said to himself,
miserably, "and I don't suppose there was anything in it but
'Dearest Marguerite, let us always tell each other our secrets';
I heard her say that twice, and of course she writes it, too."
Then temptation came upon him swiftly, suddenly.

By nature Bunty was the most arrant little storyteller ever born,
and it was only Judy's fearless honesty and strongly expressed
scorn for equivocation that had kept him moderately truthful.
But Judy was miles away, and could not possibly wither him up
with her look of utter contempt.  He was at the nursery door now,
turning the handle with hesitating hands.

"What a time you've been," said Meg from the table, where she was
mending a boxful of her gloves.  "Well, what did she say?"

Just at her elbow was the gay _bonbonniere_ containing the brown,
cream-encrusted walnuts.

"She said, 'All right,'" said Bunty gruffly.

Meg counted the eight chocolates out into his little grimy hand,
and resumed her mending with a relieved sigh.  And Bunty, with a
defiant, shamed look in his eyes, stuffed the whole of the
sweets into his mouth at once, as if to preclude the possibility
of a sudden repentance.

The other note was equally unfortunate.  Little Flossie went
home, her thoughts intent upon a certain Grannie bonnet Nell
had promised to make for her new doll.

"Gween with pink stwings," she was saying softly to herself as
she climbed the steps to her own door.

Alan was lying on the veranda lounge, smoking his black pipe.

"Gween what?"  he laughed--"guinea-pigs or kangaroos?"

"Clawice Maud's bonnet," the little girl said, and entered forthwith
into a grave discussion with him as to the colour he thought more
suitable for that waxen lady's winter cloak.

Then she turned to go in.

"What's that sticking out of your wee pocket, Flossie girl?"  he
said, as she brushed past him.  She stopped a second and felt.

"Oh, nearly I didn't wemember, an' I pwomised I would--it's a
letter for you, Alan," she said, and gave Meg's poor little epistle
up into the very hands of the Philistine.



CHAPTER VIII  A Catapult and a Catastrophe


   "Oh, sweet pale Margaret,
    Oh, rare pale Margaret,
    What lit your eyes with tearful power?"


The dusk had fallen very softly and tenderly over the garden,
and the paddocks, and the river.  There was just the faintest
wind at the waters edge, but it seemed almost too tired after the
hot, long day to breathe and make ripples.  Very slowly the grey,
still light deepened, and a white star or two came out and blinked
up away in the high, far heavens.  Down behind the gum trees,
across the river, there was a still whiter moon; a stretch of
water near was beginning to smile up to it.  Meg hoped it
would not climb past the tree-tops before eight o'clock, or the
long paddocks would be flooded, with light and she would be seen.
At tea-time, and during the early part of the evening, she was
preoccupied and inclined to be irritable in her anxiety, and she
snubbed Bunty two or three times quite unkindly.

He had been hovering about her ever since six o'clock in almost
a pitiable way.

It was characteristic of this small boy that when he had been tempted
into departing from the paths of truth he was absolutely wretched
until he had confessed, and rubbed his little unclean hands into
his wet eyes until he was "a sight to dream of, not to tell."

Pip said it was because he was a coward, and had not the moral
courage to go to sleep with a lie on his soul, for fear he might
wake up and see an angel with a fiery sword standing by his
bedside.  And I must sorrowfully acknowledge this seemed a truer
view of the case than believing the boy was really impressed
with the heinousness of his offence and anxious to make amends.
For the very next day, if occasion sufficiently strong offered,
he would fall again, and the very next night would creep up to
somebody and whimper, with his knuckles in his eyes, that he had
"t--t--told a s--s--story, boo--hoo!"

By seven o'clock this particular, evening he was miserably
repentant; several tears had trickled down, his cheeks and mingled
with the ink of the map he was engaged upon for Miss Marsh.  He
established himself at Meg's elbow, and kept looking up into her
face in a yearning love-and-forgive-me kind of way that she found
infinitely embarrassing; for she had begun to suspect, from his
strange conduct, that he had in some way learned the contents
of her note, and was trying to discourage her from her enterprise.
The more he gazed at her the redder and more uncomfortable she
became.

"You can have my new c--c--catapult," he whispered once, giving
her a tearful, imploring look, that she interpreted as an entreaty
to stay safely at home.

At last the clock had travelled up to eight, and the children being
engaged in a wordy warfare over the possession of a certain stray
dog that had come to Misrule in the afternoon, she slipped out of
the room unobserved.  No one was in the hall, and she picked up
the becoming, fleecy cloud she had hidden there, twisted it round
her head, and crept out of the side door and along the first path.

Down in the garden the ground was white with fallen rose leaves,
and the air full of their dying breath; a clump of pampas grass
stood tall and soft against the sky; some native trees, left
growing among the cultivated shrubs, stretched silver-white
arms up to the moon and gave the little hurrying figure a ghostly
kind of feeling.  Out of the gate and into the first paddock,
where the rose scent did not come at all, and only a pungent smell
of wattle was in the thin, hushed air.  More gum trees, and more
white, ghostly arms; then a sharp movement near the fence, a thick,
sepulchral whisper, and a stifled scream from Meg.

"Here's the c--c--c--catapult, M--Meg; t---take it," Bunty said,
his face white and miserable.

"You little stupid! What do you mean coming creeping here like
this?" Meg said, angry as soon as her heart began to beat
again.

"I only w--wanted to p--p--please you, M--M-Meggie," the little
boy said, with a bitter sob in his voice.

He had put both his arms round her waist, and was burying his nose
in her white muslin dress.  She shook him off hastily.

"All right; there--thanks," she said.  "Now go home, Bunty;
I want to have a quiet walk in the moonlight by myself."

He screwed his knuckles as far into his eyes as they would go,
his mouth opened, and his lower lip dropped down, down.

"I t--t--told y--y--you a b--b--big st--st--story;" he wept,
rocking to and fro where he stood.

"Did you?  Oh, all right!  Now go home," she said impatiently.
"You always ARE telling stories, Bunty, you know, so I'm not
surprised. There-go along."

"But--but I'm--must tell you all ab--ab--about it," he said,
still engaged in driving his eyes into his head.

"No, you needn't; I'll forgive you this time," she said
magnanimously, "only don't do it again.  Now run away at once,
or you won't have your map done, and miss Marsh will punish you."

His eyes returned to their proper position, likewise his hands.
His heart was perfectly light again as he turned to go back to the
house.  When he had gone a few steps he came back.

"D'ye want that catapult very much, Meg?" he said gently.
"You're only a girl, so I don't 'spect it would be very much
good to you, would it?"

"No, I don't want it.  Here, take it, and hurry back: think of
your map," Meg returned, in a very fever of impatience at his
slowness.

And then Bunty, utterly happy once more, turned and ran away gaily
up to the house.  And Meg let down the slip-rail, put it back in
its place with trembling fingers, and fled in wild haste through
the two remaining paddocks.

The wattle-scrub at the end was very quiet; there was not a rustle,
not a sound of a voice, not a sound of the affected little laugh
that generally told when Aldith was near.

Meg stopped breathless, and peered among the bushes; there was a
tall figure leaning against the fence.

"Andrew!" she said in a sharp whisper, and forgetting in her
anxiety that she never called him by his Christian name--"where
are the others?  Hasn't Aldith come?"

There was the smell of a cigar, and, looking closely, she saw to
her horror it was Alan.

"Oh!" she said, in an indescribable tone.

Her heart gave one frightened, shamed bound, and then seemed
to stop beating altogether.

She looked up, at him as if entreating him not to have too bad an
opinion of her; but his face wore the contemptuous look she had
grown to dread and his lips were finely curled.

"I--I only came out for a little walk; it is such a beautiful
evening," she said, with miserable lameness; and then in a tone
of justification she added, "it's my father's paddock, too."

He leaned back against he fence and looked down at her.

"Flossie gave me your note, and as it seemed addressed to me, and
I was told it was far me; I opened it," he said.

"You KNEW it was for Andrew," she said not looking at him, however.

"So I presumed when I had read it," he returned slowly; "but
Andrew has not come back to-night yet, so I came instead; it's all
the same as long as it's a boy, isn't it?"

The girl made no reply, only put her hand up and drew the cloud
more closely round her head.

His lips curled a little more.

"And I know how to kiss, too, I assure you.  I am quite a good hand
at it, though you may not think so.  Oh yes, I know you said you
did not want to be kissed; but then, girls always say that, don't
they?--even when they expect it most."

Still Meg did not speak, and the calm, merciless voice went on.

"I am afraid it is hardly dark enough for you, is it?  The moon
is very much in the way, do you not think so?  Still, perhaps we
can find a darker place farther on, and then I can kiss you without
danger.  What is the matter?--are you always as quiet as this with
Andrew?"

"Oh, DON'T!" said Meg, in a choking voice.

The mocking tone died instantly out of his voice, "Miss Meg, you
used to seem such a nice little girl," he said quietly; "what
have you let that horrid MacCarthy girl spoil you for?  For she is
horrid, though you may not think so."

Meg did not speak or move, and he went on with a gentle earnestness
that she had not thought him capable of..

"I have watched her on the boat, systematically going to work to
spoil you, and can't help thinking of the pity of it.  I imagined
how I should feel if my little sister Flossie ever fell in with
such a girl, and began to flirt and make herself conspicuous,
and I wondered would you mind if I spoke to you about it.
Are you very angry with me, Miss Meg?"

But Meg leaned her head against the rough fence and began to
sob-little, dry, heartbroken sobs that went to the boy's warm
heart.

"I oughtn't to have spoken as I did at first--I was a perfect
brute," he said remorsefully; "forgive me, won't you?  Please,
little Miss Meg--I would rather cut my hand off than really hurt
you."

This last was a little consoling, at any rate, and Meg lifted her
face half a second, white and pathetic in the moonlight, and all
wet with grievous tears.

"I--I--oh! indeed I have not been quite so horrid as you think,"
she said brokenly; "I didn't want to come this walk--and oh!
indeed, indeed, indeed I wouldn't allow ANYONE to kiss me.  Oh,
PLEASE do believe me!"

"I do, I do indeed," he said eagerly; "I only said it because--well,
because I am a great rough brute, and don't know how to talk to a
little, tender girl.  Dear Miss Meg, do shake hands and tell me you
forgive my boorishness."

Meg extended a small white hand, and he shook it warmly.  Then
they walked up the paddocks together, and parted at a broken gate
leading into the garden.

"I'll never flirt again while I live," she said with great
earnestness, as he bade her good-bye; and he answered encouragingly,
"No, I am quite sure you won't--leave it to girls like Aldith, won't
you? you only wanted to be set straight.  Good-bye, little Miss Meg."



CHAPTER IX  Consequences


"However could you do it?
 Some day, no doubt, you'll rue it!"


Meg's troubles were not quite over, however, even yet.  When she
got into the house Nellie met her in the hall and stared at her.

"Where have you been?" she said, a slow wonder in her round eyes.
"I've been hunting and hunting for you."

"What for?" said Meg shortly.

"Oh, Dr. Gormeston and Mrs. Gormeston and two Miss Gormestons are in
the drawing-room, and I think they'll stay for ever and ever."

"Well?" said Meg.

"And the General is ill again, and Esther says she won't leave him
for a second, not if Gog and Magog were down there dying to see
her."

"Well?" said Meg again.

"And Father is as mad as he can be, and is having to keep them
all amused himself.  He's sung 'My sweetheart when a boy' and
'Mona,' and he's told them all about his horses, and now I s'pose
he doesn't know what to do."

"Well, I can't help it," Meg said wearily, and as if the subject
had no interest for her.

"But you'll just have to!" Nell cried sharply, "I've done my
best: he sent out and said we were to go in, and you weren't
anywhere, so there was only Baby and me."

"And what did you do?" Meg asked, curious in spite of herself.

"Oh, Baby talked to Miss Gormeston, and they asked me to play,"
she returned, "so I played the 'Keel Row.'  Only I forgot
till I had finished that it was in two sharps," she added sadly.
"And then Baby told Mrs. Gormeston all about Judy leaving the
General at the Barracks, and being sent to boarding school for it,
and about the green frog Bunty gave her, and, then Father said
we'd better go to bed, and asked why ever you didn't come in."

"I'll go, I'll go," Meg said hastily, "he'll be fearfully cross
to-morrow about it.  Oh! and, Nell, go and tell Martha to
send in the wine and biscuits and things in half an hour."

She flung off her cloud, smoothed her ruffled hair, and peeped
in the hall-stand glass to see if the night wind had taken away
the traces of her recent tears.  Then she went into the drawing-roam,
where her father was looking quite heated and unhappy over
his efforts to entertain four guests who were of the class
popularly known as "heavy in hand:"

"Play something, Meg," he said presently, when greetings were
finished, and a silence seemed settling down over them all again;
"or sing something that will be better--haven't you anything you
can sing?"

Now Meg on ordinary occasions had a pleasant, fresh little voice
of her own, that could be listened to with a certain amount of
pleasure, but this evening she was tired and excited and unhappy.
She sang "Within a mile of Edinboro' town," and was exceedingly
flat all through.

She knew her father was sitting on edge all the time, and that her
mistakes were grating on him, and at the end of the song, rather
than turn round immediately and face them all, she began to play
Kowalski's March Hongroise.  But the keys seemed to be rising up
and hitting her hands, and the piano was growing unsteady, and
rocking to and fro in an alarming manner; she made a horrible
jangle as she clutched at the music-holder for safety, and the
next minute swayed from the stool and fell in a dead, faint right
into Dr. Gormeston's arms, providentially extended just in time.

The heavy, heated atmosphere had proved too much for her, in her
unhinged state of mind.  Captain Woolcot was extraordinarily
upset by the occurrence; not one of his children had ever done
such a thing before, and as Meg lay on the sofa, with her
little fair head drooping against the red frilled cushions, her
face white and unconscious, she looked strangely like her mother,
whom he had buried out in the churchyard four years ago.  He went
to the filter for a glass of water, and, as it trickled, wondered
in a dull, mechanical kind of way if his little dead wife thought
he had been too quick in appointing Esther to her kingdom.  And
then, as he stood near the sofa and looked at the death-like face,
he wondered with a cold chill at his heart whether Meg was going
to die, too, and if so would she be able to tell the same little
wife that Esther received more tenderness at his hands than she
had done.

His reverie was interrupted by the doctor's sharp, surprised
voice.  He was talking to Esther, who had been hastily summoned to
the scene, and who had helped to unfasten the pretty bodice.

"Why, the child is tight-laced!" he said; "surely you must
have noticed it, madam.  That pressure, if it has been constant,
has been enough to half kill her.  Chut, chut! faint indeed--
I wonder she has not taken fits or gone into a decline before this."

Then a cloud of trouble came over Esther's beautiful face--she had
failed again in her duty.  Her husband was regarding her almost
gloomily from the sofa, where the little figure lay in its
crumpled muslin dress, and her heart told her these children
were not receiving a mother's care at her hands.

Afterwards, when Meg was safely in bed and the excitement
all over, she went up to her husband almost timidly.

"I'm only twenty; Jack; don't be too hard on me!" she said
with a little sob in her voice.  "I can't be all to them that
she was, can I?"

He kissed the bright, beautiful head against his shoulder,
and comforted her with a tender word or two.  But again and again
that night there came to him Meg's white, still face as it lay on
the scarlet cushions, and he knew the wind that stirred the
curtains at the window had been playing with the long grass in
the churchyard a few minutes since.



CHAPTER X  Bunty in the Light of a Hero


    "'I know him to be valiant.'
     'I was told that by one that knows him better than you.'
     'What's he?'
     'Marry, he told the so himself, and he said he cared not who knew
      it'"


Bunty had been betrayed into telling another story.  It was a
very, big one, and he was proportionately miserable.  Everyone
else had gone out but Meg, who was still in bed after her fainting
fit, and he had been having a lonely game of cricket down in the
paddock by himself.  But even with a brand-new cricket ball this
game palls after a time when one has to bowl and bat and backstop
in solitary state.  So presently he put his bat over into the garden,
and began to throw the ball about in an aimless fashion, while he
cogitated on what he should do next.  His father's hack was standing
away at the farther end of the paddock, and in an idle, thoughtless
way Bunty sauntered down towards it, and then sent his ball spinning
over the ground in its direction "to give it a jump."  Nothing was
further from his thoughts than an idea of hurting the animal, and
when the ball struck it full on the leg, and it moved away limping,
he hastened down to it, white and anxious.

He could see he had done serious mischief by the way the poor
thing held its leg up from the ground and quivered when he touched
it.  Terror seized him forthwith, and he turned hastily round with
his usual idea of hiding in his head.  But to his utter dismay,
when he got half-way back across the paddock he saw his father and
a brother officer come out of the wicket gate leading from the
garden and saunter slowly down in the direction of the horse,
which was a valuable and beautiful one.

In terror at what he had done, he slipped the cricket ball into the
front of his sailor jacket, and, falling hurriedly upon his
knees, began playing an absorbing game of marbles.  His trembling
thumb had hit about a dozen at random when he heard his name called
in stentorian tones.

He rose, brushed the dust from his shaking knees, and walked slowly
down to his father.

"Go and tell Pat I want him instantly," the Captain said.  He
had the horse's leg in his hand and was examining it anxiously.
"If he's not about, send Pip.  I can't think how it's happened--
do you know anything of this, Bunty?"

"No, of course not! I n--never did n--n--nothing," Bunty said with
chattering teeth, but his father was too occupied to notice his
evident guilt, and bade him go at once.

So he went up to the stables and sent Pat posthaste back to his
father.

And then he stole into the house, purloined two apples and a bit
of cake from the dining-room, and went away to be utterly miserable
until he had confessed.

He crept into a disused shed some distance from the house; in days
gone by it had been a stable, and had a double loft over it that
was only to be reached by a ladder in the last stage of dilapidation.
Bunty scrambled up, sat down in an unhappy little heap among some
straw, and began thoughtfully to gnaw an apple.

If ever a little lad was in need of a wise loving, motherly
mother it was this same dirty-faced, heavyhearted one who sat
with his small rough head against a cobwebby beam and muttered
dejectedly, "'Twasn't my fault: 'Twas the horse:"

He fancied something moved in the second loft, which was divided
from the one he was in by a low partition.  "Shoo--shoo, get away!"
he called, thinking it was rats.  He struck the floor several times
with his heavy little boots.

"Shoo!" he said.

"Bunty,"

The boy turned pale to his lips.  That odd, low whisper of his
name, that strange rustle so near him--oh, what COULD it mean?

"Bunty."

Again the name sounded.  Louder this time, but in a tired voice,
that struck him some way with a strange thrill.  The rustling grew
louder, something was getting over the partition, crossing the
floor, coming towards him.  He gave a sob of terror and flung
himself face downwards on the ground, hiding his little blanched
face among the straw.

"Bunty," said the voice again, and a light hand touched his arm.

"Help me--HELP me!" he shrieked.  "Meg--oh! Father--Esther!"

But one hand was hastily put over his mouth and another pulled him
into a sitting position.

He had shut his eyes very tightly, so as not to see the ghostly
visitant that he knew had come to punish him for his sin.  But
something made him open them, and then he felt he could never
close them again for amazement.

For, it was Judy's hand that was over his mouth, and Judy's self
that was standing beside him.

"My golly!" he said, in a tone of stupefaction.  He stared hard
at her to make sure she was real flesh and blood.  "However did
you get here?"

But Judy made no answer.  She merely took the remaining apple
and cake from his hand, and, sitting down, devoured them in
silence.

"Haven't you got any more?" she said anxiously.  Then he
noticed what a tall, gaunt, strange-looking Judy it was.  Her
clothes were hanging round her almost in tatters, her boots were
burst and white with dust, her brown face was thin and sharp,
and her hair matted and rough.

"My golly!" the little boy said again, his eyes threatening
to start out of his head--"my golly, Judy, what have you been
doin'?"

"I--I've run away, Bunty," Judy said, in a quavering voice.
"I've walked all the way from school.  I wanted to see you all
so badly."

"My jiggery!" Bunty said.

"I've thought it all out," Judy continued, pushing back her hair
in a weary moray.  "I can't quite remember everything just now,
I am so tired, but everything will be all right."

"But what'll he say?" Bunty said with frightened eyes, as a
vision of his father crossed his mind.

"He won't know, of course," Judy returned, in a matter-of-fact
manner.  "I shall just live here in this loft for a time, and
you can all come to see me and bring me food and things, and then
presently I'll go back to school."  She sank down among the straw
and shut her eyes in an exhausted way for a minute or two, and
Bunty watched her half fascinated.

"How far is it from your school?" he said at last.

"Seventy-seven miles."  Judy shuddered a little.  "I got a lift
in a luggage train from Lawson to Springwood, and a ride in a cart
for a little way, but I walked the rest.  I've been nearly a week
coming," she added after a pause, and shut her eyes again for quite
a long time.  Then a tear or two of weakness and self-pity trickled
from beneath her black lashes, and made a little clean mark down her
cheeks.  Bunty's throat swelled at the sight of them, he had never
seen Judy cry as long as he could remember.  He patted her thin
hand, he rubbed his head against her shoulder, and said, "Never
mind, old girl," in a thick voice.

But that brought, half a dozen great heavy drop hurrying down from
beneath the closed lashes, and the girl turned over and lay face
downwards to hide them.  Then she struggled up to a sitting position
and actually began to laugh.

"IF the Miss Burtons could see me!" she said.  "Oh, I've managed
everything so beautifully; they think I'm spending a fortnight at
Katoomba--oh, BUNTY, you ought to see the curls Miss Marian Burton
wears plastered at each side of her cheeks!"  She broke off,
laughing almost hysterically, and then coughing till the tears came
back in her eyes.

"Do go and get me something to eat," she said crossly, when she got
her breath--"you might remember I've had nothing to eat since
yesterday morning; only you always were selfish, Bunty."

He got up and moved away in a great hurry.  "What could you eat?
what shall I get?"  he said, and put one leg down the trap-door.

"Anything so long as it's a lot," she said--"ANYTHING!--I feel I
could eat this straw, and crunch up the beams as if they were
biscuits.  I declare I've had to keep my eyes off you, Bunty;
you're so fat I keep longing to pick your bones."

Her eyes shone with a spark of their old fun, but then she began to
cough again, and, after the paroxysm had passed, lay back exhausted.

"Do fetch same of the others," she called faintly, as his head was
disappearing.  "You're not much good alone, you know."

His head bobbed back a moment, and he tried to smile away the pain
her words gave him, for just at that minute he would have died for
her without a murmur.

"I'm awf'ly sorry, Judy," he said gently, "but the others are
all out.  Wouldn't I do?  I'd do anything, Judy please."

Judy disregarded the little sniffle that accompanied the last
words, and turned her face to the wall.

Two big tears trickled down again.

"They MIGHT have stayed in," she said with a sob.  "They might
have known I should try to come.  Where are they?"

"Pip's gone fishing," he said, "and Nell's carrying the basket
for him.  And Baby's at the Courtneys', and Esther's gone to town
with the General.  Oh, and Meg's ill in bed, because her stays were
too tight last night and she fainted."

"I suppose they haven't missed me a scrap," was her bitter
thought, when she heard how everything seemed going on as usual,
while she had been living through so much just to see them all.

Then the odd feeling of faintness came back, and she closed her
eyes again and lay motionless, forgetful of time, place, or hunger.

Bunty sped across the paddock on winged feet; the sight of his
father near the stables gave him a momentary shock, and brought
his own trouble to mind, but he shook it off again and hurried on.
The pantry door was locked.  Martha, the cook, kept it in that
condition generally on account of his own sinful propensities
for making away with her tarts and cakes; it was only by
skilful stratagem he could ever get in, as he remembered
dejectedly.

But Judy's hunger!  Nothing to eat since yesterday morning!

He remembered, with a feeling of pain even now, the horrible
sinking sensation he had experienced last week when for punishment
he had been sent to bed without his tea.  And Judy had forgone
three meals!  He shut his lips tightly, and a light of almost
heroic resolve came into his eyes.  Round at the side of the house
was the window to the pantry; he had often gazed longingly up at it,
but had never ventured to attempt the ascent, for there was a
horrible cactus creeper up the wall.

But now for Judy's sake he would do it or die.  He marched round
the house and up to the side window; no one was about, the whole
place seemed very quiet.  Martha, as he had seen, was cooking in
the kitchen, and the other girl was whitening the front veranda.
He gave one steady look at the great spiky thorns, and the next
minute was climbing up among them.

Oh, how they pierced and tore him!  There was a great, jagged
wound up one arm, his left stocking was ripped away and a deep
red scratch showed across his leg, his hands were bleeding and
quivering with pain.

But he had reached the sill, and that was everything.

He pushed up the narrow window, and with much difficulty
forced his little fat body through.  Then he dropped down on to
a shelf, and lowered himself gingerly on to the floor.  There was
no time to stay to look at his many hurts, he merely regarded
the biggest scratch with rueful eyes, and then began to look around
for provender.  The pantry was remarkably empty--not a sign of
cakes, not a bit of jelly, not a remnant of fowl anywhere.  He cut
a great piece off a loaf, and carefully wrapped some butter in a
scrap of newspaper.  There was some corned beef on a dish, and he
cut off a thick lump and rolled it up with the remains of a
loquat tart.  These parcels he disposed of down the loose front of
his sailor coat, filling up his pockets with sultanas, citron-peel,
currants, and such dainties as the store bottles held.  And then
he prepared to make his painful retreat.

He climbed upon the shelf once more, put his head out of the
window, and gave a look of despair at the cactus.  And even as
he knelt there sounded behind him the sharp click of a turning
key.

He looked wildly round, and there was Martha in the doorway, and
to his utter horror she was talking to his father, who was in the
passage just beyond.

"Row's Embrocation, or arnica," the Captain was saying.  "It is
probably in this pantry, my good girl, because it is the last
place I should expect it to be in.  I left it on my bedroom
mantelpiece, but somebody has seen fit to meddle with it.  Why
in the name of all that is mysterious can't you let my things
alone?"

"And for what should I be after moving it for?"  Martha retorted.
"I don't mix the pastry with it to make it lightsome, leastway
not ordinarily."

She tossed her head, and the action revealed the small, kneeling,
terrified figure at the window.  Now the door was only half open,
and her master was standing just beside it outside, so she only
had the benefit of the spectacle.

Twice she opened her mouth to speak, but Bunty made such
frantic, imploring faces at her than she closed it again, and
even began to examine the bottles on the shelf near the door to
give the boy an opportunity of retreat.

One minute and he would, have been safe--one minute and he would
have been in the thick of the cactus, that had quite lost its terrors.

But the Fates were too strong for him.  And all because Martha
Tomlinson's shoe was don at the heel.  In turning round it twisted
a little under her, and, in trying to recover her balance, she put
out one hand.  And in putting out one hand she knocked over a jug.
And the jug communicated its shock to dish.  Which toppled over,
and coolly pushed the great basin of milk off the shelf on to the floor.
I don't know if ever you have tried to clean a board floor after milk,
but I am sure you can imagine it would be a disagreeable task,
especially if you had scrubbed it well only that morning.  It was hardly
to be wondered at, therefore, that Martha, in her profound irritation
at the disaster, turned angrily round, and, pointing to the figure
now stuck in the window, demanded in an exasperated tone whether
the blessed saints could stand that dratted boy any longer, for she
couldn't, so there.

The Captain took an angry step into the pantry and gave a roar of
command for Bunty to come down.

The boy dropped in an agony of dread and shrinking.

"Always his hands a-pickin' and stealin' and his tongue a-lyin',"
said Martha Tomlinson, gazing unkindly at the unhappy child.

Two, three, four, five angry cuts from the riding-whip in the
Captain's hands, and Bunty had ducked under his arm and fled howling
down the passage and out of the back door.

Away across the paddocks he went, sobbing at every step, but hugely
commending himself for bearing all this for someone else's sake.

He could hardly have believed, had anyone told him previously, that
he could have done anything so absolutely noble, and the thought
comforted him even while the cuts and scratches smarted.  He tried to
stifle his sobs as he reached the shed, and even stuffed half a
handful of currants into his mouth towards that end.

But it was a very tearful, scratched, miserable face that bobbed up
the opening near Judy again.

She did not move, though her eyes were half open, and he knelt down
and shook her shoulder gently.

"Here's some things, Judy--ain't you goin' to eat them?"

She shook her head very slightly.

"Have some corned beef, or some currants; there's some peel, too, if
you'd rather."

She shook her head again.  "Do take them away," she said, with a
little moan.

A look of blank disappointment stole over his small, heated face.

"An' I've half killed myself to get them!  Well, you ARE a mean girl!"
he said.

"Oh, DO go away,":  Judy moaned, moving her head restlessly from
side to side.  "Oh, how my feet ache! no--my head, and my side--oh!
I don't know what it is!"

"I got hit here and here," Bunty said, indicating the places, and
wiping away tears of keen self-pity with his coat sleeve.  "I'm scratched
all over with that beastly old cactus."

"Do you suppose there are many miles more?" Judy said, in such a
quick way that all the words seemed to run into each other. "I've
walked hundreds and hundreds, and haven't got home yet.  I suppose
it's because the world's round, and I'll be walling in at the school
gate again presently."

"Don't be an idjut!" Bunty said gruffly.

"You'll be sure and certain, Marian, never to breathe a word of it;
I've trusted you, and if you keep faith I can go home and come back
and no one will know.  And lend me two shillings, can you?  I've not
got much left.  Bunty, you selfish little pig, you might get me some
milk!  I've been begging and begging of you for hours, and my head is
going to Catherine wheels for want of it."

"Have some corned beef, Judy, dear--oh, Judy, don't be so silly and
horrid after I nearly got killed for you," Bunty said, trying with
trembling fingers to stuff a piece into her mouth.

The little girl rolled over and began muttering again.

"Seventy-seven miles," she said, "and I walked eleven yesterday,
that makes eleven hundred and seventy-seven--and six the day before
because my foot had a blister--that's eleven hundred and eighty-three.
And if I walk ten miles a day I shall get home in eleven hundred and
eighty-three times ten, that's a thousand and--and--oh! what is it?
whatever is it?  Bunty, you horrid little pig, can't you, tell me what
it is?  My head aches too much to work, and a thousand and something
days--that's a year--two years--two years--three years before I get there.
Oh, Pip, Meg, three years! oh, Esther! ask him, ask him to let me come
home!  Three years--years--years!"

The last word was almost shrieked and the child struggled to her feet
and tried to walk.

Bunty caught her arms and held her.  "Let me go, can't you?" she said
hoarsely.  "I shall never get there at this rate.  Three years, and all
those miles!"

She pushed him aside and tried to walk across the loft, but her legs
tottered under her and she fell down in a little senseless heap. "Meg--
I'll fetch Meg," said the little boy in a trembling, alarmed
voice, and he slipped down the opening and hastened up to the house.



CHAPTER XI  The Truant


He burst into Meg's bedroom like a whirlwind.  "She's in the old shed,
Meg, and I'm not sure, but I think she's gone mad;  and I've had the
awfullest beating, and got nearly killed with the cactus for her, and
never told anything.  She can't eat the corned beef, either, after all.
She's run away--and oh, I'm sure she's mad!"

Meg lifted a pale, startled face from the pillows.  "Who on earth--
what---"

"Judy," he said, and burst into excited sobs.  "She's in the shed,
and I think she's mad!"

Meg got slowly out of bed, huddled on some clothes, and even then
utterly disbelieving the wild story, went downstairs with him.

In the hall they met their father, who was just going out.

"Are you better?" he said to Meg.  "You should have stayed in bed
all day; however, perhaps the air will do you more good."

"Yes," she said mechanically.

"I'm going out for the rest of the day; indeed, I don't expect
either Esther or myself will be back till to-morrow morning."

"Yes," repeated Meg.

"Don't let the children blow the house up, and take care of
yourself--oh! and send Bunty to bed without any tea--he's had
enough for one day, I'm sure."

"Yes," said the girl again, only taking in the import of what the
last pledged her to when Bunty whispered a fierce "Sneak!" at her
elbow.

Then the dogcart rattled up; and the Captain went away, to their
unspeakable relief.

"Now what is this mad story?" Meg said, turning to her small
brother.  "I suppose it's one of your untruths, you bad little boy."

"Come and see,"'  Bunty returned, and he led the way through the
paddocks.  Half-way down they met Pip and Nell, returning earlier
than expected from the fishing expedition.  Nellie looked sad, and
was walking at a respectful distance behind her brother.

"You might as well take a phonograph with you as Nellie," he said,
casting a look of withering scorn on that delinquent.  "She talked the
whole time, and didn't give me a chance of a bite."

"Judy's home," said Bunty, almost bursting with the importance of his
knowledge.  "No one's seen, her but me; I've nearly got killed
with climbing up cactuses and into windows and things, and I've had
thrashings from Father and everything, but I never told a word, did
I, Meg?  I've got her up in the shed here, and I went and got corned
beef and everything just you look at my legs:"

He displayed his scars proudly, but Meg hurried on, and Pip and Nell
followed in blank amazement.  At the shed they stopped.

"It's a yarn of Bunty's," Pip said contemptuously. "'Tisn't April
the first yet, my son."

"Come and see," Bunty returned, swarming up.  Pip followed, and gave
a low cry; then Meg and Nell, with rather more difficulty, scrambled
up, and the scene was complete.

The delirium had passed, and Judy was lying with wide-open eyes
gazing in a tired way at the rafters.

She smiled up at them as they gathered round her.  "If Mahomet won't
come to the mountain," she said, and then coughed for two or three
minutes.

"What have you been doing, Ju, old girl?" Pip said, with an odd
tremble in his voice.  The sight of his favourite sister, thin,
hollow-checked, exhausted, was too much for his boyish manliness.
A moisture came to his eyes.

"How d'you come, Ju?" he said, blinking it away.

And the girl gave her old bright look up at him.  "Sure and they
keep no pony but shank's at school," she said; "were you afther
thinkin' I should charter a balloon?"

She coughed again.

Meg dropped down on her knees and put her arms round her little thin
sister.

"Judy," she cried, "oh, Judy, Judy! my dear, my dear!"

Judy laughed for a little time, and called her an old silly, but she
soon broke down and sobbed convulsively.  "I'm so hungry," she said,
at last pitifully.

They all four, started up as though they would fetch the stores of
Sydney to satisfy her.  Then Meg sat down again and lifted the
rough, curly head on her lap.

"You go, Pip," she said, "and bring wine and a glass, and in the
meat-safe there's some roast chicken; I had it for my lunch, and
Martha said she would put the rest there till tea; and be quick, Pip."

"My word!" said Pip to himself, and he slipped down and flew across
to the house.

"UpON my word!" said Martha, meeting him in the hall five minutes
later, a cut-glass decanter under his arm, a wineglass held in his
teeth by the stem, a dish of cold chicken in his hand, and bread
and butter in a little stack beside the chicken.  "Upon my word!
And what next, might I ask?"

"Oh, shut up, and hang your grandmother!" said Pip, brushing past
her, and going a circuitous voyage to the shed lest she should be
watching.

He knelt down beside his little sister and fed her with morsels of
chicken and sips of wine, and stroked her wild hair, and called
her old girl fifty times, and besought her to eat just a little more
and a little more.

And Judy, catching the look in the brown, wet eyes above her, ate all
he offered, though the first mouthful nearly choked her; she would
have eaten it had it been elephant's hide, seeing she loved this boy
better than anything else in the world, and he was in such distress.
She was the better for it, too, and sat up and talked quite naturally
after a little time.

"You shouldn't have done t you shouldn't really, you know, old girl,
and what the governor will say to you beats me."

"He won't know," she answered quickly.  "I'd never forgive whoever told
him.  I can only stay a week.  I've arranged it all beautifully, and I
shall live here in this loft; Father never dreams of coming here, so
it will be quite safe, and you can all bring me food.  And then after
a week"--she sighed heavily--"I must go back again."

"Did you really walk all those miles just to see us?" Pip said,
and again there was the strange note in his voice.

"I got a lift or two on the way," she said, "but I walked
nearly all of it, I've been coming for nearly a week:"

"How COULD you do it?  Where did you sleep, Judy?  What did you eat?"
Meg exclaimed, in deep distress.

"I nearly forget," Judy said; closing her eyes again.  "I kept
asking for food at little cottages, and sometimes they asked me to
sleep, and I had three-and-six--that went a long way.  I only slept
outside two nights, and I had my jacket then."

Meg's face was pale with horror at her sister's adventure.  Surely no
girl in the wide world but Judy Woolcot would have attempted such a
harebrained project as walking all those miles with three-and-six in
her pocket.

"How COULD you?" was all she could find to say.  "I hadn't meant
to walk all the way," Judy said, with a faint mile.  "I had seven
shillings in a bit of paper in my pocket, as well as the three-and-six,
and I knew it would take me a long way in the train.  But then I lost
it after I had started, and I didn't believe in going back just for
that, so, of course, I had to walk."

Meg touched her cheek softly.

"It's no wonder you got so thin," she said.

"Won't the Miss Buttons be raising a hue-and-cry after you?" Pip asked.
"It's a wonder they've not written to the pater to say you have skedaddled."

"Oh! Marian and I made that all safe," Judy said, with a smile of
recollective pleasure.  "Marian's my chum, you see, and does anything
I tell her.  And she lives at Katoomba."

"Well?" said Meg, mystified, as her sister paused.  "Well, you see,
a lot of the girls had the measles, and so they sent Marian home, for
fear she should get them.   And Marian's mother asked for me to go there,
too, for a fortnight; and so Miss Burton wrote and asked Father could I?
and I wrote and asked couldn't I come home instead for the time?"

"He never told us," Meg said softly.

"No, I s'pose not.  Well, he wrote back and said 'no' to me and
'yes' to her.  So one day they put us in the train safely, and
we were to be met at Katoomba.  And the thought jumped into my head
as we went along:  Why ever shouldn't I come home on the quiet?  So
I told Marian she could explain to her people I had gone home instead,
and that she was to be sure to make it seem all right, so they wouldn't
write to Miss Button.  And then the train stopped at Blackheath, and
I jumped straight out, and she went on to Katoomba, and I came home.
That's all.  Only, you see, as I'd lost my money there was nothing left
for it but to walk."

Meg smoothed the dusty, tangled confusion of her hair.

"But you can't live out here for the week," she said, in a troubled
voice.  "You've got a horrid cough with sleeping outside, and I'm
sure you're ill.  We shall have to tell Father about it.  I'll beg him
not to send you back, though."

Judy started up, her eyes aflame.

"If you do," she said--"if you do, I will run away this very night,
and walk to Melbourne, or Jerusalem, and never see any of you again!
How can you, Meg!  After I've done all this just so he wouldn't know!
Oh, how CAN you?"

She was working herself up into a strong state of excitement.

"Why, I should be simply packed back again tomorrow--you know I
would, Meg.  Shouldn't I now, Pip?  And get into a fearful row at
school into the bargain.  My plan is beautifully simple.  After
I've had a week's fun here with you I shall just go back--you can
all lend me some money for the train.  I shall just meet Marian at
Katoomba on the 25th; we shall both go back to school together, and
no one will be a bit the wiser.  My cough's nothing; you know I
often do get coughs at home, and they never hurt me.  As long as you
bring me plenty to eat, and stay with me, I'll be all right."

The rest and food and home faces had done much already for her;  her
face looked less pinched, and a little more wholesome colour was
creeping slowly into her cheeks.

Meg had an uncomfortable sense of responsibility, and the feeling that
she ought to tell someone was strong upon her; but she was overruled
by the others in the end.

"You couldn't be so mean, Meg," Judy had said warmly, when she
had implored to be allowed to tell Esther.

"Such a blab!" Bunty had added.  "Such an awful sneak!" Pip had
said.

So Meg held her tongue, but was exceedingly unhappy.



CHAPTER XII  Swish, Swish!


On the fourth day of Judy's residence in the loft, Martha Tomlinson
remarked to her fellow-servant and sufferer, Bridget, that she
believed them blessed children were in a conspiracy to put her
"over the river."

Bridget's digestion was impaired that morning, and she merely
remarked that she supposed the dear little things only felt a desire
to see her in her proper place.

I should explain to you, perhaps, that "over the river" meant
Gladesville, which is Sydney's Colney Hatch.

Many things had led the unhappy Martha to a belief in this conspiracy.
For instance, when she went to make Pip's bed as usual one morning all
the bedclothes had gone.  The white counterpane was spread smoothly
over the mattress, but there was absolutely no trace of the blankets,
sheets, and pillows.  She hunted in every possible and impossible place,
questioned the children, and even applied to Esther, but the missing
things could not be found.

"There's a man in corduroy trousers hanging round here every night,"
Pip said, gloomily regarding his stripped bed.  "I shouldn't wonder if
he had something to do with it."

Which suggestion was distinctly unkind, seeing the man in corduroy
trousers was Martha's most ardent and favoured admirer.

The next day the washing basin in Meg's room went, and after that a
chair from the nursery, and a strip of carpet from the top landing,
not to mention such small things as a teapot, a spirit-lamp, cups and
plates, half a horn, and a whole baking of gingerbread nuts.

The losses preyed upon Martha, for the things seemed to disappear
while the children were in bed; and though she suspected them, and
watched them continually, she could get no clear proof of their
guilt, nor even find any motive for them abstracting such things.

And after the disappearance of each fresh article, Pip used to ask
whether the corduroy-trousered gentleman had been to the house the
night before.  And as it always happened, that he had, Martha could do
nothing but cast a wrathful glance at the boy and flounce from the
room.

One night the little chess-table from the nursery was spirited away.

Pip fell upon Martha's neck the, next morning early, as she was
sweeping the carpet, and affected to be dissolved in tears.

"'We never prize the violet,'"  he said, in broken tones.  "Ah!
Martha, Martha! we never felt what a treasure we had in you till now,
when your days with us are numbered."

"Get along with you," she said, hitting out at him with the broom
handle.  "And I ain't a-goin' to leave, so don't you think it.  You'd
have it your own way then too much.  No; you don't get shut of
Martha Tornlinson just yet, young man."

"But won't he be wanting you, Martha?" he said gently.  "His
furnishing must be nearly finished now.  He's not taken a saucepan
yet, nor a flat-iron, I know; but there's everything else, Martha;
and I don't mind telling you in confidence I'm thinking of giving you
a flat-iron myself as a wedding present, so you needn't wait till he
comes for that."

"Get out with you!" said Martha again, thrusting the broom-head
right into his face, and nearly choking him with dust.  "It's a limb
of the old gentleman himself you are."

Away in the loft things were getting very comfortable.

A couple of rugs hung on the walls kept out the draught.  Judy's bed,
soft and warm, was in a corner; she had a chair to sit in, a
table to eat at, even a basin in which to perform her ablutions.
And she had company all day; and nearly always all night.  Once Meg
had stolen away, after fastening her bedroom door, and had shared the
bed in the loft; once Nellie had gone, and the other night Pip had
taken a couple of blankets and made himself a shakedown among the straw.
They used to pay her visits at all hours of the day, creeping up the
creaking ladder one after the other, whenever they could get away
unnoticed.

The governess had, as it happened, a fortnight's holiday, to nurse a
sick mother, so the girls and Bunty had no demands on their time.  Pip
used to go to school late and come back early, cajoling notes of excuse,
whenever, possible, out of Esther.  He even played the truant once, and
took a caning for it afterwards quite good-humouredly.

Judy still looked pale and tired, and her cough was rather troublesome;
but she was fast getting her high spirits back, and was enjoying her
adventure immensely.

The only drawback was the cribbed, cabined, and confined space of
the loft.

"You will HAVE to arrange things so that I can go for a run," she said
one morning, in a determined manner.  "My legs are growing shorter,
I am sure, with not exercising them.  I shall have forgotten how to walk
by the end of the week."

Pip didn't think it could be done; Meg besought her to run no risks;
but Bunty and Nell were eager for it.

"Meg could talk to Father," Bunty said, "and Pip could keep
teasing General till Esther would be frightened to leave the room,
and then me and Judy would nick down and have a run, and get back
before you let them go."

Judy shook her head.

"That would be awfully stale," she said.  "If I go, I shall stay
down some time.  Why shouldn't we have a picnic down at the river?"

"Oh, yes, let's!" Bunty cried, with sparkling eyes.

"I'm sure we could manage it especially as it's Saturday, and Pip
hasn't to go to school," Judy continued, thinking it rapidly out.
"Two of you could go and get some food.  Tell Martha you are all
going for a picnic--she'll be glad enough not to have dinner to
set--then you go on.  Two others can watch if the coast's clear
while I get down and across the paddocks, and once we're at the
corner of the road we're safe."

It seemed feasible enough, and in a very short time the preparations
were all made.  Pip was mounting guard at the shed, and had undertaken
to get Judy safely away, and Bunty had been stationed on the back
veranda to keep cave and whistle three times if there was any danger.

He was to wait for a quarter of an hour by the kitchen clock, and
then, if all was well, to bring the big billy and a bread loaf,
and catch the others up on the road.

It was slow work waiting there, and he stood on one leg, like a
meditative fowl, and reviewed the events of the last few exciting
days.

He had a depressed feeling at his heart, but why he could hardly
tell.  Perhaps it was the lie he had told his father, and which was
still unconfessed, because the horse was seriously lame, and his
courage oozed away every time he thought of that riding-whip.

Perhaps it was the reaction after the great excitement.  Or it may
have been a rankling sense of injustice at the small glory his brave
deeds on Judy's behalf evoked from the others.  They did not seem to
attach any importance to them, and, indeed, laughed every time he
alluded to them or drew public attention to his scars.  Two or
three of the scratches on his legs were really bad ones, and while he
was standing waiting he turned down his stockings and gazed at these
with pitying eyes and something like a sob in his throat.

"Nobody cares!" he muttered, and one of his ever-ready tears fell
splashing down on one extended bare leg.  "Judy likes Pip best, and
he never climbed the cactus; Meg thinks I tell stories; and Nellie
says I'm a greedy pig--nobody cares!"

Another great fat tear gathered and fell.  "Have you taken root
there?" a voice asked.

His father, smoking at the open french window, had been watching him,
and marvelling at his rare and exceeding quietness.

Bunty started, guiltily, and pulled up his stockings.

"I'm not doin' nothin'," he said aggrievedly, after a minute's
pause.  Bunty always lapsed into evil grammar when agitated.  "Nothing
at all.  I'm goin' to a picnic."

"Ah, indeed!" said the Captain.  "You looked as if you were
meditating on some fresh mischief, or sorrowing over some old--which
was it?"

Bunty turned a little pale, but remarked again he "wasn't doin'
nothin'."

The Captain felt in a lazy, teasing mood, and his little fat, dirty
son, was the only subject near.

"Suppose you come here and confess every bit of mischief you've
done this week," he said gravely.  "I've the whole morning to
spare, and it's time I saw to your morals a little."

Bunty approached the arm of the chair indicated, but went whiter than
ever.

"Ah, now we're comfortable.  Well, there was stealing from the pantry
on Tuesday--that's one," he said, encouragingly.  "Now then."

"I n--n--never did n--nothin' else," Bunty gasped.  He felt certain
it was all over with him, and the cricket ball episode was discovered.
He even looked nervously round to see if the riding-whip was near.
Yes, there was Esther's silver-topped one flung carelessly on a chair.
He found time to wish fervently Esther was a tidy woman.

"Nothing at all, Bunty?  On your word?" said his father, in an
impressive tone.

"I was p--playin' marbles," he said, in a shaking voice.  "How
c--c--could I have sh--shot anything at y--y--your old horse?"

"Horse--ah!" said his father.  A light broke upon him, and his face
grew stern.  "What did you throw at Mazeppa to lame him?  Answer me at
once."

Bunty gave a shuddering glance at the whip.

"N-n-nothin'," he answered--"n--nothin' at all.  My c--c--cricket
b--ball was up in the st--st--stables.  I was only p--p--playin'
marbles."  The Captain gave him a little shake.

"Did you lame Mazeppa with the cricket ball?" he said sternly.

"N--n--no I n--never," Bunty whispered, white to the lips.  Then
semi-repentance came to him, and he added:  "It just rolled out of my
p--p---pocket, and M--Mazeppa was passing and h--h--hit his l-leg on it."

"Speak the truth, or I'll thrash you within an inch of your life," the
Captain said, standing up, and seizing Esther's whip: "Now then, sir--was
it you lamed Mazeppa?"

"Yes," said Bunty, bursting into a roar of crying, and madly dodging
the whip.

Then, as the strokes descended on his unhappy shoulders, he filled
the air with his familiar wail of "'Twasn't me, 'twasn't my fault!"

"You contemptible young cur!" said his father, pausing a moment when
his arm ached with wielding the whip.  "I'll thrash this mean spirit
of lying and cowardice out of you, or kill you in the attempt."  Swish,
swish.  "What sort of a man do you think you'll make?"  Swish, swish.
"Telling lies just to save your miserable skin!"  Swish, swish,
swish, swish.

"You've killed me--oh, you've killed me!  I know you have!" yelled
the wretched child, squirming all over the floor.  "'Twasn't me,
'twasn't my fault--hit the others some."

Swish, swish, swish.  "Do you think the others would lie so
contemptibly?  Philip never lied to me.  Judy would cut her tongue out
first."  Swish, swish, swish.  "Going to a picnic, are you?  You can
picnic in your room till to-morrow's breakfast."  Swish, swish, swish.
"Pah--get away with you!"

Human endurance could go no further.  The final swish had been actual
agony to his smarting, quivering shoulders and back.  He thought of
the others, happy and heedless, out in the sunshine, trudging merrily
off to the river, without a thought of what he was bearing, and his
very heart seethed to burst in the hugeness of its bitterness and
despair.  "Judy's home!" he said, in a choking, passionate voice.
"She lives in the old shed in the cow, paddock.  Boo, hoo, hoo!
They're keepin' it secret from you.  Boo, hoo.  She's gone to the
picnic, and she's run away from school."



CHAPTER XIII  Uninvited Guests


The captain was walking slowly across the paddocks with the cabbage-tree
hat he kept for the garden pushed back from his brow.  He was rather
heated after his tussle with his second son, and there was a thoughtful
light in his eyes.  He did not believe the truth of Bunty's final
remark, but still he considered there was sufficient probability in it
to make a visit to the shed not altogether superfluous.

Not that he expected, in any case, to find his errant daughter there,
for had not Bunty said there was a picnic down at the river?  But he
thought, there might be some trace or other.

The door of the shed swung back on its crazy hinges, and the sunlight
streamed in and made a bar of glorified dust across the place.

There was no sign of habitation here, unless a hair ribbon of Meg's
and some orange peel, might be considered as such.

He saw the shaky, home-made ladder, resting against the hole in the
ceiling, and though he had generally more respect for his neck than
his children had for theirs, he ventured his safety upon it.  It
creaked ominously as he reached the top step and crawled
through into the loft.

There were a ham-bone, a box of dominoes, and a burst pillow this
side of the partition, nothing else, so he walked across and
looked over.

"Very cosy," he murmured, "I shouldn't mind camping here myself
for a little time," and it even came into his head to do so, and be
there as a "surprise party" when Judy returned.  But he dismissed the
idea as hardly compatible with dignity.  He remembered hearing
rumours of missing furniture in the house, and almost a smile came
into his eyes as he saw the little old table with the spirit-lamp and
teapot thereon, the bed-clothing and washing-basin.  But a stern
look succeeded it.  Were seventy-seven miles not sufficient obstacle
to Judy's mischievous plans?  How did she dare thus to defy him, a
child of thirteen: and he her father?  His lips compressed
ominously, and he went down again and strode heavily back to the
house.

"Esther!" he called, in a vibrating voice at the foot of the
stairs.

And "Coming, dear--half a minute," floated down in response.

Half a minute passed ten times, and then she came, the beautiful young
mother with her laughing-faced wee son in her arms.  Her eyes looked
so tender; and soft, and loving that he turned away impatiently; he
knew quite well how it would be; she would beg and entreat him to
forgive his little daughter when she heard, and when she looked as
bright and beautiful as she did just now he could refuse her nothing.

He stood in profound meditation for a minute or two.

"What is it you want, John?" she said.  "Oh! and what do you think?
I have just found another tooth, a double one--come and look."

He came, half unwillingly, and stuck his little finger into his infant
son's mouth.

Esther guided it till it felt a tiny, hard substance.  "The third,"
she said proudly; "aren't you pleased?"

"Hum!" he said.  Then he meditated a little longer, and after a
minute or two rubbed his hands as if he was quite pleased with
himself.

"Put on your hat, Esther, and the General's," he said, patting that
young gentleman's head affectionately.  "Let us go down to the river
for a stroll; the children are down there picnicking, so we can be
sure of some tea."

"Why, yes, that will be very nice," she said, "won't it Bababsie,
won't it, sweet son?"

She called to Martha, who was dusting the drawing-room in a cheerfully
blind way peculiarly hers.

"The General's hat, please, Martha, the white sun-hat with strings;
it's on my bed, I think, or a chair or somewhere--oh! and bring
down my large one with the poppies in, as well, please."

Martha departed, and, after a little search, returned with the
headgear.

And Esther tied the white sun-hat over her own curly, crinkly hair,
and made the General crow with laughing from his seat on the hall
table.  And then she popped it on the Captain's head, and put the
cabbage-tree on her son's, and occupied several minutes thus in pretty
play.

Finally they were ready, and moved down the hall.

"Master Bunty is locked in his room; on no account open the door,
Martha," was the Captain's last command.

"Oh, Jack!" Esther said reproachfully.

"Oblige me by not interfering," he said; "allow me a little
liberty with my own children, Esther.  He is an untruthful little
vagabond; I am ashamed to own him for my son."

And Esther, reflecting on the many shiftinesses of her stepson, was
able to console herself with the hope that it would do him good.

They went a shortcut through the bush to avoid the public road, and
the blue, sun-kissed, laughing river stretched before them.

"There they are," Esther cried, "in the old place, as usual, look
at the fire, little sweet son;  see the smoke, boy bonny--four--five
of them.  Why, who have they got with them?" she said in surprise,
as they drew nearer the group on the grass.

Before they were close enough to recognize faces the circle suddenly
seemed to break up and fall apart.

One of its members turned sharply round and fled away across the
grass, plunging into the thick bracken and bush, and disappearing from
sight in less time than it takes to tell.

"Whoever had you with you?" Esther said when they reached the
children.

There was a half-second's silence, then Pip threw some sticks on the
fire and said coolly:

"Only a friend of Meg's, a frightened kind of kid who has quite a
dread of the pater.  I believe she imagines soldiers go round with
their swords sharpened, ready for use."

He laughed lightly.  Nell joined in in a little hysterical way, and
Baby began to cry.

Meg, white as death, picked her up and hurriedly began telling her
the story of the three bears for comfort.

Esther looked a little puzzled, but, of course, never dreamt of
connecting the flying figure with Judy.

And the Captain seemed delightfully blind and unsuspicious.  He
lay down on the grass and let the General swarm all over him;  he
made jokes with Esther; he told several stories of his young days,
and never even seemed to remark that his audience seemed inattentive
and constrained.

"Haven't you made some tea?" Esther said at last.  "We love
billy tea, and thought you would be sure to have some?"

"Bunty hasn't come, he was to have brought the billy," Pip said,
half sulkily.  He had suspicions that there was something behind this
great affability of his father, and he objected to being played
with.

"Ah," the Captain said gravely, "that is unfortunate.  When I came
away Bunty did not seem very well, and was thinking of spending
the rest of the day in his bedroom."

Pip made up the fire in a dogged way, and Meg flashed a frightened
glance at her father, who smiled affectionately back at her.

After an hour of this strained intercourse the Captain proposed a
return home.

"It is growing chill," he said.  "I should be grieved for the
General's new-born tooth to start its life by aching--let's go home
and make shift with teapot tea."

So they gathered up the untouched baskets and made themselves into a
procession.

The Captain insisted on Pip and Meg walking with him, and he sent
Baby and Nell on in front, one on either side of Esther, who was
alternately leading and carrying the General.

This arrangement being, as indeed Pip shrewdly suspected; to prevent
the possibility of any intercourse or formation of new plans.

And when they got home he invited them all to come into his
smoking-room, a little slit of a place off the dining-room.

Esther took the General upstairs, but the others followed him in
silence.

"Sit down, Pip, my boy," he said genially.  "Come, Meg, make yourself
at home, take a seat in that armchair.  Nell and Baby can occupy
the lounge."

They all sat down helplessly where he told them, and watched his
face anxiously.

He selected a pipe from the row over the mantelpiece, fitted a new
mouthpiece to it, and carefully filled it.

"As you are all in possession of my room," he said in an urbane voice,
"I can hardly smoke with any comfort here, I am afraid.  I will come
and talk to you again later on.  I am going to have a pipe first in
the old loft in the cow paddock.  Keep out of mischief till I come back."

He struck a match, lighted his tobacco, and, without a glance at the
silent children, left the room, locking the door behind him.

Once more he crossed the paddocks, and once more pushed open the
creaking door.  The orange peel lay just where he had seen it before,
only it was a little drier and more dead-looking.  The hair ribbon
was in exactly the same knot.  The ladder creaked in just the same
place, and again threatened to break his neck when he reached the top.
The dominoes were there still, the ham-bone and the pillow occupied
the same places; the only difference being the former had a black
covering of ants now, and a wind had been playing with the pillow,
and had carried the feathers in all directions.

He crossed the floor, not softly, but just with his usual measured
military-step.  Nothing moved.  He reached the partition and looked
over.

Judy lay across the improvised bed, sleeping a sleep of utter
exhaustion after her rapid flight from the river.  She had a frock of
Meg's on, that made her look surprisingly long and thin; he was
astonished to think she had grown so much.

"There will be no end to my trouble with her as she grows older," he
said, half aloud, feeling extremely sorry for himself for being her
father.  Then a great anger and irritation rose within him as he
watched her sleeping so quietly there.  Was she always to be a disturber
of his peace?  Was she always to thwart him like this?

"Judy," he said in a loud voice.

The closed eyelids sprang open, the mist of sleep and forgetfulness
cleared from the dark eyes, and she sprang up, a look of absolute
horror on her face.

"What are you doing here, may I ask?" he said, very coldly.

The scarlet colour flooded her cheeks, her very brow, and then
dropped down again, leaving her white to the lips, but she made no
answer.

"You have run away from school, I suppose?" he continued, in the
same unemotional voice.  "Have you anything to say?"

Judy did not speak or move, she only watched his face with parted
lips.

"Have you anything to say for yourself, Helen?" he repeated.

"No, Father," she said.

Her face had a worn, strained look that might have touched him
at another time, but he was too angry to notice.

"No excuse or reason at all?"

"No, Father."

He moved toward the opening.  "A train goes in an hour and a half, you
will come straight back with me this moment," he said, in an even
voice.  "I shall take precautions to have you watched at school since
you cannot be trusted.  You will not return home for the Christmas
holidays, and probably not for those of the following June."

It was as bad as a sentence of death.  The room swam before the girl's
eyes, there was a singing and rushing in her ears.

"Come at once," the Captain said.  Judy gave a little caught breath;
it tickled her throat and she began to cough.

Such terrible coughing, a paroxysm that shook her thin frame and made
her gasp for breath.  It lasted two or three minutes, though she put
her handkerchief to her mouth to try to stop it.

She was very pale when it ceased, and he noticed the hollows in her
cheeks for the first time.

"You had better come to the house first," he said, less harshly, "and
see if Esther has any cough stuff."

Then in his turn he caught his breath and grew pale under his bronze.

For the handkerchief that the child had taken from her lips had
scarlet, horrible spots staining its whiteness.



CHAPTER XIV  The Squatter's Invitation So


After all there was no dogcart for Judy, no mountain train, no
ignominious return to the midst of her schoolfellows, no vista of
weary months unmarked by holidays.

But instead, a warm, soft bed, and delicate food, and loving voices
and ceaseless attention.  For the violent exertion, the scanty food,
and the two nights in the open air had brought the girl to indeed a
perilous pass.  One lung was badly inflamed, the doctor said; it was
a mystery to him, he kept telling them, how she had kept up so long;
an ordinary girl would have given in and taken to her bed long ago.
But then he was not acquainted with the indomitable spirit and pluck
that were Judy's characteristics.

"Didn't you have any pain?" he asked, quite taken aback to find such
spirits and so serious a condition together.

"H'm, in my side sometimes," she answered carelessly.  "How long
will it be before I can get up, Doctor?"  She used to ask the latter
question of him every morning, though, if the truth were known, she
felt secretly more than a little diffident at the idea of standing up
again.

There was a languor and weariness in her limbs that made her doubtful
if she could run about very much, and slower modes of progressing she
despised.  Besides this, there was a gnawing pain, under her arms,
and the cough was agony while it lasted.

Still, she was not ill enough to lose interest in all that was going
on, and used to insist upon the others telling her everything that
happened outside--who made the biggest score at cricket, what flowers
were out in her own straggling patch of garden, how many eggs the
fowls laid a day, how the guinea-pigs and canaries were progressing,
and what was the very latest thing in clothes or boots the new
retriever puppy had devoured.

And Bunty used to bring in the white mice and the blind French
guinea-pig, and let them run loose over the counterpane, and Pip did
most of his carpentering on a little table near, so she could see
each fresh stage and suggest improvements as he went along.

Meg, who had almost severed her connection with Aldith, devoted
herself to her sister, and waited on her hand and foot; she made her
all kinds of little presents--a boot-bag, with compartments; a
brush-and-comb bag, with the monogram "J.W.," worked in pink silk;
a little work-basket, with needle-book, pin-cushion, and all complete.
Judy feared she should be compelled to betake herself to tidy habits
on her recovery.

Her pleasure in the little gifts started a spirit of competition
among the others.

For one whole day Pip was invisible, but in the evening he turned up,
and walked to the bedside with a proud face.  He had constructed a
little set of drawers, three of which actually opened under skilful
coaxing.

"It's not for doll-clothes," he said, after she had exhausted all the
expressions of gratitude in common use, "because I know you hate
them, but you can keep all your little things in them, you see--hair
strings, and thimbles, and things."

There was a sound of dragging outside the door and presently Bunty
came in backward, lugging a great, strange thing.

It seemed to be five or six heavy pieces of board nailed together
haphazard.

"It's a chair," he explained, wiping the perspiration from his
forehead.  "Oh!  I'm going to put some canvas across it, of course,
so you won't fall through; but I thought I'd show it you first."

Judy's eyes smiled, but she thanked him warmly.  "I wasn't goin'
to make any stupid thing, like Pip did," the small youth continued,
looking deprecatingly at the little drawers.  "This is really
useful, you see; when you get up you can sit on it, Judy, by the
fire and read or sew or something.  You like it better 'n Pip's, don't
you?"

Judy temporized skilfully, and averted offence to either by asking
them to put the presents with all the others near the head of the bed.

"What a lot of things you'll have to take back to school, Ju," Nell
said, as she added her contribution in the shape of a pair of crochet
cuffs and a doll's wool jacket.

But Judy only flashed her a reproachful glance, and turned her face
to the wall for the rest of the evening.

That was what had been hanging over her so heavily all this long
fortnight in bed--the thought of school in the future.

"What's going to happen to me when I get better, Esther?" she
asked next morning, in a depressed way, when her stepmother came to
see her.  "Is he saving up a lot of beatings for me?  And shall I
have to go back the first week?"

Esther reassured her.

"You won't go back this quarter at all, very likely not next either,
Judy dear.  He says you shall go away with some of the others for
a change till you get strong; and, between you and me, I think
its very unlikely you, will go back ever again."

With this dread removed, Judy mended more rapidly, surprising even
the doctor with her powers of recuperation.

In three weeks she was about the house again, thin and great-eyed,
but full of nonsense and even mischief once more.  The doctor's visits
ceased; he said she had made a good recovery so far, but should
have change of surroundings, and be taken a long way from sea air.

"Let her run wild for some months, Woolcot," he said at his last
visit; "it will take time to quite shake off all this and get her
strength and flesh back again."

"Certainly, certainly; she shall go at once," the Captain said.

He could not forget he shock he had received in the old loft five
or six weeks ago, and would have agreed if he had been bidden to take
her for a sojourn in the Sahara.

The doctor had told him the mischief done to her lungs was serious.

"I won't say she will ultimately die of consumption,"  he had said,
"but there is always a danger of that vile disease in these nasty
cases.  And little Miss Judy is such a wild, unquiet subject;
she seems to be always in a perfect fever of living, and to possess
a capacity for joy and unhappiness quite unknown to slower natures.
Take care of her, Woolcot, and she'll make a fine woman some day--ay,
a grand woman."

The Captain smoked four big cigars in the solitude of his study
before he could decide how he could best "take care of her."

At first he thought he would send her with Meg and the governess to
the mountains for a time, but then there was the difficulty about
lessons for the other three.  He might send them to school, or
engage a governess certainly, but then again there was expense to be
considered.

It was out of the question for the girls to go alone, for Meg had
shown herself nothing but a silly little goose, in spite of her
sixteen years; and Judy needed attention.  Then he remembered
Esther, too, was, looking unwell; the nursing and the General
together had been too much for her, and she looked quite a shadow of
her bright self.  He knew he really ought to send her, too, and the
child, of course.

And again the expense.

He remembered the Christmas holidays were not very far away; what
would become of the house with Pip and Bunty and the two youngest
girls running wild, and no one in authority?  He sighed heavily, and
knocked the ash from his fourth cigar upon the carpet.

Then the postman came along the drive and past the window.  He poked
up with a broad smile, and touched his helmet in a pleased kind of
way.  If almost seemed as if he knew that in one of the letters he
held the solution of the problem that was making the Captain's brow
all criss-crossed with frowning lines.

A fifth cigar was being extracted from the case, a wrinkle was
deepening just over the left eyebrow, a twinge of something very like
gout was calling forth a word or two of "foreign language," when
Esther came in with a smile on her lips and an open letter in her
hands.

"From Mother," she said.  "Yarrahappini's a wilderness, it seems, and
she wants me to go up, and take the General with me, for a few weeks."

"Ah!" he said.

It would certainly solve one of the difficulties.  The place was very
far away certainly, but then it was Esther's old home, and she had
not seen it since her marriage.  She would grow strong again there
very quickly.

"Oh, and Judy, too."

"Ah-h-h!" he said.

Two of the lines smoothed themselves carefully from his brow.

"And Meg, because I mentioned she was looking pale."

The Captain placed the cigar back in the case.  He forgot there was
such a thing as gout.

"The invitation could not have been more opportune," he said.  "Accept
by all means; nothing could have been better;  and it is an exceedingly
healthy climate.  The other children can---"

"Oh, Father expressly stipulates for Pip as well, because he is a
scamp."

"Upon my word, Esther, your parents have a large enough fund of
philanthropy.  Anyone else included in the invitation?"

"Only Nell and Bunty and Baby.  Oh, and Mother says if you can
run up at any time for a few days shooting you know without her
telling you how pleased she will be to see you."

"The hospitality of squatters is world-farmed, but this breaks all
previous records, Esther."  The Captain got up and stretched himself
with the air of a man released from a nightmare.  "Accept by all
means--every one of you.  On their own heads be the results;  but
I'm afraid Yarrahappini will be a sadder and wiser place before
the month is over."

But just how much sadder or how much wiser he never dreamed.



CHAPTER XV  Three Hundred Miles in the Train


They filled a whole compartment--at least there was one seat vacant,
but people seemed shy of taking it after a rapid survey of them all.

The whole seven of them, and only Esther as bodyguard--Esther--in
a pink blouse an sailor hat, with a face as bright and mischievous
as Pip's own.

The Captain had come to see them off, with Pat to look after the
luggage.  He had bought the tickets--two whole ones for Esther and
Meg, and four halves for the others.  Baby was not provided with even
a half, much to her private indignation--it was an insult to her four
years and a half, she considered, to go free like the General.

But the cost of those scraps of pasteboard had made the Captain look
unhappy: he only received eighteenpence change out of the ten pounds
he had tendered; for Yarrahappini was on the borders of the Never-Never
Land.

He spent the eighteenpence on illustrated papers--Scraps, Ally
Sloper's Half-Holiday, Comic Cuts, Funny Folks, and the like,
evidently having no very exalted opinion of the literary
tastes of his family; and he provided Esther with a yellow-back--
on which was depicted a lady in a green dress fainting in the arms
of a gentleman attired in purple, and Meg with Mark Twain's "Jumping
Frog", because he had noticed a certain air of melancholy in her eyes
lately.

Then bells clanged and a whistle shrieked, porters flew wildly about,
and farewells were said, sadly or gaily as the case might be.

There was a woman crying: in a hopeless little way on the platform,
and a girl with sorrowful, loving eyes leaning out of a second-class
window towards her; there was a brown-faced squatter, in a tweed cap
and slippers, to whom the three-hundred-mile journey was little more
of an event than dining;  and there was the young man going selecting,
and thinking England was little farther, seeing his wife and child
were waving a year's good-bye from the platform.  There were sportsmen
going two hundred miles after quail and wallaby; and cars full of
ladies returning to the wilds after their yearly or half-yearly tilt
with society and fashion in Sydney; and there were the eight we are
interested in, clustering around the door and two windows, smiling
and waving cheerful good-byes to the Captain.

He did not look at all cast down as the train steamed fussily away---
indeed, he walked down the platform with almost a jaunty air as if
the prospect of two months bachelordom was not without its redeeming
points.

It was half-past six in the afternoon when they started, and they
would reach Curlewis, which was the nearest railway station to
Yarrahappini, about five the next morning.  The expense of sleeping-
berths had been out of the question with so many of them; but in the
rack with the bags were several rolls of rugs and two or three air-
pillows against the weary hours.  The idea of so many hours in the
train had been delightful to all the young ones; none of them but Judy
had been a greater distance than forty or fifty miles before, and it
seemed perfectly fascinating to think of rushing on and on through
the blackness as well as the daylight.

But long before ten o'clock a change came o'er the spirit of their
dreams.  Nell and Baby had had a quarrel over the puffing out of the
air-cushions, and were too tired and cross to make it up again;  Pip
had hit Bunty over the head for no ostensible reason, and received
two kicks in return; Judy's head ached, and the noise, was not calculated
to cure it; Meg had grown weary of staring out into the moving darkness,
and wondering whether Alan would notice she was never on the river-boat
now; and the poor little General was filling the hot air with
expostulations, in the shape of loud roars, at the irregularities of
the treatment he was undergoing.

Esther had taken his day clothes off, and made a picture of him in
a cream flannel nightgown and a pink wool jacket.  And for half an
hour, he had submitted good-temperedly to being handed about and
tickled and half-smothered with kisses.  He had eyen permitted Nell to
bite his little pink toes severally, and say a surprising amount of
nonsense about little pigs that went to market and did similarly
absurd things.

He had hardly remonstrated when there had been a dispute about the
possession of his person, and Bunty had clung to his head and body
while Nell pulled vigorously at his legs.

But after a time, when Esther made him a little bed on one of the
seats and tried to lay him down upon it, a sense of his grievances
came over him.

He had a swinging cot at home; with little gold bars at the foot to
blink at--he could not see why he should be mulcted of it, and made to
put up with a rug three times doubled.  He was accustomed, too, to a
shaded light, a quiet room, and a warning H'sh! h'sh! whenever
people forgot themselves sufficiently to make the slightest noise.

Here the great yellow light flared all the time, and every one of the
noisy creatures at whose hands he endured so much was within a few
feet of him.

So he lifted up his voice and wept.  And when he found weeping did not
produce his gold-barred cot, and the little dangling tassels on the
mosquito nets, he raised his voice two notes, and when even there
Esther only went on patting his shoulder in a soothing way he burst
into roars absolutely deafening.

Nellie dangled all her long curls in his face to engage his
attention, but he clutched them viciously and pulled till the tears
came into her eyes.  Esther and Meg sang lullabies till their tongues
ached, Judy tried walking him up and down the narrow space, but he
stiffened himself in her arms, and she was not strong enough to hold
him.  Finally he dropped off into an exhausted sleep, drawing deep,
sobbing breaths and little hiccoughs of sorrow.

Then Bunty was discovered asleep on the floor with his head under a seat,
and had to be lifted into an easier position; and Baby, bolt upright
in a corner, was nodding like a little pink-and-white daisy the sun has
been too much for.

One by one the long hours dragged away; farther and farther through
the silent, sleeping country flew the red-eyed train, swerving round
zigzag curves, slackening up steeper places, flashing across the
endless stretching plains.

The blackness grew grey and paler grey, and miles and miles of
monotonous gum saplings lay between the train and sky.  Up burst
the sun, and the world grew soft and rosy like a baby waked from
sleep.  Then the grey gathered again, the pink, quivering lights
faded out, and the rain came down--torrents of it, beating against
the shaking window-glass, whirled wildly ahead by a rough morning
wind, flying down from the mountains.  Such a crushed, dull-eyed,
subdued-looking eight they were as they tumbled out on the Curlewis
platform when five o'clock came.  Judy coughed at the wet, early,
air, and was hurried into the waiting-room and wrapped in a rug.

Then the train tossed out their, trunks and portmanteaux and rushed on
again, leaving them desolate and miserable, looking after it, for it
seemed no one had come to meet them.

The sound of wet wheels slushing through puddles, the crack of a whip,
the even falling of horses' feet, and they were all outside again,
looking beyond the white railway palings to the road.

There were a big, covered waggonette driven by a wide yellow oil-skin
with a man somewhere in its interior, and a high buggy, from which an
immensely tall man was climbing.

"Father!"

Esther rushed out into the rain.  She put her arms round the dripping
mackintosh and clung fast to it for a minute or two.  Perhaps that is
what made her cheeks and eyes so wet and shining.

"Little girl--little Esther child!" he said, and almost lifted her
off the ground as he kissed her, tall though Meg considered her.

Then he hurried them all off into the buggies, five in one and three
in the other.  There was a twenty-five-mile drive before them yet.

"When did you have anything to eat last?" he asked; the depressed
looks of the children were making him quite unhappy.  "Mother has
sent you biscuits and sandwiches, but we, can't get coffee or
anything hot till we get home."

Nine o'clock, Esther told him, at Newcastle, but it was so boiling
hot they had had to leave most of it in their cups and scramble into
the train again.  The horses were whipped up; and flew over the
muddy roads at a pace that Pip, despite his weariness, could not but
admire.

But it was a very damp, miserable drive, and the General wept with
hardly a break from start to finish, greatly to Esther's vexation,
for it was his first introduction to his grandfather.

At last, when everyone was beginning to feel the very end of patience
had come, a high white gate broke the monotony of dripping wet
fences.

"Home!" Esther said joyfully.  She jumped the General up and down on
her knee.

"Little Boy Blue, Mum fell off that gate when she was three," said she,
looking at it affectionately as Pip swung it open.

Splash through the rain again; the wheels went softly now, for the
way was covered with wet fallen leaves.

"Oh, where IS the house?" Bunty said, peeping through Pip's arm
on the box seat, and seeing still nothing but an endless vista of
gum trees.  "I thought, you said we were there, Esther."

"Oh, the front door is not quite so near the gate as at Misrule,"
she said.  And indeed it was not.

It was fifteen minutes before they even saw the chimneys, then there
was another gate to be opened.  A gravel drive now trimly kept,
high box round the flower-beds, a wilderness of rose bushes that
pleased Meg's eye, two chip tennis-courts under water.

Then the house.

The veranda was all they noticed; such a wide one it was, as wide as
an ordinary room, and there were lounges and chairs and tables
scattered about, hammocks swung from the corners, and a green thick
creeper with rain-blown wisteria for an outer wall.

"O--o--oh," said Pip; "o--oh!  I AM stiff--o--oh, I say, what are you
doing?"

For Esther had deposited her infant on his knee, and leapt out of
the waggonette and up the veranda steps.

There was a tiny old lady there, with a great housekeeping apron
on.  Esther gathered her right up in her arms, and they kissed and
clung to each other till they were both crying.

"My little girl!" sobbed the little old lady, stroking, with eager
hands, Esther's wet hair and wetter cheeks.

And Bunty, who had followed close behind, looked from the tall figure
of his stepmother to the very small one of her mother and laughed.

Esther darted back to the buggy, took the General from Pip, and,
springing up the steps again, placed him in her mother's arms.

"Isn't he a fat 'un!" Bunty said, sharing in her pride; "just you
look at his legs."

The old lady sat down for one minute in the wettest chair she could
find, and cuddled him close up to her.

But he doubled his little cold fists, fought himself free, and
yelled for Esther.

Mr. Hassal had emptied the buggies by now, and came up the steps
himself.

"Aren't you going to give them some breakfast, little mother?" he
said, and the old lady nearly dropped her grandson in her distress.

"Dear, dear!" she said.  "Well, well! Just to think of it!  But it
makes one forget."

In ten minutes they were all in dry things, sitting in the warm
dining-room and making prodigious breakfasts.

"WASN'T I hungry!" Bunty said.  His mouth was full of toast, and he
was slicing the top off his fourth egg and keeping an eye on a dish
that held honey in one compartment and clotted cream in another.

"The dear old plates!" Esther picked hers up after she had emptied it
and looked lovingly at the blue roses depicted upon it.  "And to think
last time l ate off one I---"

"Was a little bride with the veil pushed back from your face," the old
lady said, "and everyone watching you cut the cake.  Only two have broken
since--oh yes, Hannah, the girl who came after Emily, chipped off the
handle of the sugar-basin and broke a bit out of the slop-bowl."

"Where did Father stand?" Meg asked.  She was peopling the room with
wedding guests; the ham and the chops, the toast and eggs and dishes
of fruit, had turned to a great white towered cake with silver
leaves.

"Just up there where Pip is sitting," Mrs. Hassal said, "and he
was helping Esther with the cake, because she was cutting it
with his sword.  Such a hole you made in the table-cloth, Esther, my
very best damask one with the convolvulus leaves, but, of course,
I've darned it--dear, dear!"

Baby had upset her coffee all over herself and her plate and Bunty,
who was next door.

She burst into tears of weariness and nervousness at the new people,
and slipped off her chair under the table.  Meg picked her up.

"May I put her to bed?" she said; "she is about worn out."

"Me, too," Nellie said, laying down her half-eaten scone and pushing
back her chair.  "Oh, I am so tired!"

"So'm I."  Bunty finished up everything on his plate in choking
haste and stood up.  "And that horrid coffee's running into my
boots."

So just as the sun began to smile and chase away the sky's heavy
tears, they all went to bed again to make up for the broken night,
and it was: six o'clock and tea-time before any of them opened their
eyes again.



CHAPTER XVI   Yarrahappini


Yarrahappini in the sunshine, the kind of sunshine that pushes the
thermometer's silver thread up to 100 deg.!

Right away in the distance on three sides was a blue hill line and
blue soft trees.

And up near the house the trees were green and beautiful, and the
flowers a blaze of colour.

But all the stretching plain between was brown Brown burnt grass
with occasional patches of dull green, criss-crossed here and there
with fences; that ran up the little hills that in places broke the
plain's straight line, and disappeared in the dips where rank grass
and bracken flourished.  The head station consisted of quite a little
community of cottages on the top of a hill.  Years ago, when Esther
was no bigger than her own little General, there had been only a rough,
red weather-board place on the hill-top, and a bark but or two for
outhouses.

And Mr. Hassal had been in the saddle from morning to night, and
worked harder than any two of his own stockmen, and Mrs. Hassal had
laid aside her girlish accomplishments, her fancy work, her guitar,
her water-colours, and had scrubbed and cooked and washed as many a
settler's wife has done before, until the anxiously watched wool
market had brought them better days.

Then a big stone cottage reared itself slowly right in front of the
little old place with its bottle-bordered garden plot, where nothing
more aristocratic than pig's face and scarlet geranium had ever grown.
A beautiful cottage it was, with its plenitude of lofty rooms, its
many windows, and its deep veranda.  The little home was kitchen
and bedrooms for the two women servants now, and was joined to the
big place by a covered way.

A hundred yards away there was a two-roomed cottage that was occupied
by the son of an English baronet, who, for the consideration of
seventy pounds a year and rations kept the Yarrahappini business
books and gave out the stores.

Farther still, two bark humpies stood, back to back.  Tettawonga,
a bent old black fellow, lived in one, and did little else than
smoke and give his opinion on the weather every morning.

Twenty years ago he had helped to make a steady foundation for
the red cottage that had arrived ready built on a bullock-dray.

Fifteen years ago he had killed with his tomahawk one of two
bushrangers who were trying to pick up Yarrahappini in the
absence of his master, and he had carried little trembling
Mrs. Hassal and tiny Esther to place of safety, and gone back
and dealt the other one a blow on the head that stunned him
till assistance came.

So, of course, he had earned his right to the cottage and the
daily rations and the pipe that never stirred from his lips.

Two of the station hands lived in the other cottage when they
were not out in distant parts of the run.

Close to the house was a long weather-board building with a heavy,
padlocked door.

"Oh, let's go in," Nell said, attracted by the size of the
padlock; "it looks like a treasure-house in a book--mayn't we
go in, please, little grandma?"

They were exploring all the buildings--the six children in a body,
Mrs. Hassal, whom they all called "little grandma," much to her
pleasure, and Esther with the boy.

"You must go and ask Mr. Gillet," the old lady said; "he keeps
the keys of the stores.  See, over in that cottage near the tank,
and speak nicely, children, please."

"Such a gentleman," she said in a low tone to Esther, "so clever,
so polished, if only he did not drink so."

Meg and Judy went, with Baby hurrying after them as fast as her
short legs would allow.

"Come in," a voice said, when they knocked.  Meg hesitated
nervously, and a man opened the door.  Such a great, gaunt man,
with restless, unhappy eyes, a brown, wide brow, and neatly
trimmed beard.

Judy stated that Mrs. Hassal had sent them for the keys, if he had
no objection.

He asked them to come in and sit down while he looked for them.

Meg was surprised at the room, as her blue eyes plainly showed, for
she had only heard him spoken of as the store-keeper.  There were
bookshelves, on which she saw Shakespeare and Browning and Shelley
and Rossetti and Tennyson, William Morris, and many others she had
never seen before.  There were neatly framed photographs and engravings
of English and Continental scenery on the walls.  There was a little
chased silver vase on a bracket, and some of the flowers from the
passion vines in it.  The table with the remains of breakfast on
it was as nice on a small scale as the one she had just left in
the big cottage.

He came back froth the inner room with the keys.  "I was afraid I
had mislaid then," he said; "the middle one opens the padlock,
Miss Woolcot; the brass fat one is for the two bins, and the
long steel one for the cupboard."

"Thank you so much.  I'm afraid we disturbed you in the middle of your
breakfast," Meg said, standing up and blushing because she thought he
had noticed her surprise at the bookshelves.

He disclaimed the trouble, and held the door open for them with
a bow that had something courtly in it, at least so Meg thought,
puzzling how it came to be associated with salt beef by the
hundredweight and bins of flour.  He watched them go over the
grass--at least he watched Meg in her cool, summer muslin and
pale-blue belt, Meg in her shady chip hat, with the shining fluffy
plait hanging to her waist.

Judy's long black legs and crumpled cambric had no element of the
picturesque in them.

Mrs. Hassal unfastened the padlock of the store-room.  Such a
chorus of "ohs!" and "ahs!" there was from the children!


Baby had never seen so much sugar together in her life before; she
looked as if she would have liked to have been let loose in the
great bin for an hour or two.

And the currants!  There was a big wooden box brim full--about
forty pounds, Mrs. Hassal thought when questioned.

Bunty whipped up a handful and pocketed them when everyone was
looking at the mountain of candles.

"Home-made! my DEAR, why, yes, of course," the old lady said.
"Why, I wouldn't dream of using a bought candle, any more than
I would use bought soap."

She showed them the great bars of yellow, clean-smelling stuff,
with finer, paler-coloured for toilet purposes.

Hams and sides of bacon hung thickly from the rafters.  "Those are
mutton hams," she said, pointing to one division.  "I keep those
for the stockmen."

Pip wanted to know if the stores were meant to serve them all their
lives, there seemed enough of them: he was astonished to hear that
every six months they were replenished.

"Twenty to thirty men, counting the boundary riders and stockmen
at different parts of the place; and double that number at shearing
or drafting times, not to mention daily sundowners--it's like feeding
an army, my dears," she said;  "and then, you see, I had to make
preparations for all of you--Bunty especially."

Her little grey eyes twinkled merrily as she looked at that small
youth.

"You can have them back," Bunty said, half sulkily.  He produced
half a dozen currants from his pocket.  "I shouldn't think you'd
mind, with such a lot;  we only have a bottleful at home."

On which the old lady patted his head, unlocked a tin, and filled
his hands with figs and dates.

"And have you to cook every day, for all those men?" Meg said,
wondering what oven could be found large enough.

"Dear, no!" the old lady answered.  "Dear, dear, no; each man
does everything for himself in his own hut; they don't even get
bread, only rations of flour to make damper for themselves.  Then
we give them a fixed, quantity of meat, tea, sugar, tobacco,
candles, soap, and one or two other things."

"Where do you keep the wool and things?" said Pip, who had a soul
above home-made soap and metal dips for candles; "I can't see any
shed or anything."

Mrs. Hassal told him they were a mile away, down by the creek,
where the sheep were washed and sheared at the proper season.  But
the heat was too much to make even Pip want to go just then, so they
attached themselves to Mr. Hassal, leaving little grandma with
Esther, the General, and Baby, and went over to the brick stables
near.

There were three or four buggies under cover, but no horses at all,
they were farther afield.  Across the paddock they went, and up the
hill.  Half a dozen answered Mr. Hassal's strange whistle; the
others were wild, unbroken things, that tossed their manes and fled
away at the sight of people to the farthermost parts where the trees
grew.

Pip chose one, a grey, with long, fleet-looking legs and a narrow,
beautiful head; he prided himself upon knowing something about
"points."  Judy picked a black, with reddish, restless eyes, but
Mr. Hassal refused it because it had an uncertain temper, so she
had to be content with a brown with a soft, satiny nose.

Meg asked for "something very quiet" in a whisper Judy and Pip could
not hear, and was given a ruggy horse that had carried Mrs. Hassal
eighteen years ago.  Each animal was to be at the complete disposal
of the young people during their stay at Yarrahappini, but the rides
would have to take place before breakfast or after tea, they were told,
if they wanted any pleasure out of them; the rest of the day was
unbearable on horseback.  Nellie was disappointed in the sheep,
exceedingly so.  She had expected to find great snow-white beautiful
creatures that would be tame and allow her to put ribbon on their
necks and lead them about.

From the hill-top the second morning she saw paddock after paddock,
each with a brown, slowly moving mass; she ran down through the
sunshine with Bunty to view them more closely.

"Oh, WHAT a shame!" she exclaimed, actual tears of disappointment
springing to her eyes when she saw the great fat things with their
long, dirty, ragged-looking fleece.

"Wait for a time, little woman," Mr. Hassal said; "just you wait
till we give them their baths."



CHAPTER XVII  Cattle-Drafting at Yarrahappini


"To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard
With a running fire of stockwhip and a fiery run of hoofs."


Pip could hardly sleep one night, a month after their arrival, for
thinking of the cattle drafting that was on the programme for the
morrow.  He had been casting about for some fresh occupation, far
he was a boy to whom variety was the salt of life.  At first he had
been certain he could never tire of shooting rabbits.  Mr. Hassal had
given him the "jolliest little stunner of a gun,"  and, Tettawonga
had gone out with him the first day; and had been very scornful
about his enthusiasm when he shot two.

"Ba'al good, gun do.  Plenty fellow rabbit longa scrub, budgery
way north, budgery way south; budgery way eblywhere.  Ba'al good
barbed wire fence do, ba'al good poison do.  Bah!"

But Pip was not to be discouraged, and really thought he had done
great good to the Yarrahappini estate by shooting those two soft,
fleet brown things.  He took them home and displayed them proudly
to the girls, cleaned his perfectly clean gun, and sallied forth
the next day.

Tettawonga took his pipe from between his lips when he saw him again
and laughed, a loud cackling laugh, that made Pip flush with anger.

"Kimbriki and kimbriki, too!  Rabbit he catti, curri-curri now.  Boy
come long with cawbawn gun, rabbit jerund drekaly, go burri, grass
grow, sheep get fat-ha, ha, he, he!"

**************************************
"To-morrow and to-morrow too!  Rabbit, he go away quickly now.  Boy
come along with big gun, rabbit he afraid directly, go under the
ground."
**************************************

Pip understood his mixed English enough to know he was making fun of
him, and told him wrathfully to "shut up for a Dutch idiot."

Then he shouldered the gun he was so immeasurably proud of and went
off the other side of the barbed-wire fence, where was the happy
hunting-ground of the little rodent that would not allow Mr. Hassal to
grow rich.

He shot five that day, four the next, seven the next, but after a
time he voted it slow, and went after gill birds, with more enjoyment
but less certainty of a bag.

Every day was filled to the brim with enjoyment, and but for the
intense heat that first month at Yarrahappini would have been one of
absolute content and happiness.

And now there was the cattle-drafting!

Breakfast was very early the morning of the great event; by
half-past five it was almost over, and Pip, in a fever of
restlessness, was telling Mr. Hassal he was sure they would be
late and miss it.

Judy had pleaded hard to be allowed to go, but everyone said it was
out of the question--indeed, it was doubted if it were wise to allow
Pip to face the danger that is inseparable with the drafting of the
wilder kind of cattle that had been driven from great distances.

But he had forcibly carried the day, and dressed himself up in so
business-like a way that Mr. Hassel had not the heart to refuse him.
He came down to breakfast in a Crimean shirt and a pair of old, serge
trousers fastened round the waist with a leathern belt, in which an
unsheathed bowie knife, freshly sharpened, was jauntily stuck.  No
persuasions would induce him either to wear a coat or sheathe the knife.

The grey was brought round to the veranda steps, with Mr. Hassal's
own splendid horse.  Mr. Gillet was there on a well-groomed roan;
he had three stock-whips, two quite sixteen feet long, the third
shorter one, which he presented to Pip.

The boy's face glowed.  "Hurrah, Fizz!" he said; standing up in
his saddle and brandishing it round his head.  "What 'ud you give to
change places?"

He dug his heels into the animal's sides and went helter-skelter
at a wild gallop down the hill.

It was a mile and a half to the cattle yards, and here was the
strongest excitement.

Pip could not think where all the men had sprung from.  There were
some twenty or thirty of them, stockmen, shearers "on the
wallaby," as their parlance expressed lack of employment, two
Aboriginals, exclusive of Tettawonga, who was smoking and looking
on with sleepy enjoyment, and several other of the station hands.

In the first yard there were five hundred cattle that had been driven
there the night before, and that just now presented the appearance of
a sea of wildly lashing tails and horns.  Such horns!--great,
branching, terrific-looking things that they gored and fought each
other madly with, seeing they could not get to the common enemy
outside.

Just for the first moment or two Pip felt a little disinclined to
quit the stronghold of his horse's back.  The thunder of hoofs and
horns, the wild charges made by the desperate animals against the
fence, made him expect to see it come crashing down every minute.

But everybody else had gone to "cockatoo"--to sit on the top rail
of the enclosure and look down at the maddened creatures, so at length
he fastened his bridle to a tree and proceeded gingerly to follow
their example.

At a sudden signal from Mr. Hassal the men dropped down inside,
half along, one side and half the other.  The object was to get a
hundred or two of the cattle into the forcing-yard adjoining, the gate
to which was wide open.  Pip marvelled at the courage of the men;
for a moment his heart had leaped to his mouth as bullock after
bullock essayed to charge them, but the air resounded with cracks from
the mighty stock whips and drafting-sticks, and beast after beast
retreated towards the centre with its face dripping with blood.

Then one huge black creature, with a bellow that seemed to shake
the plain, made a wild rush to the gate, the whole herd at his heels.
Like lightning, the men made a line behind, shouting, yelling,
cracking their whips to drive them onward.  Pip stood up and halloed,
absolutely beside himself with excitement.  Then he held his breath
again.

Mr. Hassal and one of the black boys were creeping cautiously up
near the gateway through which the tumultuous stream of horns and
backs was pouring.  Half a dozen mighty blows from the men, and
the last leader fell back for an instant, driving the multitude back
behind him.

In that second the two had slipped up the rails and the herd was in
two divisions.

Two lines of stockmen again, whip-crackings, bellows, blood, horns,
hide and heels in the air, and some forty or fifty were secure in a
third yard, a long narrow place with a gate at the end leading into
the final division.

Pip learnt from Mr. Gillet the object of these divisions: some of
the beasts were almost worthless things, and had been assigned to a
buyer for a couple of pounds a head, just for the horns, hides, and
what might be got for the flesh.  Others were prime, fat creatures,
ready for the butcher and Sydney market.  And others again were
splendid animals, of great value for prize and breeding purposes,
and were to be made into a separate draft.

The man at the last gateway was doing the all important work of
selecting.  He was armed with a short thick stick, and, as the other
men drove the animals down towards him, decided with lightning speed
to which class they belonged.  A heavy blow on the nose, a sharp,
rapid series of them between the eyes, and the most violent brute
plunged blindly whither the driver sent him.  All the day work went on,
and just as the great hot purple shadows began to fall across the
plain they secured the last rail, the battle was over, and the animals
in approved divisions.

Pip ate enough salt beef and damper to half kill him, drank more tea
than he had ever disposed of at one sitting in all his fourteen years,
swung himself into his saddle in close imitation of the oldest
stockman, and thought if he only could have a black, evil-looking
pipe like Tettawonga and the rest of the men his happiness would be
complete and his manhood attained.

He reached home as tired as "a dozen dogs and a dingo," and
entertained his sisters and Bunty with a graphic account of the
day's proceedings, dwelling lengthily on his own prowess and the
manifold perils he had escaped.

The next day both Esther and Judy rode with the others to the yards
to see the departures.

The best of the contingent, which Mr. Hassal had only wanted to
separate, not to sell, were driven out through the gate and away
to their old fields and pastures stale.

The "wasters," some hundred and fifty of them, with half a dozen
stockmen mounted on the best horses of the place told off for
them, were released from their enclosure in a state of frenzied
desperation, and, with much cracking of whips and yells, mustered
into a herd and driven across the plain in the direction of the road.
And some hour or two later the best "beef" lot were driven forth,
and quiet reigned at Yarrahappini once more.  During the two days
of excitement the children all decided upon their future professions,
which were all to be of a pastoral nature.

Pip was going to be a stockman, and brand and draft cattle all the
days of his life.  Judy was going to be his "aide-de-camp", provided
he let her stay in the saddle, and provided her with a whip just as
long as his own.  Meg thought she should like to marry the richest
squatter in Australia, and have the Governor and the Premier come up
for shooting and "things," and give balls to which all the people
within a hundred miles would come.  Nell decided the would make soap
and candles, coloured as well as plain, when she arrived at years
of discretion; said Baby inclined to keeping paddocks full of pet
lambs that never grew into sheep.

Bunty did, not wax enthusiastic over any of the ideas.

"I'd rather be like Mr. Gillet," he said, and his eyes looked dreamy.

"Pooh! no books and figures far me; give me a run of Salt Bush country,
and a few thousand sheep," said Pip.

"Hear! hear!" chimed in Judy.

"Stoopids!" said Bunty, in a voice of great scorn.  "Doesn't Mr.
Gillet keep the store keys--just think those currants and figs."



CHAPTER XVIII The Picnic at Krangi-Bahtoo


Esther had gone to a ball, not in a dress of delicate colour with
great puffed sleeves, and a dazzling neck bare and beautiful under its
wraps, not through the darkness to a blaze of lights and swinging
music.

She had gone, in the broad light of the morning, in a holland suit
with a blue Henley shirt, a sailor hat, and a gossamer.

Under the front buggy seat where Mr. Hassal sat was a box containing
a beautiful gown, all daffodil silk and delicate wavelets of chiffon.
And there were daffodil shoes and stockings, a plume fan in a hat-box
on her knee, and a lovely trained white underskirt with billowy
frills of torchon, the very sight of which made Meg wild to
be grown up.

But none of these things were to be donned for many an hour yet.

The ball was a neat little matter of fifty-five miles away, across
country, so she had to start tolerably early, of course, in order to
have comfortable time to "titivate," as Pip expressed it.

The children, as compensation for having no part in this pleasure,
were to have a very, out-of-the-way kind of picnic all to themselves.

In the first place, the picnic ground was fourteen miles away;
in the second, the journey was to be made, not in everyday buggies,
or on commonplace horses, but on a dray drawn by a team of twelve
yoked bullocks.

A boundary-rider had reported that a magnificent blue gum that
they had long called King Koree had been blown down during a violent
gale, and Mr. Hassal immediately declared that, whatever the
trouble, it must be brought for the foundation of a kind of dam
across the creek at Krangi-Bahtoo, the picnic spot.  The fallen
bush monarch lay twenty miles away from the station, and six beyond
the place chosen for the picnic; so it was arranged the trolly
should carry the party for the fourteen miles, leave them to
picnic, go forward for the tree, bring it back, and deposit it near
the creek ready for future operations, and bring the children
back in the cool of the evening.

But for escorting his daughter to the ball, Mr. Hassal would have
gone himself to the place and seen about it in person.  As it was, he
placed the great trolly in the charge of four men, with instructions
to pick up a couple of men from distant huts to help in the task.

Krangi-Bahtoo--or Duck Water, as, less prettily, we should call
it--was the name given to the head of the creek, which had scooped
out the earth till it made itself a beautiful ravine just there,
with precipitous rocks and boulders that the kangaroos skipped across
and played hide-and-seek behind with hunters, and great towering
blue gums and red gums, that seemed to lose themselves in the blue,
blue sky-canopy above.

Tettawonga told of a Bunyip that dwelt where the trickling water
had made a pool, deep and beautiful, and delicate ferns had crept
tenderly to fringe its edge, and blackwood, and ti-trees grown up
thick and strong for a girdle.  The water-hen made a home there,
the black swan built among the grass-like reeds, the wild duck
made frequent dark zigzag lines against the sky.  From the trees
the bell-bird, the coach-whip, the tewinga, the laughing-jackass,
the rifle-bird and regent, filled the air with sound, if not with
music.  And the black snake, the brown snake, the whip, the diamond,
and the death adder glided gently among the fallen leaves and
grasses, and held themselves in cheerful readiness for intruders.
That was why a condition was attached to the freely granted picnic.

Everyone might go, and go on the bullock-dray, but the picnic was
to take place above the ravine, and no one was to venture down, on
pain of being instantly packed back to Sydney.

They all promised faithfully.  Mrs. Hassal, tiny as she was, had a
way of commanding implicit obedience.

Then an incredible number of hampers, brimming over with good things,
was packed.

Mr. Gillet went, to give an appearance of steadiness to the party,
and to see no one got sunstroke.

He had a Heine in one pocket against the long, unusual day, a bulging
Tennyson in the other, and a sheaf of English papers under his arm
as he climbed on the trolly, where the whole seven were already seated.

The SEVEN?  Even so, Judy had refused to stir without the General,
and had promised "on her life" not to allow any harm to come near him.

Mr. Gillet gave a glance almost of dismay when he found the whole
number was to be present, without the subtraction of the mischievously
disposed ones, or the addition of anyone but himself weighted with
authority.  For a moment he distrusted his own powers in such a
situation.

Judy caught the doubting look.

"You're quoting poetry to yourself, Mr. Gillet," she said.

"I?" he said, and looked astonished.  "Indeed, no.  What makes you
think so, Miss Judy?"

"I can hear it distinctly," she said.  "Your eyes are saying it,
and your left ear, not to mention the ends of your moustache."

"Judy!" reproved Meg, whom something had made strangely quiet.

He pretended to be alarmed--shut his eyes, held his left ear,
covered his moustache.

"What can they be saying?" he said.

"'Oh that I was where I would be!
  Then I would be where I am not:
  But where I am I still must be,
  And where I would be I cannot.'

"Meg, I WISH you would stop treading on my toes."

So after that even Mr. Gillet grew gay and talkative, to show he
was enjoying himself, and the bullocks caught the infection of the
brimming spirits behind them, and moved a LEETLE bit faster than
snails.  When they had crept along over about ten miles, however,
the slow motion and the heat that beat down sobered them a little.

"Miss Meg, that silver-grey gum before you, guileless of leaves,
indicates Duck Water."

How glad they were to unfold themselves and stretch out their arms
and legs on the ground at last.  No one had dreamt riding behind a
bullock team could have been so "flat, stale, and unprofitable," as
it was after the first mile or two.

Then the trolly continued its course.

"I doubt if they will be back before the sun goes down, if they
don't go a little quicker," Mr. Gillet said; "it is lunch-time
now."

They were in a great grassed paddock that at one end fell abruptly
down to the ravine and swamp lands known as "Duck Water."

A belt of great trees made a shade at one side, and along the other
was the barbed-wire fence that showed they had not got away from the
Yarrahappini estate even yet: higher up was the lonely bark hut of
one of the stockmen.

They went up in a body to speak to him before he joined the bullock
team, and to view his solitary dwelling.

Just a small room it was, with a wide fireplace and chimney, where
hung a frying-pan, a billy, a cup, and a spoon.  There was a bunk in
one corner, with a couple of blue blankets on it, a deal table and one
chair in the middle of the room.  Over the fire-place hung a rough
cupboard, made out of a soap-box, and used to hold rations.  From a
nail in the low ceiling a mosquito-net bag was suspended, and the
buzzing flies around proclaimed that it held meat.  The walls were
papered with many a copy of "The Illustrated Sydney News", and
"The Town and Country Journal"; there was a month-old "Daily Telegraph"
lying on the chair, where the owner had laid it down.

A study in brown the stockman was, brown, dull eyes; brown,
dusty-looking hair; brown skin, sundried and shrivelled; brown,
unkempt beard; brown trousers of corduroy, and brown coat.

His pipe was black, however--a clay, that looked as if it had
been smoked for twenty years.

"Wouldn't you like to be nearer the homestead?" Meg asked.  "Isn't
it lonely?"

"Not ter mention," the brown man said to his pipe or his beard.

"What do you do with yourself when you're, not outside?" asked
Pip.

"Smoke," said the man.

"But on Sundays, and all through the evenings?"

"Smoke," he said.

"On Cwismas day," Baby said, pressing to see this strange man;
"zen what does you do?"

"Smoke" he said.

Judy wanted to know how long he'd lived in the little place, and
everyone was stricken dumb to hear he had been there most of the time
for seven years.

"Don't you ever forget how to talk?" she said, in an awestruck
voice.

But he answered laconically to his beard that there was the cat.

Baby had found it already under the kerosene tin that did duty
for a bucket, and it had scratched her in three places: brown,
like its master, it was evil-eyed, fiercely whiskered, thin
as a rail; still, there was the affection of years between the two.

Mr. Gillet told him of the squatter's wish that he should go with the
other men and help with the tree.  He pulled a brown hat over his brow
and moved away towards the bullock-dray, which had crept up the
winding road by now, to the hill-top.

"Water in tub, nearer than creek," he muttered to his pipe before he
went, and they found his tub-tank and gladly filled the billy ready
for lunch.

Mrs. Hassal's roast fowls and duck tasted well; even though they
frizzled on the plates as if the sun were trying to finish their
cooking.  And the apple tarts and apricot turnovers vanished speedily;
and of the fruit salad that came forth from two screw-top
bottles, not a teaspoonful remained to tell a tale.

Mr. Gillet had brought materials for a damper, by special request,
and after lunch prepared to make it, so they might have it for
afternoon tea.

"Pheough!" said Judy.  "Is THAT how you make it?  You need not give
ME any."

It certainly was manufactured with surprising celerity.

Mr. Gillet merely tossed some flour from a bag out upon a plate,
added a pinch of salt and some water; then he shaped it into a cake
of dough, and laid it on the ashes of the fire, covering it all over
with the hot, silver ash.

"HOW dirty!" said Nell, elevating her pretty little nose.

But when it was cooked, and Mr. Gillet lifted it up and dusted the
ash away--lo! it was high and light and beautifully white.

So they ate it, and took mental marginal notes to make it in the
paddocks at Misrule for each and every picnic to come.

They piled up two plates of good things and put in the brown man's
cupboard, and Mr. Gillet laid is unread English papers on the chair
near the cat.

"That 'Telegraph' is a month old," he said deprecatingly seeing Meg
smile upon him her first smile that day.


Chapter XIX  A Pale-Blue Hair Ribbon


    She in her virginal beauty
    As pure as a pictured saint,
    How should this sinning and sorrow
    Have for her danger or taint?

The reason our sweet pale Margaret had been reluctant of her smiles
was on account of the very man who alone missed them.

Quite a warm friendship had sprung up during the month between the
little fair-faced girl, who looked with such serene blue eyes to a
future she felt must be beautiful, and the world-worn man, who looked
back to a past all blackened and unlovely by his own acts.

He rode with the two girls every-day, because Mrs. Hassal did not
like them going long distances alone; and, seeing Judy seldom walked
her horse, and Meg's steed had not a canter in it, it fell out that
he kept beside the slow and timid rider all the time.

"You remind me of a little sister I had who died," he said slowly to
Meg once, after a long talk.  "Perhaps if she were alive now I should
not be quite so contemptible."

Meg's face flushed scarlet, and a shamed look had come into her eyes.
It seemed altogether terrible to her that he should know she knew of
his failing.

"Perhaps it makes her sorry now," she said in a whisper he scarcely
heard, and then she grew pale at her boldness, and rode on a little
way to hide her distressed looks.

On the way home the pale-blue ribbon, that tied the strands of her
sunny plait together, blew off.  He dismounted and picked it up.
Meg stretched out her hand for it, but he untied the bow and folded
it slowly round his big hand.

"May I keep it?" he said in a low voice.  "For my blue ribbon?
I know the conditions that attach."

"If you would--oh, if you would!" Meg breathed rather than said.
Then Judy galloped up and they rode home three abreast.  It was
such happiness to her all the hot, long days that followed; to a
girl just entering life there can be no purer, deeper feeling of
pleasure than that brought by the knowledge that she is influencing
for good some man or woman older than herself, more sin-worn and
earth-wearied.  Poor little Meg!  Her tender rose dreams had
pictured her big _protege_ a man among men again, holding up his
head once more, taking his place in the world, going back to the
old country, and claiming the noble lady her fertile imagination
had pictured; waiting so patiently for him; and all this because
she, Meg Woolcot, had stepped into his life and pointed the way
he should go.

And then she went to swing in a hammock on the back veranda,
and all her castles came tumbling about her ears, dealing her sharp,
bitter blows.  There was a thick creeper of passion-fruit vines
behind her, and through it she could hear Tettawonga talking to
the cook.

"Marse Gillet on the burst agen," he said, and chuckled through
the side of his lips where his pipe did not rest.

Meg sat up in horror.  Since she had been at Yarrahappini she had
heard the phrase applied to too many of the station hands: not to
know that it meant a reckless drinking bout.

"Lor'!  I'M not surprised," the woman said, "he's been too sober late
days to keep it up; s'pose he's been trying to last the visitors out,
but found it too much.  Who's got the keys?"

"Mis' Hassal," he said, "you to helpin' her--ba`al good for
stores to-day, Marse Gillet--he, he, ha, ha!"

So that was what had happened to him all these three days she had
not seen him!  She had heard he had ridden over to the next station on
business for Mr. Hassal, but had not dreamed such 'a thing had
overtaken him.  The fifth day she had seen him in the distance, once
coming out of the storeroom and looking exactly like himself, only
his shoulders stooped a little more, and once smoking outside his own
door.

The sixth day was the picnic.

Just as light-hearted and merry as the others she could not feel,
with this disappointment at her heart, this shaken trust in human
nature.

How weak he was, she thought, how ignoble!

All her pity was swept away in a young, large indignation.

She had hardly shaken hands when they had met in the morning,
and all the long drive she was persistently cold towards him.

After lunch the party became scattered.  Judy took the General and
went over to the belt of trees; Pip and Bunty occupied themselves
with catching locusts; Baby and Nell gathered wild flowers.  Meg
knelt down to collect the spoons and forks: and put the untouched
food back into the baskets away from the ants.

"I will do this--you look hot, Miss Meg; sit down quietly," Mr.
Gillet said.

"Thank you, but I prefer to do it myself," Miss Meg said, with
freezing dignity.

She did not look at him, but there was a certain tightness about
her lips that made him know the light in her clear young, eyes was
a scornful one.

He did not offer again, but sat and watched her pack up the things
with an untranslatable look on his face.  When she had almost
finished he took something out of his pocket.

"I have to give you this again," he said, and handed her the blue
length of ribbon, folded smoothly, but showing the crease where it
had been tied.

She took it without lifting her eyes, crushed it up in her hand, and
slipped it into her pocket.

"I had almost hoped you would say I might keep it, in spite of
everything," he said, "just as a talisman against the future, but
your lips are too severe, Miss for me to cherish the hope longer."

"It would be as useless as it has been," she said stiffly.  Her
hands moved nervously, however, and she wrapped up the remains of
a duck and a jam tart together.

"Then I am not to have another chance?" he said.

"It would be no use," Meg repeated, gathering up bananas and oranges
with a heightened colour.

He does not realize how wicked he has been, he thinks he ought to be
forgiven at once was her thought.

He emptied the billy slowly on the ground, he put on its blackened lid
and tied the newspaper around it.  Then he looked at her again,
and the way her soft hair fell on her forehead made him think
of his young dead sister.

"I BEG you to give it to me again, little Miss Meg," he said.

Meg's heart and head had a rapid battle; the former was tender
and charitable, and bade her take the little ribbon and give it to
him instantly; the latter said he had sinned greatly, and she must
show him her disapproval by her manner, even if she yielded what he
asked her in the end.  The head won.

"My influence is evidently useless--that bit of ribbon would make
no difference in the future," she said very coldly.

He leaned back against the tree and yawned, as if the subject had no
more interest for him.

"Ah well," he said, "I dare say you are right."  Meg felt a little
taken down.

"Of course, if you really want the ribbon you can have it," she said
loftily.  She took it from her pocket and tendered it to him.

But he made no effort to take it.

"Keep it to tie your hair again, little girl," he said; "after all,
I don't suppose it would be any use."

Meg continued her packing with burning cheeks, and he filled up his
pipe and smoked it, watching her idly the while.

"It's an odd thing," he said, more as if making an observation
than addressing her, "but the gentlest-looking women are nearly
always the hardest."

Meg opened her mouth to speak, but found nothing to say, so closed it
again and began to count Mrs. Hassal's forks for the fourth time.

"I wonder would you mind if I gave you a little advice, Miss Meg, in
return for all you have given me," he said, taking his pipe from
his mouth and looking at it as if he were trying to find out the
lettering on its nickel plate.

"Certainly not."

She laid down the bundle and looked at him with calm, surprised
eyes.  "Say whatever you please, I do not mind in the very least."

He sat up and played with the handle of a strap while he spoke.

"You have brothers," he said; "some day they will go a little
astray--for it is only women like you, Miss Meg, and angels who
can keep to the path always.  Don't be too hard on them.  Don't
make an effort to show them the difference between your whiteness
and their blackness.  They will see it right enough, but they
won't like you to draw their attention to it.  Try and look gentle
and forgiving--they'll feel quite as miserable as you could wish
them to feel.  The world has a beautiful frown of its own, and an
endless vocabulary of cold words--wouldn't it do if the little
sisters left it the monopoly of them?"

"Oh-h-h!" said Meg.  Her cheeks were crimson, and all the dignity
had oozed out of her voice.

He buckled the strap round nothing with infinite care, and went on
again in a low tone:

"Suppose Pip did something very wrong some day, and the world flung
stones at him till he was bruised all over.  And suppose feeling
very wretched, he came home to his sisters.  And Meg, because
wickedness was abhorrent to her, threw a few more little stones,
so that the pain might teach him a lesson he could not forget.
And Judy, because he was her brother and in trouble, flung her arms
round him and encouraged him, and helped him to fight the world again,
and gave him never a hard word or look, thinking he had had plenty.
Which sister's influence would be greater, Miss Meg?"

Meg's little soft mouth, was quivering, her eyes were on the ground,
because the tears would have splashed out if she had lifted them.

"Oh-h-h!" she said again.  "Oh, how very horrid I have been--oh-h-h!"

She covered her face with her hands, for one of her quickly gathered
tears was trembling on her lashes.

Mr. Gillet dropped the strap and the pipe, and looked across to her
with tender eyes.

"I am more than twice your age, Miss Meg, old enough nearly to be
your father--you will forgive me for saying all this, won't you?
I was thinking, of my sister who died.  I had another little sister,
too, a year older, but she was hard--only event to her once.
She is one of the best women in England now, but her lips are severe.
Little Miss Meg, could not bear the thought of you growing hard."

Half a dozen big tears had fallen down among the forks.  Meg was
crying because it was borne upon her what a very hateful creature
she was.  First Alan lectured her and spoke of his sister, and now
this man.

He misinterpreted her silence.

"I have no right to speak to you like this, because my life has been
any colour but white--that is it, isn't it, Miss Meg?" he said with
great sadness.

Meg dropped her sheltering hands.

"Oh, no," she said, "oh! how CAN you think so?  It is only I am so
horrid." She rummaged in her pocket and brought out the ribbon.

"Will you take it again?" she said--"oh, PLEASE, just to make me
feel less horrid.  Oh, please take it!"

She looked at him with wet, imploring eyes, and held it out.

He took it, smoothed its crumpledness, and placed it in his
pocket-book.

"God bless you," he said, and the tone made Meg sob.



CHAPTER XX  Little Judy


Across the grass came a little flying figure, Judy in a short
pink frock with her wild curls blowing about her face.

"Are you a candidate for sunstroke--where IS your hat, Miss Judy?"
Mr. Gillet asked.

Judy shook back her dark tangle:

"Sorrow a know I knows," she said--"it's a banana the General
is afther dyin' for, and sure it's a dead body I shall live to see
misself if you've eaten all the oranges."

Meg pushed the bag of fruit across the cloth to her, and tried to
tilt her hat over her tell-tale eyes.

But the bright dark ones had seen the wet lashes the first moment.

"I s'pose you've been reading stupid poetry and making Meg cry?"
she said, with an aggressive glance from Mr. Gillet to the book on
the grass.  "You really ought to be, ashamed of yourselves, SICH
behaviour at a picnic.  It's been a saving in oranges, though,
that's a mercy"

She took half a dozen great fat ones from the bag, as well as four
or five bananas, and went back with flying steps to the belt of trees,
where the General in his holland coat could just be seen.

He was calmly grubbing up the earth and putting it in his little red
mouth when she arrived with the bananas.

He looked up at her with an adorable smile.  "BABY!" she said, swooping
down upon him with one of her wild rushes. "BABY!"

She kissed him fifty times; it almost hurt her sometimes, the feeling
of love for this little fat, dirty boy.

Then she gathered him up on her knee and wiped as much of the dirt as
possible from his mouth with the corner of his coat.

"Narna," he said, struggling onto the ground again; so she took the
skin from a great yellow one and put it in his small, chubby hand.

He ate some of it, and squeezed the rest up tightly in his hands,
gleefully watching it come up between his wee fingers in little
worm-like morsels.

Then he smeared it over his dimpled face, and even rubbed it on his
hair, while Judy was engrossed with her fifth orange.

So, of course, she had to whip him for doing it, or pretend to, which
came to the same thing.  And then he had to whip her, which did not
only mean pretence.

He beat her with a stick he found near, he smacked her face and pulled
her hair and bumped himself up and down on her chest, and all in such
solemn, painstaking earnestness that she could only laugh even when
he really hurt her.

"Dood now?" he said at last anxiously.  And she began to weep noisily,
with covered face and shaking shoulders, in the proper, penitent way.
And then he put his darling arms round her neck and hugged her, and
said "Ju-Ju" in a choking little voice, and patted her cheeks, and
gave her a hundred eager, wide, wet kisses till she was better.

Then they played chasings, and the General fell down twenty times,
and scratched his little knees and hands, and struggled up again.
and staggered on.

Presently Judy stood still in a hurry; there was a tick working
its slow way into her wrist.  Only its two back legs were left out
from under the skin, and for a long time she pulled and pulled without
any success.  Then it broke in two, and she had to leave one half in
for little Grandma and kerosene to extract on their return.

Two or three minutes it had taken her to try to move it, and when
she looked up the General had toddled same distance away, and was
travelling along as fast as ever his little fat legs would carry
him, thinking he was racing her.  Just as she, started after him he
looked back, his eyes dancing, his face dimpled and mischievous, and,
oh! so dirty..

And then--ah, God!

It is so hard to write it.  My pen has had only happy writing
to-do so far, and now!

"You rogue!" Judy called, pretending to run very quickly.
Then the whole world seemed to rise up before her.

There was a tree falling, one of the great, gaunt, naked things that
had been ringbarked long ago.  All day it had swayed to and fro,
rotten through and through; now there came up across the plain a puff
of wind, and down it went before it.  One wild ringing cry Judy gave,
then she leaped across the ground, her arms outstretched to the little
lad running with laughing eyes and lips straight to death.

The crash shook the trees around, the very air seemed splintered.

They had heard it--all the others--heard the wild cry and then the
horrible thud.

How their knees shook what blanched faces they had as they rushed
towards the sound!

They lifted it off the little bodies--the long, silvered trunk with
the gum dead and dried in streaks upon it.  Judy was face downwards,
her arms spread out.

And underneath her was the General, a little shaken, mightily
astonished, but quite unhurt.  Meg clasped him for a minute, but then
laid him down, and gathered with the others close around Judy.

Oh, the little dark, quiet head, the motionless body, in its pink,
crushed frock, the small, thin, outspread hands!

"Judy!" Pip said, in a voice of beseeching agony.  But the only
answer was the wind at the tree-tops and the frightened breathings
of the others.

Mr. Gillet remembered there was no one to act but himself.  He went
with Pip to the stockman's hut; and they took the door off its
leather hinges and carried it down the hill.

"I will lift her," he said, and passed his arms around the little
figure, raising her slowly, slowly, gently upwards, laying her on
the door with her face to the sky.

But she moaned--oh, how she moaned!

Pip, whose heart had leapt to his throat at the first sign of life,
almost went mad as the little sounds of agony burst from her lips.

They raised the stretcher, and bore her up the hill to the little
brown hut at the top.

Then Mr. Gillet spoke, outside the doorway, to Meg and Pip, who
seemed dazed, stunned.

"It will be hours before we can get help, and it is five now," he
said.  "Pip, there is a doctor staying at Boolagri ten miles along
the road.  Fetch him--run all the way.  I will go back home--fourteen
miles.  Miss Meg, I can't be back all at once.  I will bring a buggy;
the bullock-dray is too slow and jolting, even when it comes back.
You must watch by her, give her water if she asks--there is nothing
else you can do."

"She is dying?" Meg said--"dying?"

He thought of all that might happen before he brought help, and dare
not leave her unprepared.

"I think her back is broken," he said, very quietly.  "If it is, it
means death."

Pip fled away down the road that led to the doctor's.

Mr. Gillet gave a direction or two, then he looked at Meg.

"Everything depends on you; you must not even think of breaking down,"
he said.  "Don't move her, watch all the time."

He moved away towards the lower road.

She sprang after him.

"Will she die while you are away?--no one but me."

Her eyes were wild, terrified.

"God knows!" he said, and turned away.

It was almost more than he could bear to go and leave this little
girl alone to face so terrible a thing.  "God help me!" she moaned,
hurrying back, but not looking at the hot, low-hanging sky.  "Help
me, God!  God, help me, help me!"



CHAPTER XXI  When the Sun Went Down


Such a sunset!

Down at the foot of the grass hill there was a flame-coloured sky,
with purple, soft clouds massed in banks high up where the dying
glory met the paling blue.  The belt of trees had grown black, and
stretched sombre, motionless arms against the orange background.
All the wind had died, and the air hung hot and still, freighted
with the strange silence of the bush.

And at the top of the hill, just within the doorway of the little
brown hut, her wide eyes on the wonderful heavens, Judy lay dying.
She was very quiet now, though she had been talking--talking of
all sorts of things.  She told them she had no pain at all.

"Only I shall die when they move me," she said.

Meg was sitting in a little heap on the floor beside her.  She had
never moved her eyes from the face on the pillow of mackintoshes, she
had never opened her white lips to say one word.

Outside the bullocks stood motionless against the sky--Judy said
they looked like stuffed ones having their portrait taken.  She
smiled the least little bit, but Meg said, "Don't," and writhed.

Two of the men had gone on superfluous errands for help; the others
stood some distance away, talking in subdued voices.

There was nothing for them to do.  The brown man had been talking--
a rare thing for him.

He had soothed the General off to sleep, and laid him in the bunk
with the blue blanket tucked around him.  And he had made a billy
of hot strong tea, and asked the children, with tears in his eyes,
to drink some, but none of them would.

Baby had fallen to sleep on the floor, her arms clasped tightly
around Judy's lace-up boot.

Runty was standing, with a stunned look on his white face, behind
the stretcher.  His eyes were on his sister's hair, but he did
not dare to let there wander to her face, for fear of what he should
see there.  Nellie was moving all the time--now to the fence to strain
her eyes down the road, where the evening shadows lay heavily, now
to fling herself face downward behind the hut and say, "Make her
better, God!  God, make her better, make her better!  Oh! CAN'T You
make her better?"

Greyer grew the shadows round the little but, the bullocks' outlines
had faded, and only an indistinct mass of soft black loomed across
the light.  Behind the trees the fire was going out, here and there
were yellow, vivid streaks yet, but the flaming sun-edge, had dipped
beyond the world, and the purple, delicate veil was dropping down.

A curlew's note broke the silence, wild, mournful, unearthly.  Meg
shivered, and sat up straight.  Judy's brow, grew damp, her eyes
dilated, her lips trembled.

"Meg!" she said, in a whisper that cut the air.  "Oh, Meg, I'm
frightened!  MEG, I'm so frightened!"

"God!" said Meg's heart.

"Meg, say something.  Meg, help me!  Look at the dark, Meg.  MEG,
I can't die!  Oh, why don't they be quick?"

Nellie flew to the fence again; then to say, "Make her better,
God--oh, please, God!"

"Meg, I can't think of anything to say. Can't you say something,
Meg?  Aren't there any prayers about the dying in the Prayer Book?--
I forget.  Say something, Meg!"

Meg's lips moved, but her tongue uttered no word.

"Meg, I'm so frightened!  I can't think of anything but `For what
we are about to receive,' and that's grace, isn't it?  And there's
nothing in Our Father that would do either.  Meg, I wish we'd gone
to Sunday-school and learnt things.  Look at the dark, Meg!  Oh, Meg,
hold my hands!"

"Heaven won't--be--dark," Meg's lips said.  Even when speech came,
it was only a halting, stereotyped phrase that fell from them.

"If it's all gold and diamonds, I don't want to go!"  The child was
crying now.  "Oh, Meg, I want to be alive!  How'd you like to die,
Meg, when you're only thirteen?  Think how lonely I'll be without
you all.  Oh, Meg!  Oh, Pip, Pip!  Oh, Baby!  Nell!"

The tears streamed down her cheeks; her chest rose and fell.

"Oh, say something, Meg!--hymns!--anything!"

Half the book of "Hymns Ancient and Modern" danced across Meg's brain.
Which one could she think of that would bring quiet into those
feverish eyes that were fastened on her face with such a frightening,
imploring look?

Then she opened her lips:

    "Come unto Me, ye weary,
     And I will give you rest,
     Oh, bl---

"I'm not weary, I don't WANT to rest," Judy said, in a fretful tone.

Again Meg tried:

   "My God, my Father, while I stray
    Far from my home on life's rough way,
    Oh, teach me from my heart to say
           Thy will be done!"

"That's for old people," said the little tired voice.  He won't expect
ME to say it."

Then Meg remembered the most beautiful hymn in the world, and said
the first and last verses without a break in her voice:

   "Abide with me, fast falls the eventide,
    The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide.
    When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
    Help of the helpless, oh, abide with me!

    Hold Thou Thy Cross before my closing eyes,
    Shine through the gloom and point me to the skies.
    Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee
    In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me!

"Oh! and Judy, dear, we are forgetting; there's Mother, Judy, dear--
you won't be lonely!  Can't you remember Mother's eyes, little Judy?"

Judy grew quiet, and still more quiet.  She shut her eyes so she
could not see the gathering shadows.  Meg's arms were round her,
Meg's cheek was on her brow, Nell was holding her hands, Baby her
feet, Bunty's lips were on her hair.  Like that they went with her
right to the Great Valley, where there are no lights even for stumbling,
childish feet.

The shadows were cold, and smote upon their hearts; they could
feel the wind from the strange waters on their brows;  but only
she who was about to cross heard the low lapping of the waves.

Just as her feet touched the water there was a figure in the doorway.

"Judy!" said a wild voice; and Pip brushed them aside and fell
down beside her.

"Judy, Judy, JUDY!

The light flickered back in her eyes.  She kissed him with pale lips
once, twice; she gave him both her hands, and her last smile.

Then the wind blew over them all, and, with a little shudder, she
slipped away.



Chapter XXII  And Last


    "She seemed a thing that could not feel
        The touch of earthly years."

    "No motion has she now--no force;
       She neither hears nor sees;
     Rolled round in earth's diurnal course,
       With rocks and stones and trees."


They went home again, the six of them, and Esther, who, all her
days, "would go the softlier, sadlier" because of the price that
had been paid for the life of her little sweet son.  The very air
of Yarrahappini seemed to crush them and hang heavy on their souls.

So when the Captain, who had hurried up to see the last of his poor
little girl, asked if they would like to go home, they all said
"Yes."

There was a green space of ground on a hill-top behind the cottage,
and a clump of wattle trees, dark-green now, but gold-crowned
and gracious in the spring.

This is where they left little Judy.  All around it Mr. Hassal had
white tall palings put; the short grave was in the shady corner of
it.

The place looked like a tiny churchyard in a children's country
where there had only been one death.

Or a green fair field, with one little garden bed.

Meg was glad the little mound looked to the east; the suns died
behind it--the orange and yellow and purple suns she could not
bear to watch ever again while she lived.

But away in the east they rose tenderly always, and the light crept
up across the sky to the hill-top in delicate pinks and trembling
blues and brightening greys, but never fiery, yellow streaks, that
made the eyes ache with hot tears.

There was a moon making it white and beautiful when they said
good-bye to it on the last day.

They plucked a blade or two of grass each from the fresh turfs,
and turned away.  Nobody cried; the white stillness of the far moon,
the pale, hanging stars, the faint wind stirring the wattles; held
back their tears till they had closed the little gate behind them
and left her alone on the quiet hill-top.  Then they went-back
to Misrule, each to pickup the thread of life and go on with the
weaving that, thank God, must be done, or hearts would break
every day.

Meg had grown older; she would never be quite so young again as
she had been before that red sunset sank into her soul.

There was a deeper light in her eyes; such tears as she had wept
clear the sight till life becomes a thing more distinct and
far-reaching.

Nellie and she went to church the first Sunday after their return.
Aldith was a few pews away, light-souled as ever, dressed in gay
attire, flashing smiling, coquettish glances across to the Courtneys'
pew, and the Grahams sitting just behind.

How far away Meg had grown from her!  It seemed years since she
had been engrossed with the latest mode in hat trimming, the dip
of "umbrella" skirts, and the best method of making the hands
white.  Years since she had tried a trembling 'prentice hand at
flirtations.  Years, almost, since she had given the little blue
ribbon at Yarrahappini, that was doing more good than she
dreamed of.

Alan looked at her from his pew--the little figure in its sorrowful
black, the shining hair hanging in a plait no longer frizzed at the
end, the chastened droop of the young lips, the wistful sadness
of the blue eyes.  He could hardly realize it was the little
scatterbrain girl who had written that letter, and stolen away
through the darkness to meet his graceless young brother.

He clasped her hand when church was over; his grey eyes, with the
quick moisture in them, made up for the clumsy stumbling words of
sympathy he tried to speak.

"Let us be friends always, Miss Meg," he said, as they parted at
the Misrule gate.

"Yes, let us," said Meg.

And the firm, frank friendship became a beautiful thing in both their
lives, strengthening Meg and making the boy gentler.

Pip became his laughing, high-spirited self again, as even the most
loving boy will, thanks to the merciful making of young hearts;  but
he used to get sudden fits of depression at times, and disappear all
at once, in the midst of a game of cricket or football, or from
the table when the noise was at its highest.

Bunty presented to the world just as grimy a face as of old, and
hands even more grubby, for he had taken a mechanical turn of late,
and spent his spare moments in manufacturing printing machines--so
called--and fearful and wonderful engines, out of an old stove and
some pots and rusty frying-pans rescued from the rubbish heap.

But he did not tell quite so many stories in these days; that deep
sunset had stolen even into his young heart, and whenever he felt
inclined to say "I never, 'twasn't me, 'twasn't my fault," a tangle
of dark curls rose before him, just as they had lain that night when
he had not dared to move his eyes away from them.

Baby's legs engrossed her very much at present, for she had just
been promoted from socks to stockings, and all who remember the
occasion in their own lives will realize the importance of it to her.

Nell seemed to grow prettier every day.  Pip had his hands full with
trying to keep her from growing conceited; if brotherly rubs and
snubs availed anything, she ought to have been as lowly minded as
if she had had red hair and a nose of heavenward bent.

Esther said she wished she could buy a few extra years, a stern
brow, and dignity in large quantities from some place or other--
there might be some chance, then, of Misrule resuming its baptismal
and unexciting name of The River House.

But, oddly enough, no one echoed the wish.

The Captain never smoked at the end of the side veranda now:
the ill-kept lawn made him see always a little figure in a pink
frock and battered hat mowing the grass in a blaze of sunlight.
Judy's death made his six living children dearer to his heart,
though he showed his affection very little more.

The General grew chubbier and more adorable every day he lived.
It is no exaggeration to say that they all worshipped him now
in his little kingly babyhood, for the dear life had been twice
given, and the second time it was Judy's gift, and priceless
therefore.

My pen has been moving heavily, slowly, for these last two
chapters; it refuses to run lightly, freely again just yet,
so I will lay it aside, or I shall sadden you.

Some day, if you would care to hear it, I should like to tell
you of my young Australians again, slipping a little space
of years.

Until then, farewell and adieu.










End of Project Gutenberg's Seven Little Australians, by Ethel Turner






This etext was produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.






SIDE-LIGHTS ON ASTRONOMY

AND KINDRED FIELDS OF POPULAR SCIENCE


ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES


BY SIMON NEWCOMB




CONTENTS


PREFACE

    I. THE UNSOLVED PROBLEMS OF ASTRONOMY
   II. THE NEW PROBLEMS OF THE UNIVERSE
  III. THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSE
   IV. THE EXTENT OF THE UNIVERSE
    V. MAKING AND USING A TELESCOPE
   VI. WHAT THE ASTRONOMERS ARE DOING
  VII. LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE
 VIII. HOW THE PLANETS ARE WEIGHED
   IX. THE MARINER'S COMPASS
    X. THE FAIRYLAND OF GEOMETRY
   XI. THE ORGANIZATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
  XII. CAN WE MAKE IT RAIN?
 XIII. THE ASTRONOMICAL EPHEMERIS AND NAUTICAL ALMANAC
  XIV. THE WORLD'S DEBT TO ASTRONOMY
   XV. AN ASTRONOMICAL FRIENDSHIP
  XVI. THE EVOLUTION OF THE SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATOR
 XVII. THE EVOLUTION OF ASTRONOMICAL KNOWLEDGE
XVIII. ASPECTS OF AMERICAN ASTRONOMY
  XIX. THE UNIVERSE AS AN ORGANISM
   XX. THE RELATION OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD TO SOCIAL PROGRESS
  XXI. THE OUTLOOK FOR THE FLYING-MACHINE




ILLUSTRATIONS

SIMON NEWCOMB

PHOTOGRAPH OP THE CORONA OP THE SUN, TAKEN IN TRIPOLI DURING TOTAL
ECLIPSE OF AUGUST 30, 1905.

A TYPICAL STAR CLUSTER-CENTAURI

THE GLASS DISK

THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL

THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL

GRINDING A LARGE LENS

IMAGE OF CANDLE-FLAME IN OBJECT-GLASS

TESTING ADJUSTMENT OF OBJECT-GLASS

A VERY PRIMITIVE MOUNTING FOR A TELESCOPE

THE HUYGHENIAN EYE-PIECE

SECTION OF THE PRIMITIVE MOUNTING

SPECTRAL IMAGES OF STARS, THE UPPER LINE SHOWING HOW THEY APPEAR
WITH THE EYE-PIECE PUSHED IN, THE LOWER WITH THE EYE-PIECE DRAWN
OUT

THE GREAT REFRACTOR OF THE NATIONAL OBSERVATORY AT WASHINGTON

THE "BROKEN-BACKED COMET-SEEKER"

NEBULA IN ORION

DIP OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE IN VARIOUS LATITUDES

STAR SPECTRA

PROFESSOR LANGLEY'S AIR-SHIP






PREFACE

In preparing and issuing this collection of essays and addresses,
the author has yielded to what he could not but regard as the too
flattering judgment of the publishers. Having done this, it became
incumbent to do what he could to justify their good opinion by
revising the material and bringing it up to date. Interest rather
than unity of thought has determined the selection.

A prominent theme in the collection is that of the structure,
extent, and duration of the universe. Here some repetition of
ideas was found unavoidable, in a case where what is substantially
a single theme has been treated in the various forms which it
assumed in the light of constantly growing knowledge. If the
critical reader finds this a defect, the author can plead in
extenuation only the difficulty of avoiding it under the
circumstances. Although mainly astronomical, a number of
discussions relating to general scientific subjects have been
included.

Acknowledgment is due to the proprietors of the various
periodicals from the pages of which most of the essays have been
taken. Besides Harper's Magazine and the North American Review,
these include McClure's Magazine, from which were taken the
articles "The Unsolved Problems of Astronomy" and "How the Planets
are Weighed." "The Structure of the Universe" appeared in the
International Monthly, now the International Quarterly; "The
Outlook for the Flying-Machine" is mainly from The New York
Independent, but in part from McClure's Magazine; "The World's
Debt to Astronomy" is from The Chautauquan; and "An Astronomical
Friendship" from the Atlantic Monthly.

SIMON NEWCOMB. WASHINGTON, JUNE, 1906.




I

THE UNSOLVED PROBLEMS OF ASTRONOMY


The reader already knows what the solar system is: an immense
central body, the sun, with a number of planets revolving round it
at various distances. On one of these planets we dwell. Vast,
indeed, are the distances of the planets when measured by our
terrestrial standards. A cannon-ball fired from the earth to
celebrate the signing of the Declaration of Independence, and
continuing its course ever since with a velocity of eighteen
hundred feet per second, would not yet be half-way to the orbit of
Neptune, the outer planet. And yet the thousands of stars which
stud the heavens are at distances so much greater than that of
Neptune that our solar system is like a little colony, separated
from the rest of the universe by an ocean of void space almost
immeasurable in extent. The orbit of the earth round the sun is of
such size that a railway train running sixty miles an hour, with
never a stop, would take about three hundred and fifty years to
cross it. Represent this orbit by a lady's finger-ring. Then the
nearest fixed star will be about a mile and a half away; the next
more than two miles; a few more from three to twenty miles; the
great body at scores or hundreds of miles. Imagine the stars thus
scattered from the Atlantic to the Mississippi, and keep this
little finger-ring in mind as the orbit of the earth, and one may
have some idea of the extent of the universe.

One of the most beautiful stars in the heavens, and one that can
be seen most of the year, is a Lyrae, or Alpha of the Lyre, known
also as Vega. In a spring evening it may be seen in the northeast,
in the later summer near the zenith, in the autumn in the
northwest. On the scale we have laid down with the earth's orbit
as a finger-ring, its distance would be some eight or ten miles.
The small stars around it in the same constellation are probably
ten, twenty, or fifty times as far.

Now, the greatest fact which modern science has brought to light
is that our whole solar system, including the sun, with all its
planets, is on a journey towards the constellation Lyra. During
our whole lives, in all probability during the whole of human
history, we have been flying unceasingly towards this beautiful
constellation with a speed to which no motion on earth can
compare. The speed has recently been determined with a fair degree
of certainty, though not with entire exactness; it is about ten
miles a second, and therefore not far from three hundred millions
of miles a year. But whatever it may be, it is unceasing and
unchanging; for us mortals eternal. We are nearer the
constellation by five or six hundred miles every minute we live;
we are nearer to it now than we were ten years ago by thousands of
millions of miles, and every future generation of our race will be
nearer than its predecessor by thousands of millions of miles.

When, where, and how, if ever, did this journey begin--when,
where, and how, if ever, will it end? This is the greatest of the
unsolved problems of astronomy. An astronomer who should watch the
heavens for ten thousand years might gather some faint suggestion
of an answer, or he might not. All we can do is to seek for some
hints by study and comparison with other stars.

The stars are suns. To put it in another way, the sun is one of
the stars, and rather a small one at that. If the sun is moving in
the way I have described, may not the stars also be in motion,
each on a journey of its own through the wilderness of space? To
this question astronomy gives an affirmative answer. Most of the
stars nearest to us are found to be in motion, some faster than
the sun, some more slowly, and the same is doubtless true of all;
only the century of accurate observations at our disposal does not
show the motion of the distant ones. A given motion seems slower
the more distant the moving body; we have to watch a steamship on
the horizon some little time to see that she moves at all. Thus it
is that the unsolved problem of the motion of our sun is only one
branch of a yet more stupendous one: What mean the motions of the
stars--how did they begin, and how, if ever, will they end? So far
as we can yet see, each star is going straight ahead on its own
journey, without regard to its neighbors, if other stars can be so
called. Is each describing some vast orbit which, though looking
like a straight line during the short period of our observation,
will really be seen to curve after ten thousand or a hundred
thousand years, or will it go straight on forever? If the laws of
motion are true for all space and all time, as we are forced to
believe, then each moving star will go on in an unbending line
forever unless hindered by the attraction of other stars. If they
go on thus, they must, after countless years, scatter in all
directions, so that the inhabitants of each shall see only a
black, starless sky.

Mathematical science can throw only a few glimmers of light on the
questions thus suggested. From what little we know of the masses,
distances, and numbers of the stars we see a possibility that the
more slow-moving ones may, in long ages, be stopped in their
onward courses or brought into orbits of some sort by the
attraction of their millions of fellows. But it is hard to admit
even this possibility in the case of the swift-moving ones.
Attraction, varying as the inverse square of the distance,
diminishes so rapidly as the distance increases that, at the
distances which separate the stars, it is small indeed. We could
not, with the most delicate balance that science has yet invented,
even show the attraction of the greatest known star. So far as we
know, the two swiftest-moving stars are, first, Arcturus, and,
second, one known in astronomy as 1830 Groombridge, the latter so
called because it was first observed by the astronomer
Groombridge, and is numbered 1830 in his catalogue of stars. If
our determinations of the distances of these bodies are to be
relied on, the velocity of their motion cannot be much less than
two hundred miles a second. They would make the circuit of the
earth every two or three minutes. A body massive enough to control
this motion would throw a large part of the universe into
disorder. Thus the problem where these stars came from and where
they are going is for us insoluble, and is all the more so from
the fact that the swiftly moving stars are moving in different
directions and seem to have no connection with each other or with
any known star.

It must not be supposed that these enormous velocities seem so to
us. Not one of them, even the greatest, would be visible to the
naked eye until after years of watching. On our finger-ring scale,
1830 Groombridge would be some ten miles and Arcturus thirty or
forty miles away. Either of them would be moving only two or three
feet in a year. To the oldest Assyrian priests Lyra looked much as
it does to us to-day. Among the bright and well-known stars
Arcturus has the most rapid apparent motion, yet Job himself would
not to-day see that its position had changed, unless he had noted
it with more exactness than any astronomer of his time.

Another unsolved problem among the greatest which present
themselves to the astronomer is that of the size of the universe
of stars. We know that several thousand of these bodies are
visible to the naked eye; moderate telescopes show us millions;
our giant telescopes of the present time, when used as cameras to
photograph the heavens, show a number past count, perhaps one
hundred millions. Are all these stars only those few which happen
to be near us in a universe extending out without end, or do they
form a collection of stars outside of which is empty infinite
space? In other words, has the universe a boundary? Taken in its
widest scope this question must always remain unanswered by us
mortals because, even if we should discover a boundary within
which all the stars and clusters we ever can know are contained,
and outside of which is empty space, still we could never prove
that this space is empty out to an infinite distance. Far outside
of what we call the universe might still exist other universes
which we can never see.

It is a great encouragement to the astronomer that, although he
cannot yet set any exact boundary to this universe of ours, he is
gathering faint indications that it has a boundary, which his
successors not many generations hence may locate so that the
astronomer shall include creation itself within his mental grasp.
It can be shown mathematically that an infinitely extended system
of stars would fill the heavens with a blaze of light like that of
the noonday sun. As no such effect is produced, it may be
concluded that the universe has a boundary. But this does not
enable us to locate the boundary, nor to say how many stars may
lie outside the farthest stretches of telescopic vision. Yet by
patient research we are slowly throwing light on these points and
reaching inferences which, not many years ago, would have seemed
forever beyond our powers.

Every one now knows that the Milky Way, that girdle of light which
spans the evening sky, is formed of clouds of stars too minute to
be seen by the unaided vision. It seems to form the base on which
the universe is built and to bind all the stars into a system. It
comprises by far the larger number of stars that the telescope has
shown to exist. Those we see with the naked eye are almost equally
scattered over the sky. But the number which the telescope shows
us become more and more condensed in the Milky Way as telescope
power is increased. The number of new stars brought out with our
greatest power is vastly greater in the Milky Way than in the rest
of the sky, so that the former contains a great majority of the
stars. What is yet more curious, spectroscopic research has shown
that a particular kind of stars, those formed of heated gas, are
yet more condensed in the central circle of this band; if they
were visible to the naked eye, we should see them encircling the
heavens as a narrow girdle forming perhaps the base of our whole
system of stars. This arrangement of the gaseous or vaporous stars
is one of the most singular facts that modern research has brought
to light. It seems to show that these particular stars form a
system of their own; but how such a thing can be we are still
unable to see.

The question of the form and extent of the Milky Way thus becomes
the central one of stellar astronomy. Sir William Herschel began
by trying to sound its depths; at one time he thought he had
succeeded; but before he died he saw that they were unfathomable
with his most powerful telescopes. Even today he would be a bold
astronomer who would profess to say with certainty whether the
smallest stars we can photograph are at the boundary of the
system. Before we decide this point we must have some idea of the
form and distance of the cloudlike masses of stars which form our
great celestial girdle. A most curious fact is that our solar
system seems to be in the centre of this galactic universe,
because the Milky Way divides the heavens into two equal parts,
and seems equally broad at all points. Were we looking at such a
girdle as this from one side or the other, this appearance would
not be presented. But let us not be too bold. Perhaps we are the
victims of some fallacy, as Ptolemy was when he proved, by what
looked like sound reasoning, based on undeniable facts, that this
earth of ours stood at rest in the centre of the heavens!

A related problem, and one which may be of supreme importance to
the future of our race, is, What is the source of the heat
radiated by the sun and stars? We know that life on the earth is
dependent on the heat which the sun sends it. If we were deprived
of this heat we should in a few days be enveloped in a frost which
would destroy nearly all vegetation, and in a few months neither
man nor animal would be alive, unless crouching over fires soon to
expire for want of fuel. We also know that, at a time which is
geologically recent, the whole of New England was covered with a
sheet of ice, hundreds or even thousands of feet thick, above
which no mountain but Washington raised its head. It is quite
possible that a small diminution in the supply of heat sent us by
the sun would gradually reproduce the great glacier, and once more
make the Eastern States like the pole. But the fact is that
observations of temperature in various countries for the last two
or three hundred years do not show any change in climate which can
be attributed to a variation in the amount of heat received from
the sun.

The acceptance of this theory of the heat of those heavenly bodies
which shine by their own light--sun, stars, and nebulae--still
leaves open a problem that looks insoluble with our present
knowledge. What becomes of the great flood of heat and light which
the sun and stars radiate into empty space with a velocity of one
hundred and eighty thousand miles a second? Only a very small
fraction of it can be received by the planets or by other stars,
because these are mere points compared with their distance from
us. Taking the teaching of our science just as it stands, we
should say that all this heat continues to move on through
infinite space forever. In a few thousand years it reaches the
probable confines of our great universe. But we know of no reason
why it should stop here. During the hundreds of millions of years
since all our stars began to shine, has the first ray of light and
heat kept on through space at the rate of one hundred and eighty
thousand miles a second, and will it continue to go on for ages to
come? If so, think of its distance now, and think of its still
going on, to be forever wasted! Rather say that the problem, What
becomes of it? is as yet unsolved.

Thus far I have described the greatest of problems; those which we
may suppose to concern the inhabitants of millions of worlds
revolving round the stars as much as they concern us. Let us now
come down from the starry heights to this little colony where we
live, the solar system. Here we have the great advantage of being
better able to see what is going on, owing to the comparative
nearness of the planets. When we learn that these bodies are like
our earth in form, size, and motions, the first question we ask
is, Could we fly from planet to planet and light on the surface of
each, what sort of scenery would meet our eyes? Mountain, forest,
and field, a dreary waste, or a seething caldron larger than our
earth? If solid land there is, would we find on it the homes of
intelligent beings, the lairs of wild beasts, or no living thing
at all? Could we breathe the air, would we choke for breath or be
poisoned by the fumes of some noxious gas?

To most of these questions science cannot as yet give a positive
answer, except in the case of the moon. Our satellite is so near
us that we can see it has no atmosphere and no water, and
therefore cannot be the abode of life like ours. The contrast of
its eternal deadness with the active life around us is great
indeed. Here we have weather of so many kinds that we never tire
of talking about it. But on the moon there is no weather at all.
On our globe so many things are constantly happening that our
thousands of daily journals cannot begin to record them. But on
the dreary, rocky wastes of the moon nothing ever happens. So far
as we can determine, every stone that lies loose on its surface
has lain there through untold ages, unchanged and unmoved.

We cannot speak so confidently of the planets. The most powerful
telescopes yet made, the most powerful we can ever hope to make,
would scarcely shows us mountains, or lakes, rivers, or fields at
a distance of fifty millions of miles. Much less would they show
us any works of man. Pointed at the two nearest planets, Venus and
Mars, they whet our curiosity more than they gratify it.
Especially is this the case with Venus. Ever since the telescope
was invented observers have tried to find the time of rotation of
this planet on its axis. Some have reached one conclusion, some
another, while the wisest have only doubted. The great Herschel
claimed that the planet was so enveloped in vapor or clouds that
no permanent features could be seen on its surface. The best
equipped recent observers think they see faint, shadowy patches,
which remain the same from day to day, and which show that the
planet always presents the same face to the sun, as the moon does
to the earth. Others do not accept this conclusion as proved,
believing that these patches may be nothing more than variations
of light, shade, and color caused by the reflection of the sun's
light at various angles from different parts of the planet.

There is also some mystery about the atmosphere of this planet.
When Venus passes nearly between us and the sun, her dark
hemisphere is turned towards us, her bright one being always
towards the sun. But she is not exactly on a line with the sun
except on the very rare occasions of a transit across the sun's
disk. Hence, on ordinary occasions, when she seems very near on a
line with the sun, we see a very small part of the illuminated
hemisphere, which now presents the form of a very thin crescent
like the new moon. And this crescent is supposed to be a little
broader than it would be if only half the planet were illuminated,
and to encircle rather more than half the planet. Now, this is
just the effect that would be produced by an atmosphere refracting
the sun's light around the edge of the illuminated hemisphere.

The difficulty of observations of this kind is such that the
conclusion may be open to doubt. What is seen during transits of
Venus over the sun's disk leads to more certain, but yet very
puzzling, conclusions. The writer will describe what he saw at the
Cape of Good Hope during the transit of December 5, 1882. As the
dark planet impinged on the bright sun, it of course cut out a
round notch from the edge of the sun. At first, when this notch
was small, nothing could be seen of the outline of that part of
the planet which was outside the sun. But when half the planet was
on the sun, the outline of the part still off the sun was marked
by a slender arc of light. A curious fact was that this arc did
not at first span the whole outline of the planet, but only showed
at one or two points. In a few moments another part of the outline
appeared, and then another, until, at last, the arc of light
extended around the complete outline. All this seems to show that
while the planet has an atmosphere, it is not transparent like
ours, but is so filled with mist and clouds that the sun is seen
through it only as if shining in a fog.

Not many years ago the planet Mars, which is the next one outside
of us, was supposed to have a surface like that of our earth. Some
parts were of a dark greenish gray hue; these were supposed to be
seas and oceans. Other parts had a bright, warm tint; these were
supposed to be the continents. During the last twenty years much
has been learned as to how this planet looks, and the details of
its surface have been mapped by several observers, using the best
telescopes under the most favorable conditions of air and climate.
And yet it must be confessed that the result of this labor is not
altogether satisfactory. It seems certain that the so-called seas
are really land and not water. When it comes to comparing Mars
with the earth, we cannot be certain of more than a single point
of resemblance. This is that during the Martian winter a white
cap, as of snow, is formed over the pole, which partially melts
away during the summer. The conclusion that there are oceans whose
evaporation forms clouds which give rise to this snow seems
plausible. But the telescope shows no clouds, and nothing to make
it certain that there is an atmosphere to sustain them. There is
no certainty that the white deposit is what we call snow; perhaps
it is not formed of water at all. The most careful studies of the
surface of this planet, under the best conditions, are those made
at the Lowell Observatory at Flagstaff, Arizona. Especially
wonderful is the system of so-called canals, first seen by
Schiaparelli, but mapped in great detail at Flagstaff. But the
nature and meaning of these mysterious lines are still to be
discovered. The result is that the question of the real nature of
the surface of Mars and of what we should see around us could we
land upon it and travel over it are still among the unsolved
problems of astronomy.

If this is the case with the nearest planets that we can study,
how is it with more distant ones? Jupiter is the only one of these
of the condition of whose surface we can claim to have definite
knowledge. But even this knowledge is meagre. The substance of
what we know is that its surface is surrounded by layers of what
look like dense clouds, through which nothing can certainly be
seen.

I have already spoken of the heat of the sun and its probable
origin. But the question of its heat, though the most important,
is not the only one that the sun offers us. What is the sun? When
we say that it is a very hot globe, more than a million times as
large as the earth, and hotter than any furnace that man can make,
so that literally "the elements melt with fervent heat" even at
its surface, while inside they are all vaporized, we have told the
most that we know as to what the sun really is. Of course we know
a great deal about the spots, the rotation of the sun on its axis,
the materials of which it is composed, and how its surroundings
look during a total eclipse. But all this does not answer our
question. There are several mysteries which ingenious men have
tried to explain, but they cannot prove their explanations to be
correct. One is the cause and nature of the spots. Another is that
the shining surface of the sun, the "photosphere," as it is
technically called, seems so calm and quiet while forces are
acting within it of a magnitude quite beyond our conception.
Flames in which our earth and everything on it would be engulfed
like a boy's marble in a blacksmith's forge are continually
shooting up to a height of tens of thousands of miles. One would
suppose that internal forces capable of doing this would break the
surface up into billows of fire a thousand miles high; but we see
nothing of the kind. The surface of the sun seems almost as placid
as a lake.

Yet another mystery is the corona of the sun. This is something we
should never have known to exist if the sun were not sometimes
totally eclipsed by the dark body of the moon. On these rare
occasions the sun is seen to be surrounded by a halo of soft,
white light, sending out rays in various directions to great
distances. This halo is called the corona, and has been most
industriously studied and photographed during nearly every total
eclipse for thirty years. Thus we have learned much about how it
looks and what its shape is. It has a fibrous, woolly structure, a
little like the loose end of a much-worn hempen rope. A certain
resemblance has been seen between the form of these seeming fibres
and that of the lines in which iron filings arrange themselves
when sprinkled on paper over a magnet. It has hence been inferred
that the sun has magnetic properties, a conclusion which, in a
general way, is supported by many other facts. Yet the corona
itself remains no less an unexplained phenomenon.

[Illustration with caption: PHOTOGRAPH OF THE CORONA OF THE SUN,
TAKEN IN TRIPOLI DURING TOTAL ECLIPSE OF AUGUST 30, 1905]

A phenomenon almost as mysterious as the solar corona is the
"zodiacal light," which any one can see rising from the western
horizon just after the end of twilight on a clear winter or spring
evening. The most plausible explanation is that it is due to a
cloud of small meteoric bodies revolving round the sun. We should
hardly doubt this explanation were it not that this light has a
yet more mysterious appendage, commonly called the Gegenschein, or
counter-glow. This is a patch of light in the sky in a direction
exactly opposite that of the sun. It is so faint that it can be
seen only by a practised eye under the most favorable conditions.
But it is always there. The latest suggestion is that it is a tail
of the earth, of the same kind as the tail of a comet!

We know that the motions of the heavenly bodies are predicted with
extraordinary exactness by the theory of gravitation. When one
finds that the exact path of the moon's shadow on the earth during
a total eclipse of the sun can be mapped out many years in
advance, and that the planets follow the predictions of the
astronomer so closely that, if you could see the predicted planet
as a separate object, it would look, even in a good telescope, as
if it exactly fitted over the real planet, one thinks that here at
least is a branch of astronomy which is simply perfect. And yet
the worlds themselves show slight deviations in their movements
which the astronomer cannot always explain, and which may be due
to some hidden cause that, when brought to light, shall lead to
conclusions of the greatest importance to our race.

One of these deviations is in the rotation of the earth.
Sometimes, for several years at a time, it seems to revolve a
little faster, and then again a little slower. The changes are
very slight; they can be detected only by the most laborious and
refined methods; yet they must have a cause, and we should like to
know what that cause is.

The moon shows a similar irregularity of motion. For half a
century, perhaps through a whole century, she will go around the
earth a little ahead of her regular rate, and then for another
half-century or more she will fall behind. The changes are very
small; they would never have been seen with the unaided eye, yet
they exist. What is their cause? Mathematicians have vainly spent
years of study in trying to answer this question.

The orbit of Mercury is found by observations to have a slight
motion which mathematicians have vainly tried to explain. For some
time it was supposed to be caused by the attraction of an unknown
planet between Mercury and the sun, and some were so sure of the
existence of this planet that they gave it a name, calling it
Vulcan. But of late years it has become reasonably certain that no
planet large enough to produce the effect observed can be there.
So thoroughly has every possible explanation been sifted out and
found wanting, that some astronomers are now inquiring whether the
law of gravitation itself may not be a little different from what
has always been supposed. A very slight deviation, indeed, would
account for the facts, but cautious astronomers want other proofs
before regarding the deviation of gravitation as an established
fact.

Intelligent men have sometimes inquired how, after devoting so
much work to the study of the heavens, anything can remain for
astronomers to find out. It is a curious fact that, although they
were never learning so fast as at the present day, yet there seems
to be more to learn now than there ever was before. Great and
numerous as are the unsolved problems of our science, knowledge is
now advancing into regions which, a few years ago, seemed
inaccessible. Where it will stop none can say.





II

THE NEW PROBLEMS OF THE UNIVERSE


The achievements of the nineteenth century are still a theme of
congratulation on the part of all who compare the present state of
the world with that of one hundred years ago. And yet, if we
should fancy the most sagacious prophet, endowed with a brilliant
imagination, to have set forth in the year 1806 the problems that
the century might solve and the things which it might do, we
should be surprised to see how few of his predictions had come to
pass. He might have fancied aerial navigation and a number of
other triumphs of the same class, but he would hardly have had
either steam navigation or the telegraph in his picture. In 1856
an article appeared in Harper's Magazine depicting some
anticipated features of life in A.D. 3000. We have since made
great advances, but they bear little resemblance to what the
writer imagined. He did not dream of the telephone, but did
describe much that has not yet come to pass and probably never
will.

The fact is that, much as the nineteenth century has done, its
last work was to amuse itself by setting forth more problems for
this century to solve than it has ever itself succeeded in
mastering. We should not be far wrong in saying that to-day there
are more riddles in the universe than there were before men knew
that it contained anything more than the objects they could see.

So far as mere material progress is concerned, it may be doubtful
whether anything so epoch-making as the steam-engine or the
telegraph is held in store for us by the future. But in the field
of purely scientific discovery we are finding a crowd of things of
which our philosophy did not dream even ten years ago.

The greatest riddles which the nineteenth century has bequeathed
to us relate to subjects so widely separated as the structure of
the universe and the structure of atoms of matter. We see more and
more of these structures, and we see more and more of unity
everywhere, and yet new facts difficult of explanation are being
added more rapidly than old facts are being explained.

We all know that the nineteenth century was marked by a separation
of the sciences into a vast number of specialties, to the
subdivisions of which one could see no end. But the great work of
the twentieth century will be to combine many of these
specialties. The physical philosopher of the present time is
directing his thought to the demonstration of the unity of
creation. Astronomical and physical researches are now being
united in a way which is bringing the infinitely great and the
infinitely small into one field of knowledge. Ten years ago the
atoms of matter, of which it takes millions of millions to make a
drop of water, were the minutest objects with which science could
imagine itself to be concerned, Now a body of experimentalists,
prominent among whom stand Professors J. J. Thompson, Becquerel,
and Roentgen, have demonstrated the existence of objects so minute
that they find their way among and between the atoms of matter as
rain-drops do among the buildings of a city. More wonderful yet,
it seems likely, although it has not been demonstrated, that these
little things, called "corpuscles," play an important part in what
is going on among the stars. Whether this be true or not, it is
certain that there do exist in the universe emanations of some
sort, producing visible effects, the investigation of which the
nineteenth century has had to bequeath to the twentieth.

For the purpose of the navigator, the direction of the magnetic
needle is invariable in any one place, for months and even years;
but when exact scientific observations on it are made, it is found
subject to numerous slight changes. The most regular of these
consists in a daily change of its direction. It moves one way from
morning until noon, and then, late in the afternoon and during the
night, turns back again to its original pointing. The laws of this
change have been carefully studied from observations, which show
that it is least at the equator and larger as we go north into
middle latitudes; but no explanation of it resting on an
indisputable basis has ever been offered.

Besides these regular changes, there are others of a very
irregular character. Every now and then the changes in the
direction of the magnet are wider and more rapid than those which
occur regularly every day. The needle may move back and forth in a
way so fitful as to show the action of some unusual exciting
cause. Such movements of the needle are commonly seen when there
is a brilliant aurora. This connection shows that a magnetic storm
and an aurora must be due to the same or some connected causes.

Those of us who are acquainted with astronomical matters know that
the number of spots on the sun goes through a regular cycle of
change, having a period of eleven years and one or two months.
Now, the curious fact is, when the number and violence of magnetic
storms are recorded and compared, it is found that they correspond
to the spots on the sun, and go through the same period of eleven
years. The conclusion seems almost inevitable: magnetic storms are
due to some emanation sent out by the sun, which arises from the
same cause that produces the spots. This emanation does not go on
incessantly, but only in an occasional way, as storms follow each
other on the earth. What is it? Every attempt to detect it has
been in vain. Professor Hale, at the Yerkes Observatory, has had
in operation from time to time, for several years, his ingenious
spectroheliograph, which photographs the sun by a single ray of
the spectrum. This instrument shows that violent actions are going
on in the sun, which ordinary observation would never lead us to
suspect. But it has failed to show with certainty any peculiar
emanation at the time of a magnetic storm or anything connected
with such a storm.

A mystery which seems yet more impenetrable is associated with the
so-called new stars which blaze forth from time to time. These
offer to our sight the most astounding phenomena ever presented to
the physical philosopher. One hundred years ago such objects
offered no mystery. There was no reason to suppose that the
Creator of the universe had ceased His functions; and, continuing
them, it was perfectly natural that He should be making continual
additions to the universe of stars. But the idea that these
objects are really new creations, made out of nothing, is contrary
to all our modern ideas and not in accord with the observed facts.
Granting the possibility of a really new star--if such an object
were created, it would be destined to take its place among the
other stars as a permanent member of the universe. Instead of
this, such objects invariably fade away after a few months, and
are changed into something very like an ordinary nebula. A
question of transcendent interest is that of the cause of these
outbursts. It cannot be said that science has, up to the present
time, been able to offer any suggestion not open to question. The
most definite one is the collision theory, according to which the
outburst is due to the clashing together of two stars, one or both
of which might previously have been dark, like a planet. The stars
which may be actually photographed probably exceed one hundred
millions in number, and those which give too little light to
affect the photographic plate may be vastly more numerous than
those which do. Dark stars revolve around bright ones in an
infinite variety of ways, and complex systems of bodies, the
members of which powerfully attract each other, are the rule
throughout the universe. Moreover, we can set no limit to the
possible number of dark or invisible stars that may be flying
through the celestial spaces. While, therefore, we cannot regard
the theory of collision as established, it seems to be the only
one yet put forth which can lay any claim to a scientific basis.
What gives most color to it is the extreme suddenness with which
the new stars, so far as has yet been observed, invariably blaze
forth. In almost every case it has been only two or three days
from the time that the existence of such an object became known
until it had attained nearly its full brightness. In fact, it
would seem that in the case of the star in Perseus, as in most
other cases, the greater part of the outburst took place within
the space of twenty-four hours. This suddenness and rapidity is
exactly what would be the result of a collision.

The most inexplicable feature of all is the rapid formation of a
nebula around this star. In the first photographs of the latter,
the appearance presented is simply that of an ordinary star. But,
in the course of three or four months, the delicate photographs
taken at the Lick Observatory showed that a nebulous light
surrounded the star, and was continually growing larger and
larger. At first sight, there would seem to be nothing
extraordinary in this fact. Great masses of intensely hot vapor,
shining by their own light, would naturally be thrown out from the
star. Or, if the star had originally been surrounded by a very
rare nebulous fog or vapor, the latter would be seen by the
brilliant light emitted by the star. On this was based an
explanation offered by Kapteyn, which at first seemed very
plausible. It was that the sudden wave of light thrown out by the
star when it burst forth caused the illumination of the
surrounding vapor, which, though really at rest, would seem to
expand with the velocity of light, as the illumination reached
more and more distant regions of the nebula. This result may be
made the subject of exact calculation. The velocity of light is
such as would make a circuit of the earth more than seven times in
a second. It would, therefore, go out from the star at the rate of
a million of miles in between five and six seconds. In the lapse
of one of our days, the light would have filled a sphere around
the star having a diameter more than one hundred and fifty times
the distance of the sun from the earth, and more than five times
the dimensions of the whole solar system. Continuing its course
and enlarging its sphere day after day, the sight presented to us
would have been that of a gradually expanding nebulous mass--a
globe of faint light continually increasing in size with the
velocity of light.

The first sentiment the reader will feel on this subject is
doubtless one of surprise that the distance of the star should be
so great as this explanation would imply. Six months after the
explosion, the globe of light, as actually photographed, was of a
size which would have been visible to the naked eye only as a very
minute object in the sky. Is it possible that this minute object
could have been thousands of times the dimensions of our solar
system?

To see how the question stands from this point of view, we must
have some idea of the possible distance of the new star. To gain
this idea, we must find some way of estimating distances in the
universe. For a reason which will soon be apparent, we begin with
the greatest structure which nature offers to the view of man. We
all know that the Milky Way is formed of countless stars, too
minute to be individually visible to the naked eye. The more
powerful the telescope through which we sweep the heavens, the
greater the number of the stars that can be seen in it. With the
powerful instruments which are now in use for photographing the
sky, the number of stars brought to light must rise into the
hundreds of millions, and the greater part of these belong to the
Milky Way. The smaller the stars we count, the greater their
comparative number in the region of the Milky Way. Of the stars
visible through the telescope, more than one-half are found in the
Milky Way, which may be regarded as a girdle spanning the entire
visible universe.

Of the diameter of this girdle we can say, almost with certainty,
that it must be more than a thousand times as great as the
distance of the nearest fixed star from us, and is probably two or
three times greater. According to the best judgment we can form,
our solar system is situate near the central region of the girdle,
so that the latter must be distant from us by half its diameter.
It follows that if we can imagine a gigantic pair of compasses, of
which the points extend from us to Alpha Centauri, the nearest
star, we should have to measure out at least five hundred spaces
with the compass, and perhaps even one thousand or more, to reach
the region of the Milky Way.

With this we have to connect another curious fact. Of eighteen new
stars which have been observed to blaze forth during the last four
hundred years, all are in the region of the Milky Way. This seems
to show that, as a rule, they belong to the Milky Way. Accepting
this very plausible conclusion, the new star in Perseus must have
been more than five hundred times as far as the nearest fixed
star. We know that it takes light four years to reach us from
Alpha Centauri. It follows that the new star was at a distance
through which light would require more than two thousand years to
travel, and quite likely a time two or three times this. It
requires only the most elementary ideas of geometry to see that if
we suppose a ray of light to shoot from a star at such a distance
in a direction perpendicular to the line of sight from us to the
star, we can compute how fast the ray would seem to us to travel.
Granting the distance to be only two thousand light years, the
apparent size of the sphere around the star which the light would
fill at the end of one year after the explosion would be that of a
coin seen at a distance of two thousand times its radius, or one
thousand times its diameter--say, a five-cent piece at the
distance of sixty feet. But, as a matter of fact, the nebulous
illumination expanded with a velocity from ten to twenty times as
great as this.

The idea that the nebulosity around the new star was formed by the
illumination caused by the light of the explosion spreading out on
all sides therefore fails to satisfy us, not because the expansion
of the nebula seemed to be so slow, but because it was many times
as swift as the speed of light. Another reason for believing that
it was not a mere wave of light is offered by the fact that it did
not take place regularly in every direction from the star, but
seemed to shoot off at various angles.

Up to the present time, the speed of light has been to science, as
well as to the intelligence of our race, almost a symbol of the
greatest of possible speeds. The more carefully we reflect on the
case, the more clearly we shall see the difficulty in supposing
any agency to travel at the rate of the seeming emanations from
the new star in Perseus.

As the emanation is seen spreading day after day, the reader may
inquire whether this is not an appearance due to some other cause
than the mere motion of light. May not an explosion taking place
in the centre of a star produce an effect which shall travel yet
faster than light? We can only reply that no such agency is known
to science.

But is there really anything intrinsically improbable in an agency
travelling with a speed many times that of light? In considering
that there is, we may fall into an error very much like that into
which our predecessors fell in thinking it entirely out of the
range of reasonable probability that the stars should be placed at
such distances as we now know them to be.

Accepting it as a fact that agencies do exist which travel from
sun to planet and from star to star with a speed which beggars all
our previous ideas, the first question that arises is that of
their nature and mode of action. This question is, up to the
present time, one which we do not see any way of completely
answering. The first difficulty is that we have no evidence of
these agents except that afforded by their action. We see that the
sun goes through a regular course of pulsations, each requiring
eleven years for completion; and we see that, simultaneously with
these, the earth's magnetism goes through a similar course of
pulsations. The connection of the two, therefore, seems absolutely
proven. But when we ask by what agency it is possible for the sun
to affect the magnetism of the earth, and when we trace the
passage of some agent between the two bodies, we find nothing to
explain the action. To all appearance, the space between the earth
and the sun is a perfect void. That electricity cannot of itself
pass through a vacuum seems to be a well-established law of
physics. It is true that electromagnetic waves, which are supposed
to be of the same nature with those of light, and which are used
in wireless telegraphy, do pass through a vacuum and may pass from
the sun to the earth. But there is no way of explaining how such
waves would either produce or affect the magnetism of the earth.

The mysterious emanations from various substances, under certain
conditions, may have an intimate relation with yet another of the
mysteries of the universe. It is a fundamental law of the universe
that when a body emits light or heat, or anything capable of being
transformed into light or heat, it can do so only by the
expenditure of force, limited in supply. The sun and stars are
continually sending out a flood of heat. They are exhausting the
internal supply of something which must be limited in extent.
Whence comes the supply? How is the heat of the sun kept up? If it
were a hot body cooling off, a very few years would suffice for it
to cool off so far that its surface would become solid and very
soon cold. In recent years, the theory universally accepted has
been that the supply of heat is kept up by the continual
contraction of the sun, by mutual gravitation of its parts as it
cools off. This theory has the advantage of enabling us to
calculate, with some approximation to exactness, at what rate the
sun must be contracting in order to keep up the supply of heat
which it radiates. On this theory, it must, ten millions of years
ago, have had twice its present diameter, while less than twenty
millions of years ago it could not have existed except as an
immense nebula filling the whole solar system. We must bear in
mind that this theory is the only one which accounts for the
supply of heat, even through human history. If it be true, then
the sun, earth, and solar system must be less than twenty million
years old.

Here the geologists step in and tell us that this conclusion is
wholly inadmissible. The study of the strata of the earth and of
many other geological phenomena, they assure us, makes it certain
that the earth must have existed much in its present condition for
hundreds of millions of years. During all that time there can have
been no great diminution in the supply of heat radiated by the
sun.

The astronomer, in considering this argument, has to admit that he
finds a similar difficulty in connection with the stars and
nebulas. It is an impossibility to regard these objects as new;
they must be as old as the universe itself. They radiate heat and
light year after year. In all probability, they must have been
doing so for millions of years. Whence comes the supply? The
geologist may well claim that until the astronomer explains this
mystery in his own domain, he cannot declare the conclusions of
geology as to the age of the earth to be wholly inadmissible.

Now, the scientific experiments of the last two years have brought
this mystery of the celestial spaces right down into our earthly
laboratories. M. and Madame Curie have discovered the singular
metal radium, which seems to send out light, heat, and other rays
incessantly, without, so far as has yet been determined, drawing
the required energy from any outward source. As we have already
pointed out, such an emanation must come from some storehouse of
energy. Is the storehouse, then, in the medium itself, or does the
latter draw it from surrounding objects? If it does, it must
abstract heat from these objects. This question has been settled
by Professor Dewar, at the Royal Institution, London, by placing
the radium in a medium next to the coldest that art has yet
produced--liquid air. The latter is surrounded by the only yet
colder medium, liquid hydrogen, so that no heat can reach it.
Under these circumstances, the radium still gives out heat,
boiling away the liquid air until the latter has entirely
disappeared. Instead of the radiation diminishing with time, it
rather seems to increase.

Called on to explain all this, science can only say that a
molecular change must be going on in the radium, to correspond to
the heat it gives out. What that change may be is still a complete
mystery. It is a mystery which we find alike in those minute
specimens of the rarest of substances under our microscopes, in
the sun, and in the vast nebulous masses in the midst of which our
whole solar system would be but a speck. The unravelling of this
mystery must be the great work of science of the twentieth
century. What results shall follow for mankind one cannot say, any
more than he could have said two hundred years ago what modern
science would bring forth. Perhaps, before future developments,
all the boasted achievements of the nineteenth century may take
the modest place which we now assign to the science of the
eighteenth century--that of the infant which is to grow into a
man.





III

THE STRUCTURE OF THE UNIVERSE


The questions of the extent of the universe in space and of its
duration in time, especially of its possible infinity in either
space or time, are of the highest interest both in philosophy and
science. The traditional philosophy had no means of attacking
these questions except considerations suggested by pure reason,
analogy, and that general fitness of things which was supposed to
mark the order of nature. With modern science the questions belong
to the realm of fact, and can be decided only by the results of
observation and a study of the laws to which these results may
lead.

From the philosophic stand-point, a discussion of this subject
which is of such weight that in the history of thought it must be
assigned a place above all others, is that of Kant in his
"Kritik." Here we find two opposing propositions--the thesis that
the universe occupies only a finite space and is of finite
duration; the antithesis that it is infinite both as regards
extent in space and duration in time. Both of these opposing
propositions are shown to admit of demonstration with equal force,
not directly, but by the methods of reductio ad absurdum. The
difficulty, discussed by Kant, was more tersely expressed by
Hamilton in pointing out that we could neither conceive of
infinite space nor of space as bounded. The methods and
conclusions of modern astronomy are, however, in no way at
variance with Kant's reasoning, so far as it extends. The fact is
that the problem with which the philosopher of Konigsberg vainly
grappled is one which our science cannot solve any more than could
his logic. We may hope to gain complete information as to
everything which lies within the range of the telescope, and to
trace to its beginning every process which we can now see going on
in space. But before questions of the absolute beginning of
things, or of the boundary beyond which nothing exists, our means
of inquiry are quite powerless.

Another example of the ancient method is found in the great work
of Copernicus. It is remarkable how completely the first expounder
of the system of the world was dominated by the philosophy of his
time, which he had inherited from his predecessors. This is seen
not only in the general course of thought through the opening
chapters of his work, but among his introductory propositions. The
first of these is that the universe--mundus--as well as the earth,
is spherical in form. His arguments for the sphericity of the
earth, as derived from observation, are little more than a
repetition of those of Ptolemy, and therefore not of special
interest. His proposition that the universe is spherical is,
however, not based on observation, but on considerations of the
perfection of the spherical form, the general tendency of bodies--
a drop of water, for example--to assume this form, and the
sphericity of the sun and moon. The idea retained its place in his
mind, although the fundamental conception of his system did away
with the idea of the universe having any well-defined form.

The question as attacked by modern astronomy is this: we see
scattered through space in every direction many millions of stars
of various orders of brightness and at distances so great as to
defy exact measurement, except in the case of a few of the
nearest. Has this collection of stars any well-defined boundary,
or is what we see merely that part of an infinite mass which
chances to lie within the range of our telescopes? If we were
transported to the most distant star of which we have knowledge,
should we there find ourselves still surrounded by stars on all
sides, or would the space beyond be void? Granting that, in any or
every direction, there is a limit to the universe, and that the
space beyond is therefore void, what is the form of the whole
system and the distance of its boundaries? Preliminary in some
sort to these questions are the more approachable ones: Of what
sort of matter is the universe formed? and into what sort of
bodies is this matter collected?

To the ancients the celestial sphere was a reality, instead of a
mere effect of perspective, as we regard it. The stars were set on
its surface, or at least at no great distance within its
crystalline mass. Outside of it imagination placed the empyrean.
When and how these conceptions vanished from the mind of man, it
would be as hard to say as when and how Santa Claus gets
transformed in the mind of the child. They are not treated as
realities by any astronomical writer from Ptolemy down; yet, the
impressions and forms of thought to which they gave rise are well
marked in Copernicus and faintly evident in Kepler. The latter was
perhaps the first to suggest that the sun might be one of the
stars; yet, from defective knowledge of the relative brightness of
the latter, he was led to the conclusion that their distances from
each other were less than the distance which separated them from
the sun. The latter he supposed to stand in the centre of a vast
vacant region within the system of stars.

For us the great collection of millions of stars which are made
known to us by the telescope, together with all the invisible
bodies which may be contained within the limits of the system,
form the universe. Here the term "universe" is perhaps
objectionable because there may be other systems than the one with
which we are acquainted. The term stellar system is, therefore, a
better one by which to designate the collection of stars in
question.

It is remarkable that the first known propounder of that theory of
the form and arrangement of the system which has been most
generally accepted seems to have been a writer otherwise unknown
in science--Thomas Wright, of Durham, England. He is said to have
published a book on the theory of the universe, about 1750. It
does not appear that this work was of a very scientific character,
and it was, perhaps, too much in the nature of a speculation to
excite notice in scientific circles. One of the curious features
of the history is that it was Kant who first cited Wright's
theory, pointed out its accordance with the appearance of the
Milky Way, and showed its general reasonableness. But, at the time
in question, the work of the philosopher of Konigsberg seems to
have excited no more notice among his scientific contemporaries
than that of Wright.

Kant's fame as a speculative philosopher has so eclipsed his
scientific work that the latter has but recently been appraised at
its true value. He was the originator of views which, though
defective in detail, embodied a remarkable number of the results
of recent research on the structure and form of the universe, and
the changes taking place in it. The most curious illustration of
the way in which he arrived at a correct conclusion by defective
reasoning is found in his anticipation of the modern theory of a
constant retardation of the velocity with which the earth revolves
on its axis. He conceived that this effect must result from the
force exerted by the tidal wave, as moving towards the west it
strikes the eastern coasts of Asia and America. An opposite
conclusion was reached by Laplace, who showed that the effect of
this force was neutralized by forces producing the wave and acting
in the opposite direction. And yet, nearly a century later, it was
shown that while Laplace was quite correct as regards the general
principles involved, the friction of the moving water must prevent
the complete neutralization of the two opposing forces, and leave
a small residual force acting towards the west and retarding the
rotation. Kant's conclusion was established, but by an action
different from that which he supposed.

The theory of Wright and Kant, which was still further developed
by Herschel, was that our stellar system has somewhat the form of
a flattened cylinder, or perhaps that which the earth would assume
if, in consequence of more rapid rotation, the bulging out at its
equator and the flattening at its poles were carried to an extreme
limit. This form has been correctly though satirically compared to
that of a grindstone. It rests to a certain extent, but not
entirely, on the idea that the stars are scattered through space
with equal thickness in every direction, and that the appearance
of the Milky Way is due to the fact that we, situated in the
centre of this flattened system, see more stars in the direction
of the circumference of the system than in that of its poles. The
argument on which the view in question rests may be made clear in
the following way.

Let us chose for our observations that hour of the night at which
the Milky Way skirts our horizon. This is nearly the case in the
evenings of May and June, though the coincidence with the horizon
can never be exact except to observers stationed near the tropics.
Using the figure of the grindstone, we at its centre will then
have its circumference around our horizon, while the axis will be
nearly vertical. The points in which the latter intersects the
celestial sphere are called the galactic poles. There will be two
of these poles, the one at the hour in question near the zenith,
the other in our nadir, and therefore invisible to us, though seen
by our antipodes. Our horizon corresponds, as it were, to the
central circle of the Milky Way, which now surrounds us on all
sides in a horizontal direction, while the galactic poles are 90
degrees distant from every part of it, as every point of the
horizon is 90 degrees from the zenith.

Let us next count the number of stars visible in a powerful
telescope in the region of the heavens around the galactic pole,
now our zenith, and find the average number per square degree.
This will be the richness of the region in stars. Then we take
regions nearer the horizontal Milky Way--say that contained
between 10 degrees and 20 degrees from the zenith--and, by a
similar count, find its richness in stars. We do the same for
other regions, nearer and nearer to the horizon, till we reach the
galaxy itself. The result of all the counts will be that the
richness of the sky in stars is least around the galactic pole,
and increases in every direction towards the Milky Way.

Without such counts of the stars we might imagine our stellar
system to be a globular collection of stars around which the
object in question passed as a girdle; and we might take a globe
with a chain passing around it as representative of the possible
figure of the stellar system. But the actual increase in star-
thickness which we have pointed out shows us that this view is
incorrect. The nature and validity of the conclusions to be drawn
can be best appreciated by a statement of some features of this
tendency of the stars to crowd towards the galactic circle.

Most remarkable is the fact that the tendency is seen even among
the brighter stars. Without either telescope or technical
knowledge, the careful observer of the stars will notice that the
most brilliant constellations show this tendency. The glorious
Orion, Canis Major containing the brightest star in the heavens,
Cassiopeia, Perseus, Cygnus, and Lyra with its bright-blue Vega,
not to mention such constellations as the Southern Cross, all lie
in or near the Milky Way. Schiaparelli has extended the
investigation to all the stars visible to the naked eye. He laid
down on planispheres the number of such stars in each region of
the heavens of 5 degrees square. Each region was then shaded with
a tint that was darker as the region was richer in stars. The very
existence of the Milky Way was ignored in this work, though his
most darkly shaded regions lie along the course of this belt. By
drawing a band around the sky so as to follow or cover his darkest
regions, we shall rediscover the course of the Milky Way without
any reference to the actual object. It is hardly necessary to add
that this result would be reached with yet greater precision if we
included the telescopic stars to any degree of magnitude--plotting
them on a chart and shading the chart in the same way. What we
learn from this is that the stellar system is not an irregular
chaos; and that notwithstanding all its minor irregularities, it
may be considered as built up with special reference to the Milky
Way as a foundation.

Another feature of the tendency in question is that it is more and
more marked as we include fainter stars in our count. The galactic
region is perhaps twice as rich in stars visible to the naked eye
as the rest of the heavens. In telescopic stars to the ninth
magnitude it is three or four times as rich. In the stars found on
the photographs of the sky made at the Harvard and other
observatories, and in the stargauges of the Herschels, it is from
five to ten times as rich.

Another feature showing the unity of the system is the symmetry of
the heavens on the two sides of the galactic belt Let us return to
our supposition of such a position of the celestial sphere, with
respect to the horizon, that the latter coincides with the central
line of this belt, one galactic pole being near our zenith. The
celestial hemisphere which, being above our horizon, is visible to
us, is the one to which we have hitherto directed our attention in
describing the distribution of the stars. But below our horizon is
another hemisphere, that of our antipodes, which is the
counterpart of ours. The stars which it contains are in a
different part of the universe from those which we see, and,
without unity of plan, would not be subject to the same law. But
the most accurate counts of stars that have been made fail to show
any difference in their general arrangement in the two
hemispheres. They are just as thick around the south galactic
poles as around the north one. They show the same tendency to
crowd towards the Milky Way in the hemisphere invisible to us as
in the hemisphere which we see. Slight differences and
irregularities, are, indeed, found in the enumeration, but they
are no greater than must necessarily arise from the difficulty of
stopping our count at a perfectly fixed magnitude. The aim of
star-counts is not to estimate the total number of stars, for this
is beyond our power, but the number visible with a given
telescope. In such work different observers have explored
different parts of the sky, and in a count of the same region by
two observers we shall find that, although they attempt to stop at
the same magnitude, each will include a great number of stars
which the other omits. There is, therefore, room for considerable
difference in the numbers of stars recorded, without there being
any actual inequality between the two hemispheres.

A corresponding similarity is found in the physical constitution
of the stars as brought out by the spectroscope. The Milky Way is
extremely rich in bluish stars, which make up a considerable
majority of the cloudlike masses there seen. But when we recede
from the galaxy on one side, we find the blue stars becoming
thinner, while those having a yellow tinge become relatively more
numerous. This difference of color also is the same on the two
sides of the galactic plane. Nor can any systematic difference be
detected between the proper motions of the stars in these two
hemispheres. If the largest known proper motion is found in the
one, the second largest is in the other. Counting all the known
stars that have proper motions exceeding a given limit, we find
about as many in one hemisphere as in the other. In this respect,
also, the universe appears to be alike through its whole extent.
It is the uniformity thus prevailing through the visible universe,
as far as we can see, in two opposite directions, which inspires
us with confidence in the possibility of ultimately reaching some
well-founded conclusion as to the extent and structure of the
system.

All these facts concur in supporting the view of Wright, Kant, and
Herschel as to the form of the universe. The farther out the stars
extend in any direction, the more stars we may see in that
direction. In the direction of the axis of the cylinder, the
distances of the boundary are least, so that we see fewer stars.
The farther we direct our attention towards the equatorial regions
of the system, the greater the distance from us to the boundary,
and hence the more stars we see. The fact that the increase in the
number of stars seen towards the equatorial region of the system
is greater, the smaller the stars, is the natural consequence of
the fact that distant stars come within our view in greater
numbers towards the equatorial than towards the polar regions.

Objections have been raised to the Herschelian view on the ground
that it assumes an approximately uniform distribution of the stars
in space. It has been claimed that the fact of our seeing more
stars in one direction than in another may not arise merely from
our looking through a deeper stratum, as Herschel supposed, but
may as well be due to the stars being more thinly scattered in the
direction of the axis of the system than in that of its equatorial
region. The great inequalities in the richness of neighboring
regions in the Milky Way show that the hypothesis of uniform
distribution does not apply to the equatorial region. The claim
has therefore been made that there is no proof of the system
extending out any farther in the equatorial than in the polar
direction.

The consideration of this objection requires a closer inquiry as
to what we are to understand by the form of our system. We have
already pointed out the impossibility of assigning any boundary
beyond which we can say that nothing exists. And even as regards a
boundary of our stellar system, it is impossible for us to assign
any exact limit beyond which no star is visible to us. The analogy
of collections of stars seen in various parts of the heavens leads
us to suppose that there may be no well-defined form to our
system, but that, as we go out farther and farther, we shall see
occasional scattered stars to, possibly, an indefinite distance.
The truth probably is that, as in ascending a mountain, we find
the trees, which may be very dense at its base, thin out gradually
as we approach the summit, where there may be few or none, so we
might find the stars to thin out could we fly to the distant
regions of space. The practical question is whether, in such a
flight, we should find this sooner by going in the direction of
the axis of our system than by directing our course towards the
Milky Way. If a point is at length reached beyond which there are
but few scattered stars, such a point would, for us, mark the
boundary of our system. From this point of view the answer does
not seem to admit of doubt. If, going in every direction, we mark
the point, if any, at which the great mass of the stars are seen
behind us, the totality of all these points will lie on a surface
of the general form that Herschel supposed.

There is still another direct indication of the finitude of our
stellar system upon which we have not touched. If this system
extended out without limit in any direction whatever, it is shown
by a geometric process which it is not necessary to explain in the
present connection, but which is of the character of mathematical
demonstration, that the heavens would, in every direction where
this was true, blaze with the light of the noonday sun. This would
be very different from the blue-black sky which we actually see on
a clear night, and which, with a reservation that we shall
consider hereafter, shows that, how far so-ever our stellar
system may extend, it is not infinite. Beyond this negative
conclusion the fact does not teach us much. Vast, indeed, is the
distance to which the system might extend without the sky
appearing much brighter than it is, and we must have recourse to
other considerations in seeking for indications of a boundary, or
even of a well-marked thinning out, of stars.

If, as was formerly supposed, the stars did not greatly differ in
the amount of light emitted by each, and if their diversity of
apparent magnitude were due principally to the greater distance of
the fainter stars, then the brightness of a star would enable us
to form a more or less approximate idea of its distance. But the
accumulated researches of the past seventy years show that the
stars differ so enormously in their actual luminosity that the
apparent brightness of a star affords us only a very imperfect
indication of its distance. While, in the general average, the
brighter stars must be nearer to us than the fainter ones, it by
no means follows that a very bright star, even of the first
magnitude, is among the nearer to our system. Two stars are worthy
of especial mention in this connection, Canopus and Rigel. The
first is, with the single exception of Sirius, the brightest star
in the heavens. The other is a star of the first magnitude in the
southwest corner of Orion. The most long-continued and complete
measures of parallax yet made are those carried on by Gill, at the
Cape of Good Hope, on these two and some other bright stars. The
results, published in 1901, show that neither of these bodies has
any parallax that can be measured by the most refined instrumental
means known to astronomy. In other words, the distance of these
stars is immeasurably great. The actual amount of light emitted by
each is certainly thousands and probably tens of thousands of
times that of the sun.

Notwithstanding the difficulties that surround the subject, we can
at least say something of the distance of a considerable number of
the stars. Two methods are available for our estimate--measures of
parallax and determination of proper motions.

The problem of stellar parallax, simple though it is in its
conception, is the most delicate and difficult of all which the
practical astronomer has to encounter. An idea of it may be gained
by supposing a minute object on a mountain-top, we know not how
many miles away, to be visible through a telescope. The observer
is allowed to change the position of his instrument by two inches,
but no more. He is required to determine the change in the
direction of the object produced by this minute displacement with
accuracy enough to determine the distance of the mountain. This is
quite analogous to the determination of the change in the
direction in which we see a star as the earth, moving through its
vast circuit, passes from one extremity of its orbit to the other.
Representing this motion on such a scale that the distance of our
planet from the sun shall be one inch, we find that the nearest
star, on the same scale, will be more than four miles away, and
scarcely one out of a million will be at a less distance than ten
miles. It is only by the most wonderful perfection both in the
heliometer, the instrument principally used for these measures,
and in methods of observation, that any displacement at all can be
seen even among the nearest stars. The parallaxes of perhaps a
hundred stars have been determined, with greater or less
precision, and a few hundred more may be near enough for
measurement. All the others are immeasurably distant; and it is
only by statistical methods based on their proper motions and
their probable near approach to equality in distribution that any
idea can be gained of their distances.

To form a conception of the stellar system, we must have a unit of
measure not only exceeding any terrestrial standard, but even any
distance in the solar system. For purely astronomical purposes the
most convenient unit is the distance corresponding to a parallax
of 1", which is a little more than 200,000 times the sun's
distance. But for the purposes of all but the professional
astronomer the most convenient unit will be the light-year--that
is, the distance through which light would travel in one year.
This is equal to the product of 186,000 miles, the distance
travelled in one second, by 31,558,000, the number of seconds in a
year. The reader who chooses to do so may perform the
multiplication for himself. The product will amount to about
63,000 times the distance of the sun.

[Illustration with caption: A Typical Star Cluster--Centauri]

The nearest star whose distance we know, Alpha Centauri, is
distant from us more than four light-years. In all likelihood
this is really the nearest star, and it is not at all probable
that any other star lies within six light-years. Moreover, if we
were transported to this star the probability seems to be that the
sun would now be the nearest star to us. Flying to any other of
the stars whose parallax has been measured, we should probably
find that the average of the six or eight nearest stars around us
ranges somewhere between five and seven light-years. We may, in a
certain sense, call eight light-years a star-distance, meaning by
this term the average of the nearest distances from one star to
the surrounding ones.

To put the result of measures of parallax into another form, let
us suppose, described around our sun as a centre, a system of
concentric spheres each of whose surfaces is at the distance of
six light-years outside the sphere next within it. The inner is at
the distance of six light-years around the sun. The surface of the
second sphere will be twelve light-years away, that of the third
eighteen, etc. The volumes of space within each of these spheres
will be as the cubes of the diameters. The most likely conclusion
we can draw from measures of parallax is that the first sphere
will contain, beside the sun at its centre, only Alpha Centauri.
The second, twelve light-years away, will probably contain,
besides these two, six other stars, making eight in all. The third
may contain twenty-one more, making twenty-seven stars within the
third sphere, which is the cube of three. Within the fourth would
probably be found sixty-four stars, this being the cube of four,
and so on.

Beyond this no measures of parallax yet made will give us much
assistance. We can only infer that probably the same law holds for
a large number of spheres, though it is quite certain that it does
not hold indefinitely. For more light on the subject we must have
recourse to the proper motions. The latest words of astronomy on
this subject may be briefly summarized. As a rule, no star is at
rest. Each is moving through space with a speed which differs
greatly with different stars, but is nearly always swift, indeed,
when measured by any standard to which we are accustomed. Slow and
halting, indeed, is that star which does not make more than a mile
a second. With two or three exceptions, where the attraction of a
companion comes in, the motion of every star, so far as yet
determined, takes place in a straight line. In its outward motion
the flying body deviates neither to the right nor left. It is safe
to say that, if any deviation is to take place, thousands of years
will be required for our terrestrial observers to recognize it.

Rapid as the course of these objects is, the distances which we
have described are such that, in the great majority of cases, all
the observations yet made on the positions of the stars fail to
show any well-established motion. It is only in the case of the
nearer of these objects that we can expect any motion to be
perceptible during the period, in no case exceeding one hundred
and fifty years, through which accurate observations extend. The
efforts of all the observatories which engage in such work are, up
to the present time, unequal to the task of grappling with the
motions of all the stars that can be seen with the instruments,
and reaching a decision as to the proper motion in each particular
case. As the question now stands, the aim of the astronomer is to
determine what stars have proper motions large enough to be well
established. To make our statement on this subject clear, it must
be understood that by this term the astronomer does not mean the
speed of a star in space, but its angular motion as he observes it
on the celestial sphere. A star moving forward with a given speed
will have a greater proper motion according as it is nearer to us.
To avoid all ambiguity, we shall use the term "speed" to express
the velocity in miles per second with which such a body moves
through space, and the term "proper motion" to express the
apparent angular motion which the astronomer measures upon the
celestial sphere.

Up to the present time, two stars have been found whose proper
motions are so large that, if continued, the bodies would make a
complete circuit of the heavens in less than 200,000 years. One of
these would require about 160,000; the other about 180,000 years
for the circuit. Of other stars having a rapid motion only about
one hundred would complete their course in less than a million of
years.

Quite recently a system of observations upon stars to the ninth
magnitude has been nearly carried through by an international
combination of observatories. The most important conclusion from
these observations relates to the distribution of the stars with
reference to the Milky Way, which we have already described. We
have shown that stars of every magnitude, bright and faint, show a
tendency to crowd towards this belt. It is, therefore, remarkable
that no such tendency is seen in the case of those stars which
have proper motions large enough to be accurately determined. So
far as yet appears, such stars are equally scattered over the
heavens, without reference to the course of the Milky Way. The
conclusion is obvious. These stars are all inside the girdle of
the Milky Way, and within the sphere which contains them the
distribution in space is approximately uniform. At least there is
no well-marked condensation in the direction of the galaxy nor any
marked thinning out towards its poles. What can we say as to the
extent of this sphere?

To answer this question, we have to consider whether there is any
average or ordinary speed that a star has in space. A great number
of motions in the line of sight--that is to say, in the direction
of the line from us to the star--have been measured with great
precision by Campbell at the Lick Observatory, and by other
astronomers. The statistical investigations of Kaptoyn also throw
much light on the subject. The results of these investigators
agree well in showing an average speed in space--a straight-ahead
motion we may call it--of twenty-one miles per second. Some stars
may move more slowly than this to any extent; others more rapidly.
In two or three cases the speed exceeds one hundred miles per
second, but these are quite exceptional. By taking several
thousand stars having a given proper motion, we may form a general
idea of their average distance, though a great number of them will
exceed this average to a considerable extent. The conclusion drawn
in this way would be that the stars having an apparent proper
motion of 10" per century or more are mostly contained within, or
lie not far outside of a sphere whose surface is at a distance
from us of 200 light-years. Granting the volume of space which we
have shown that nature seems to allow to each star, this sphere
should contain 27,000 stars in all. There are about 10,000 stars
known to have so large a proper motion as 10". But there is no
actual discordance between these results, because not only are
there, in all probability, great numbers of stars of which the
proper motion is not yet recognized, but there are within the
sphere a great number of stars whose motion is less than the
average. On the other hand, it is probable that a considerable
number of the 10,000 stars lie at a distance at least one-half
greater than that of the radius of the sphere.

On the whole, it seems likely that, out to a distance of 300 or
even 400 light-years, there is no marked inequality in star
distribution. If we should explore the heavens to this distance,
we should neither find the beginning of the Milky Way in one
direction nor a very marked thinning out in the other. This
conclusion is quite accordant with the probabilities of the case.
If all the stars which form the groundwork of the Milky Way should
be blotted out, we should probably find 100,000,000, perhaps even
more, remaining. Assigning to each star the space already shown to
be its quota, we should require a sphere of about 3000 light-years
radius to contain such a number of stars. At some such distance as
this, we might find a thinning out of the stars in the direction
of the galactic poles, or the commencement of the Milky Way in the
direction of this stream.

Even if this were not found at the distance which we have
supposed, it is quite certain that, at some greater distance, we
should at least find that the region of the Milky Way is richer in
stars than the region near the galactic poles. There is strong
reason, based on the appearance of the stars of the Milky Way,
their physical constitution, and their magnitudes as seen in the
telescope, to believe that, were we placed on one of these stars,
we should find the stars around us to be more thickly strewn than
they are around our system. In other words, the quota of space
filled by each star is probably less in the region of the Milky
Way than it is near the centre where we seem to be situated.

We are, therefore, presented with what seems to be the most
extraordinary spectacle that the universe can offer, a ring of
stars spanning it, and including within its limits by far the
great majority of the stars within our system. We have in this
spectacle another example of the unity which seems to pervade the
system. We might imagine the latter so arranged as to show
diversity to any extent. We might have agglomerations of stars
like those of the Milky Way situated in some corner of the system,
or at its centre, or scattered through it here and there in every
direction. But such is not the case. There are, indeed, a few
star-clusters scattered here and there through the system; but
they are essentially different from the clusters of the Milky Way,
and cannot be regarded as forming an important part of the general
plan. In the case of the galaxy we have no such scattering, but
find the stars built, as it were, into this enormous ring, having
similar characteristics throughout nearly its whole extent, and
having within it a nearly uniform scattering of stars, with here
and there some collected into clusters. Such, to our limited
vision, now appears the universe as a whole.

We have already alluded to the conclusion that an absolutely
infinite system of stars would cause the entire heavens to be
filled with a blaze of light as bright as the sun. It is also true
that the attractive force within such a universe would be
infinitely great in some direction or another. But neither of
these considerations enables us to set a limit to the extent of
our system. In two remarkable papers by Lord Kelvin which have
recently appeared, the one being an address before the British
Association at its Glasgow meeting, in 1901, are given the results
of some numerical computations pertaining to this subject.
Granting that the stars are scattered promiscuously through space
with some approach to uniformity in thickness, and are of a known
degree of brilliancy, it is easy to compute how far out the system
must extend in order that, looking up at the sky, we shall see a
certain amount of light coming from the invisible stars. Granting
that, in the general average, each star is as bright as the sun,
and that their thickness is such that within a sphere of 3300
light-years there are 1,000,000,000 stars, if we inquire how far
out such a system must be continued in order that the sky shall
shine with even four per cent of the light of the sun, we shall
find the distance of its boundary so great that millions of
millions of years would be required for the light of the outer
stars to reach the centre of the system. In view of the fact that
this duration in time far exceeds what seems to be the possible
life duration of a star, so far as our knowledge of it can extend,
the mere fact that the sky does not glow with any such brightness
proves little or nothing as to the extent of the system.

We may, however, replace these purely negative considerations by
inquiring how much light we actually get from the invisible stars
of our system. Here we can make a definite statement. Mark out a
small circle in the sky 1 degree in diameter. The quantity of
light which we receive on a cloudless and moonless night from the
sky within this circle admits of actual determination. From the
measures so far available it would seem that, in the general
average, this quantity of light is not very different from that of
a star of the fifth magnitude. This is something very different
from a blaze of light. A star of the fifth magnitude is scarcely
more than plainly visible to ordinary vision. The area of the
whole sky is, in round numbers, about 50,000 times that of the
circle we have described. It follows that the total quantity of
light which we receive from all the stars is about equal to that
of 50,000 stars of the fifth magnitude--somewhat more than 1000 of
the first magnitude. This whole amount of light would have to be
multiplied by 90,000,000 to make a light equal to that of the sun.
It is, therefore, not at all necessary to consider how far the
system must extend in order that the heavens should blaze like the
sun. Adopting Lord Kelvin's hypothesis, we shall find that, in
order that we may receive from the stars the amount of light we
have designated, this system need not extend beyond some 5000
light-years. But this hypothesis probably overestimates the
thickness of the stars in space. It does not seem probable that
there are as many as 1,000,000,000 stars within the sphere of 3300
light-years. Nor is it at all certain that the light of the
average star is equal to that of the sun. It is impossible, in the
present state of our knowledge, to assign any definite value to
this average. To do so is a problem similar to that of assigning
an average weight to each component of the animal creation, from
the microscopic insects which destroy our plants up to the
elephant. What we can say with a fair approximation to confidence
is that, if we could fly out in any direction to a distance of
20,000, perhaps even of 10,000, light-years, we should find that
we had left a large fraction of our system behind us. We should
see its boundary in the direction in which we had travelled much
more certainly than we see it from our stand-point.

We should not dismiss this branch of the subject without saying
that considerations are frequently adduced by eminent authorities
which tend to impair our confidence in almost any conclusion as to
the limits of the stellar system. The main argument is based on
the possibility that light is extinguished in its passage through
space; that beyond a certain distance we cannot see a star,
however bright, because its light is entirely lost before reaching
us. That there could be any loss of light in passing through an
absolute vacuum of any extent cannot be admitted by the physicist
of to-day without impairing what he considers the fundamental
principles of the vibration of light. But the possibility that the
celestial spaces are pervaded by matter which might obstruct the
passage of light is to be considered. We know that minute meteoric
particles are flying through our system in such numbers that the
earth encounters several millions of them every day, which appear
to us in the familiar phenomena of shooting-stars. If such
particles are scattered through all space, they must ultimately
obstruct the passage of light. We know little of the size of these
bodies, but, from the amount of energy contained in their light as
they are consumed in the passage through our atmosphere, it does
not seem at all likely that they are larger than grains of sand
or, perhaps, minute pebbles. They are probably vastly more
numerous in the vicinity of the sun than in the interstellar
spaces, since they would naturally tend to be collected by the
sun's attraction. In fact there are some reasons for believing
that most of these bodies are the debris of comets; and the latter
are now known to belong to the solar system, and not to the
universe at large.

But whatever view we take of these possibilities, they cannot
invalidate our conclusion as to the general structure of the
stellar system as we know it. Were meteors so numerous as to cut
off a large fraction of the light from the more distant stars, we
should see no Milky Way, but the apparent thickness of the stars
in every direction would be nearly the same. The fact that so many
more of these objects are seen around the galactic belt than in
the direction of its poles shows that, whatever extinction light
may suffer in going through the greatest distances, we see nearly
all that comes from stars not more distant than the Milky Way
itself.

Intimately connected with the subject we have discussed is the
question of the age of our system, if age it can be said to have.
In considering this question, the simplest hypothesis to suggest
itself is that the universe has existed forever in some such form
as we now see it; that it is a self-sustaining system, able to go
on forever with only such cycles of transformation as may repeat
themselves indefinitely, and may, therefore, have repeated
themselves indefinitely in the past. Ordinary observation does not
make anything known to us which would seem to invalidate this
hypothesis. In looking upon the operations of the universe, we may
liken ourselves to a visitor to the earth from another sphere who
has to draw conclusions about the life of an individual man from
observations extending through a few days. During that time, he
would see no reason why the life of the man should have either a
beginning or an end. He sees a daily round of change, activity and
rest, nutrition and waste; but, at the end of the round, the
individual is seemingly restored to his state of the day before.
Why may not this round have been going on forever, and continue in
the future without end? It would take a profounder course of
observation and a longer time to show that, notwithstanding this
seeming restoration, an imperceptible residual of vital energy,
necessary to the continuance of life, has not been restored, and
that the loss of this residuum day by day must finally result in
death.

The case is much the same with the great bodies of the universe.
Although, to superficial observation, it might seem that they
could radiate their light forever, the modern generalizations of
physics show that such cannot be the case. The radiation of light
necessarily involves a corresponding loss of heat and with it the
expenditure of some form of energy. The amount of energy within
any body is necessarily limited. The supply must be exhausted
unless the energy of the light sent out into infinite space is, in
some way, restored to the body which expended it. The possibility
of such a restoration completely transcends our science. How can
the little vibration which strikes our eye from some distant star,
and which has been perhaps thousands of years in reaching us, find
its way back to its origin? The light emitted by the sun 10,000
years ago is to-day pursuing its way in a sphere whose surface is
10,000 light-years distant on all sides. Science has nothing even
to suggest the possibility of its restoration, and the most
delicate observations fail to show any return from the
unfathomable abyss.

Up to the time when radium was discovered, the most careful
investigations of all conceivable sources of supply had shown only
one which could possibly be of long duration. This is the
contraction which is produced in the great incandescent bodies of
the universe by the loss of the heat which they radiate. As
remarked in the preceding essay, the energy generated by the sun's
contraction could not have kept up its present supply of heat for
much more than twenty or thirty millions of years, while the study
of earth and ocean shows evidence of the action of a series of
causes which must have been going on for hundreds of millions of
years.

The antagonism between the two conclusions is even more marked
than would appear from this statement. The period of the sun's
heat set by the astronomical physicist is that during which our
luminary could possibly have existed in its present form. The
period set by the geologist is not merely that of the sun's
existence, but that during which the causes effecting geological
changes have not undergone any complete revolution. If, at any
time, the sun radiated much less than its present amount of heat,
no water could have existed on the earth's surface except in the
form of ice; there would have been scarcely any evaporation, and
the geological changes due to erosion could not have taken place.
Moreover, the commencement of the geological operations of which
we speak is by no means the commencement of the earth's existence.
The theories of both parties agree that, for untold aeons before
the geological changes now visible commenced, our planet was a
molten mass, perhaps even an incandescent globe like the sun.
During all those aeons the sun must have been in existence as a
vast nebulous mass, first reaching as far as the earth's orbit,
and slowly contracting its dimensions. And these aeons are to be
included in any estimate of the age of the sun.

The doctrine of cosmic evolution--the theory which in former times
was generally known as the nebular hypothesis--that the heavenly
bodies were formed by the slow contraction of heated nebulous
masses, is indicated by so many facts that it seems scarcely
possible to doubt it except on the theory that the laws of nature
were, at some former time, different from those which we now see
in operation. Granting the evolutionary hypothesis, every star has
its lifetime. We can even lay down the law by which it passes from
infancy to old age. All stars do not have the same length of life;
the rule is that the larger the star, or the greater the mass of
matter which composes it, the longer will it endure. Up to the
present time, science can do nothing more than point out these
indications of a beginning, and their inevitable consequence, that
there is to be an end to the light and heat of every heavenly
body. But no cautious thinker can treat such a subject with the
ease of ordinary demonstration. The investigator may even be
excused if he stands dumb with awe before the creation of his own
intellect. Our accurate records of the operations of nature extend
through only two or three centuries, and do not reach a
satisfactory standard until within a single century. The
experience of the individual is limited to a few years, and beyond
this period he must depend upon the records of his ancestors. All
his knowledge of the laws of nature is derived from this very
limited experience. How can he essay to describe what may have
been going on hundreds of millions of years in the past? Can he
dare to say that nature was the same then as now?

It is a fundamental principle of the theory of evolution, as
developed by its greatest recent expounder, that matter itself is
eternal, and that all the changes which have taken place in the
universe, so far as made up of matter, are in the nature of
transformations of this eternal substance. But we doubt whether
any physical philosopher of the present day would be satisfied to
accept any demonstration of the eternity of matter. All he would
admit is that, so far as his observation goes, no change in the
quantity of matter can be produced by the action of any known
cause. It seems to be equally uncreatable and indestructible. But
he would, at the same time, admit that his experience no more
sufficed to settle the question than the observation of an animal
for a single day would settle the question of the duration of its
life, or prove that it had neither beginning nor end. He would
probably admit that even matter itself may be a product of
evolution. The astronomer finds it difficult to conceive that the
great nebulous masses which he sees in the celestial spaces--
millions of times larger than the whole solar system, yet so
tenuous that they offer not the slightest obstruction to the
passage of a ray of light through their whole length--situated in
what seems to be a region of eternal cold, below anything that we
can produce on the earth's surface, yet radiating light, and with
it heat, like an incandescent body--can be made up of the same
kind of substance that we have around us on the earth's surface.
Who knows but that the radiant property that Becquerel has found
in certain forms of matter may be a residuum of some original form
of energy which is inherent in great cosmical masses, and has fed
our sun during all the ages required by the geologist for the
structure of the earth's crusts? It may be that in this phenomenon
we have the key to the great riddle of the universe, with which
profounder secrets of matter than any we have penetrated will be
opened to the eyes of our successors.





IV

THE EXTENT OF THE UNIVERSE


We cannot expect that the wisest men of our remotest posterity,
who can base their conclusions upon thousands of years of accurate
observation, will reach a decision on this subject without some
measure of reserve. Such being the case, it might appear the
dictate of wisdom to leave its consideration to some future age,
when it may be taken up with better means of information than we
now possess. But the question is one which will refuse to be
postponed so long as the propensity to think of the possibilities
of creation is characteristic of our race. The issue is not
whether we shall ignore the question altogether, like Eve in the
presence of Raphael; but whether in studying it we shall confine
our speculations within the limits set by sound scientific
reasoning. Essaying to do this, I invite the reader's attention to
what science may suggest, admitting in advance that the sphere of
exact knowledge is small compared with the possibilities of
creation, and that outside this sphere we can state only more or
less probable conclusions.

The reader who desires to approach this subject in the most
receptive spirit should begin his study by betaking himself on a
clear, moonless evening, when he has no earthly concern to disturb
the serenity of his thoughts, to some point where he can lie on
his back on bench or roof, and scan the whole vault of heaven at
one view. He can do this with the greatest pleasure and profit in
late summer or autumn--winter would do equally well were it
possible for the mind to rise so far above bodily conditions that
the question of temperature should not enter. The thinking man who
does this under circumstances most favorable for calm thought will
form a new conception of the wonder of the universe. If summer or
autumn be chosen, the stupendous arch of the Milky Way will pass
near the zenith, and the constellation Lyra, led by its beautiful
blue Vega of the first magnitude, may be not very far from that
point. South of it will be seen the constellation Aquila, marked
by the bright Altair, between two smaller but conspicuous stars.
The bright Arcturus will be somewhere in the west, and, if the
observation is not made too early in the season, Aldebaran will be
seen somewhere in the east. When attention is concentrated on the
scene the thousands of stars on each side of the Milky Way will
fill the mind with the consciousness of a stupendous and all-
embracing frame, beside which all human affairs sink into
insignificance. A new idea will be formed of such a well-known
fact of astronomy as the motion of the solar system in space, by
reflecting that, during all human history, the sun, carrying the
earth with it, has been flying towards a region in or just south
of the constellation Lyra, with a speed beyond all that art can
produce on earth, without producing any change apparent to
ordinary vision in the aspect of the constellation. Not only Lyra
and Aquila, but every one of the thousand stars which form the
framework of the sky, were seen by our earliest ancestors just as
we see them now. Bodily rest may be obtained at any time by
ceasing from our labors, and weary systems may find nerve rest at
any summer resort; but I know of no way in which complete rest can
be obtained for the weary soul--in which the mind can be so
entirely relieved of the burden of all human anxiety--as by the
contemplation of the spectacle presented by the starry heavens
under the conditions just described. As we make a feeble attempt
to learn what science can tell us about the structure of this
starry frame, I hope the reader will allow me to at least fancy
him contemplating it in this way.

The first question which may suggest itself to the inquiring
reader is: How is it possible by any methods of observation yet
known to the astronomer to learn anything about the universe as a
whole? We may commence by answering this question in a somewhat
comprehensive way. It is possible only because the universe, vast
though it is, shows certain characteristics of a unified and
bounded whole. It is not a chaos, it is not even a collection of
things, each of which came into existence in its own separate way.
If it were, there would be nothing in common between two widely
separate regions of the universe. But, as a matter of fact,
science shows unity in the whole structure, and diversity only in
details. The Milky Way itself will be seen by the most ordinary
observer to form a single structure. This structure is, in some
sort, the foundation on which the universe is built. It is a
girdle which seems to span the whole of creation, so far as our
telescopes have yet enabled us to determine what creation is; and
yet it has elements of similarity in all its parts. What has yet
more significance, it is in some respects unlike those parts of
the universe which lie without it, and even unlike those which lie
in that central region within it where our system is now situated.
The minute stars, individually far beyond the limit of visibility
to the naked eye, which form its cloudlike agglomerations, are
found to be mostly bluer in color, from one extreme to the other,
than the general average of the stars which make up the rest of
the universe.

In the preceding essay on the structure of the universe, we have
pointed out several features of the universe showing the unity of
the whole. We shall now bring together these and other features
with a view of showing their relation to the question of the
extent of the universe.

The Milky Way being in a certain sense the foundation on which the
whole system is constructed, we have first to notice the symmetry
of the whole. This is seen in the fact that a certain resemblance
is found in any two opposite regions of the sky, no matter where
we choose them. If we take them in the Milky Way, the stars are
more numerous than elsewhere; if we take opposite regions in or
near the Milky Way, we shall find more stars in both of them than
elsewhere; if we take them in the region anywhere around the poles
of the Milky Way, we shall find fewer stars, but they will be
equally numerous in each of the two regions. We infer from this
that whatever cause determined the number of the stars in space
was of the same nature in every two antipodal regions of the
heavens.

Another unity marked with yet more precision is seen in the
chemical elements of which stars are composed. We know that the
sun is composed of the same elements which we find on the earth
and into which we resolve compounds in our laboratories. These
same elements are found in the most distant stars. It is true that
some of these bodies seem to contain elements which we do not find
on earth. But as these unknown elements are scattered from one
extreme of the universe to the other, they only serve still
further to enforce the unity which runs through the whole. The
nebulae are composed, in part at least, of forms of matter
dissimilar to any with which we are acquainted. But, different
though they may be, they are alike in their general character
throughout the whole field we are considering. Even in such a
feature as the proper motions of the stars, the same unity is
seen. The reader doubtless knows that each of these objects is
flying through space on its own course with a speed comparable
with that of the earth around the sun. These speeds range from the
smallest limit up to more than one hundred miles a second. Such
diversity might seem to detract from the unity of the whole; but
when we seek to learn something definite by taking their average,
we find this average to be, so far as can yet be determined, much
the same in opposite regions of the universe. Quite recently it
has become probable that a certain class of very bright stars
known as Orion stars--because there are many of them in the most
brilliant of our constellations--which are scattered along the
whole course of the Milky Way, have one and all, in the general
average, slower motions than other stars. Here again we have a
definable characteristic extending through the universe. In
drawing attention to these points of similarity throughout the
whole universe, it must not be supposed that we base our
conclusions directly upon them. The point they bring out is that
the universe is in the nature of an organized system; and it is
upon the fact of its being such a system that we are able, by
other facts, to reach conclusions as to its structure, extent, and
other characteristics.

One of the great problems connected with the universe is that of
its possible extent. How far away are the stars? One of the
unities which we have described leads at once to the conclusion
that the stars must be at very different distances from us;
probably the more distant ones are a thousand times as far as the
nearest; possibly even farther than this. This conclusion may, in
the first place, be based on the fact that the stars seem to be
scattered equally throughout those regions of the universe which
are not connected with the Milky Way. To illustrate the principle,
suppose a farmer to sow a wheat-field of entirely unknown extent
with ten bushels of wheat. We visit the field and wish to have
some idea of its acreage. We may do this if we know how many
grains of wheat there are in the ten bushels. Then we examine a
space two or three feet square in any part of the field and count
the number of grains in that space. If the wheat is equally
scattered over the whole field, we find its extent by the simple
rule that the size of the field bears the same proportion to the
size of the space in which the count was made that the whole
number of grains in the ten bushels sown bears to the number of
grains counted. If we find ten grains in a square foot, we know
that the number of square feet in the whole field is one-tenth
that of the number of grains sown. So it is with the universe of
stars. If the latter are sown equally through space, the extent of
the space occupied must be proportional to the number of stars
which it contains.

But this consideration does not tell us anything about the actual
distance of the stars or how thickly they may be scattered. To do
this we must be able to determine the distance of a certain number
of stars, just as we suppose the farmer to count the grains in a
certain small extent of his wheat-field. There is only one way in
which we can make a definite measure of the distance of any one
star. As the earth swings through its vast annual circuit round
the sun, the direction of the stars must appear to be a little
different when seen from one extremity of the circuit than when
seen from the other. This difference is called the parallax of the
stars; and the problem of measuring it is one of the most delicate
and difficult in the whole field of practical astronomy.

The nineteenth century was well on its way before the instruments
of the astronomer were brought to such perfection as to admit of
the measurement. From the time of Copernicus to that of Bessel
many attempts had been made to measure the parallax of the stars,
and more than once had some eager astronomer thought himself
successful. But subsequent investigation always showed that he had
been mistaken, and that what he thought was the effect of parallax
was due to some other cause, perhaps the imperfections of his
instrument, perhaps the effect of heat and cold upon it or upon
the atmosphere through which he was obliged to observe the star,
or upon the going of his clock. Thus things went on until 1837,
when Bessel announced that measures with a heliometer--the most
refined instrument that has ever been used in measurement--showed
that a certain star in the constellation Cygnus had a parallax of
one-third of a second. It may be interesting to give an idea of
this quantity. Suppose one's self in a house on top of a mountain
looking out of a window one foot square, at a house on another
mountain one hundred miles away. One is allowed to look at that
distant house through one edge of the pane of glass and then
through the opposite edge; and he has to determine the change in
the direction of the distant house produced by this change of one
foot in his own position. From this he is to estimate how far off
the other mountain is. To do this, one would have to measure just
about the amount of parallax that Bessel found in his star. And
yet this star is among the few nearest to our system. The nearest
star of all, Alpha Centauri, visible only in latitudes south of
our middle ones, is perhaps half as far as Bessel's star, while
Sirius and one or two others are nearly at the same distance.
About 100 stars, all told, have had their parallax measured with a
greater or less degree of probability. The work is going on from
year to year, each successive astronomer who takes it up being
able, as a general rule, to avail himself of better instruments or
to use a better method. But, after all, the distances of even some
of the 100 stars carefully measured must still remain quite
doubtful.

Let us now return to the idea of dividing the space in which the
universe is situated into concentric spheres drawn at various
distances around our system as a centre. Here we shall take as our
standard a distance 400,000 times that of the sun from the earth.
Regarding this as a unit, we imagine ourselves to measure out in
any direction a distance twice as great as this--then another
equal distance, making one three times as great, and so
indefinitely. We then have successive spheres of which we take the
nearer one as the unit. The total space filled by the second
sphere will be 8 times the unit; that of the third space 27 times,
and so on, as the cube of each distance. Since each sphere
includes all those within it, the volume of space between each two
spheres will be proportional to the difference of these numbers--
that is, to 1, 7, 19, etc. Comparing these volumes with the number
of stars probably within them, the general result up to the
present time is that the number of stars in any of these spheres
will be about equal to the units of volume which they comprise,
when we take for this unit the smallest and innermost of the
spheres, having a radius 400,000 times the sun's distance. We are
thus enabled to form some general idea of how thickly the stars
are sown through space. We cannot claim any numerical exactness
for this idea, but in the absence of better methods it does afford
us some basis for reasoning.

Now we can carry on our computation as we supposed the farmer to
measure the extent of his wheat-field. Let us suppose that there
are 125,000,000 stars in the heavens. This is an exceedingly rough
estimate, but let us make the supposition for the time being.
Accepting the view that they are nearly equally scattered
throughout space, it will follow that they must be contained
within a volume equal to 125,000,000 times the sphere we have
taken as our unit. We find the distance of the surface of this
sphere by extracting the cube root of this number, which gives us
500. We may, therefore, say, as the result of a very rough
estimate, that the number of stars we have supposed would be
contained within a distance found by multiplying 400,000 times the
distance of the sun by 500; that is, that they are contained
within a region whose boundary is 200,000,000 times the distance
of the sun. This is a distance through which light would travel in
about 3300 years.

It is not impossible that the number of stars is much greater than
that we have supposed. Let us grant that there are eight times as
many, or 1,000,000,000. Then we should have to extend the boundary
of our universe twice as far, carrying it to a distance which
light would require 6600 years to travel.

There is another method of estimating the thickness with which
stars are sown through space, and hence the extent of the
universe, the result of which will be of interest. It is based on
the proper motion of the stars. One of the greatest triumphs of
astronomy of our time has been the measurement of the actual speed
at which many of the stars are moving to or from us in space.
These measures are made with the spectroscope. Unfortunately, they
can be best made only on the brighter stars--becoming very
difficult in the case of stars not plainly visible to the naked
eye. Still the motions of several hundreds have been measured and
the number is constantly increasing.

A general result of all these measures and of other estimates may
be summed up by saying that there is a certain average speed with
which the individual stars move in space; and that this average is
about twenty miles per second. We are also able to form an
estimate as to what proportion of the stars move with each rate of
speed from the lowest up to a limit which is probably as high as
150 miles per second. Knowing these proportions we have, by
observation of the proper motions of the stars, another method of
estimating how thickly they are scattered in space; in other
words, what is the volume of space which, on the average, contains
a single star. This method gives a thickness of the stars greater
by about twenty-five per cent, than that derived from the measures
of parallax. That is to say, a sphere like the second we have
proposed, having a radius 800,000 times the distance of the sun,
and therefore a diameter 1,600,000 times this distance, would,
judging by the proper motions, have ten or twelve stars contained
within it, while the measures of parallax only show eight stars
within the sphere of this diameter having the sun as its centre.
The probabilities are in favor of the result giving the greater
thickness of the stars. But, after all, the discrepancy does not
change the general conclusion as to the limits of the visible
universe. If we cannot estimate its extent with the same certainty
that we can determine the size of the earth, we can still form a
general idea of it.

The estimates we have made are based on the supposition that the
stars are equally scattered in space. We have good reason to
believe that this is true of all the stars except those of the
Milky Way. But, after all, the latter probably includes half the
whole number of stars visible with a telescope, and the question
may arise whether our results are seriously wrong from this cause.
This question can best be solved by yet another method of
estimating the average distance of certain classes of stars.

The parallaxes of which we have heretofore spoken consist in the
change in the direction of a star produced by the swing of the
earth from one side of its orbit to the other. But we have already
remarked that our solar system, with the earth as one of its
bodies, has been journeying straightforward through space during
all historic times. It follows, therefore, that we are continually
changing the position from which we view the stars, and that, if
the latter were at rest, we could, by measuring the apparent speed
with which they are moving in the opposite direction from that of
the earth, determine their distance. But since every star has its
own motion, it is impossible, in any one case, to determine how
much of the apparent motion is due to the star itself, and how
much to the motion of the solar system through space. Yet, by
taking general averages among groups of stars, most of which are
probably near each other, it is possible to estimate the average
distance by this method. When an attempt is made to apply it, so
as to obtain a definite result, the astronomer finds that the data
now available for the purpose are very deficient. The proper
motion of a star can be determined only by comparing its observed
position in the heavens at two widely separate epochs.
Observations of sufficient precision for this purpose were
commenced about 1750 at the Greenwich Observatory, by Bradley,
then Astronomer Royal of England. But out of 3000 stars which he
determined, only a few are available for the purpose. Even since
his time, the determinations made by each generation of
astronomers have not been sufficiently complete and systematic to
furnish the material for anything like a precise determination of
the proper motions of stars. To determine a single position of any
one star involves a good deal of computation, and if we reflect
that, in order to attack the problem in question in a satisfactory
way, we should have observations of 1,000,000 of these bodies made
at intervals of at least a considerable fraction of a century, we
see what an enormous task the astronomers dealing with this
problem have before them, and how imperfect must be any
determination of the distance of the stars based on our motion
through space. So far as an estimate can be made, it seems to
agree fairly well with the results obtained by the other methods.
Speaking roughly, we have reason, from the data so far available,
to believe that the stars of the Milky Way are situated at a
distance between 100,000,000 and 200,000,000 times the distance of
the sun. At distances less than this it seems likely that the
stars are distributed through space with some approach to
uniformity. We may state as a general conclusion, indicated by
several methods of making the estimate, that nearly all the stars
which we can see with our telescopes are contained within a sphere
not likely to be much more than 200,000,000 times the distance of
the sun.

The inquiring reader may here ask another question. Granting that
all the stars we can see are contained within this limit, may
there not be any number of stars outside the limit which are
invisible only because they are too far away to be seen?

This question may be answered quite definitely if we grant that
light from the most distant stars meets with no obstruction in
reaching us. The most conclusive answer is afforded by the measure
of starlight. If the stars extended out indefinitely, then the
number of those of each order of magnitude would be nearly four
times that of the magnitude next brighter. For example, we should
have nearly four times as many stars of the sixth magnitude as of
the fifth; nearly four times as many of the seventh as of the
sixth, and so on indefinitely. Now, it is actually found that
while this ratio of increase is true for the brighter stars, it is
not so for the fainter ones, and that the increase in the number
of the latter rapidly falls off when we make counts of the fainter
telescopic stars. In fact, it has long been known that, were the
universe infinite in extent, and the stars equally scattered
through all space, the whole heavens would blaze with the light of
countless millions of distant stars separately invisible even with
the telescope.

The only way in which this conclusion can be invalidated is by the
possibility that the light of the stars is in some way
extinguished or obstructed in its passage through space. A theory
to this effect was propounded by Struve nearly a century ago, but
it has since been found that the facts as he set them forth do not
justify the conclusion, which was, in fact, rather hypothetical.
The theories of modern science converge towards the view that, in
the pure ether of space, no single ray of light can ever be lost,
no matter how far it may travel. But there is another possible
cause for the extinction of light. During the last few years
discoveries of dark and therefore invisible stars have been made
by means of the spectroscope with a success which would have been
quite incredible a very few years ago, and which, even to-day,
must excite wonder and admiration. The general conclusion is that,
besides the shining stars which exist in space, there may be any
number of dark ones, forever invisible in our telescopes. May it
not be that these bodies are so numerous as to cut off the light
which we would otherwise receive from the more distant bodies of
the universe? It is, of course, impossible to answer this question
in a positive way, but the probable conclusion is a negative one.
We may say with certainty that dark stars are not so numerous as
to cut off any important part of the light from the stars of the
Milky Way, because, if they did, the latter would not be so
clearly seen as it is. Since we have reason to believe that the
Milky Way comprises the more distant stars of our system, we may
feel fairly confident that not much light can be cut off by dark
bodies from the most distant region to which our telescopes can
penetrate. Up to this distance we see the stars just as they are.
Even within the limit of the universe as we understand it, it is
likely that more than one-half the stars which actually exist are
too faint to be seen by human vision, even when armed with the
most powerful telescopes. But their invisibility is due only to
their distance and the faintness of their intrinsic light, and not
to any obstructing agency.

The possibility of dark stars, therefore, does not invalidate the
general conclusions at which our survey of the subject points. The
universe, so far as we can see it, is a bounded whole. It is
surrounded by an immense girdle of stars, which, to our vision,
appears as the Milky Way. While we cannot set exact limits to its
distance, we may yet confidently say that it is bounded. It has
uniformities running through its vast extent. Could we fly out to
distances equal to that of the Milky Way, we should find
comparatively few stars beyond the limits of that girdle. It is
true that we cannot set any definite limit and say that beyond
this nothing exists. What we can say is that the region containing
the visible stars has some approximation to a boundary. We may
fairly anticipate that each successive generation of astronomers,
through coming centuries, will obtain a little more light on the
subject--will be enabled to make more definite the boundaries of
our system of stars, and to draw more and more probable
conclusions as to the existence or non-existence of any object
outside of it. The wise investigator of to-day will leave to them
the task of putting the problem into a more positive shape.





V

MAKING AND USING A TELESCOPE


The impression is quite common that satisfactory views of the
heavenly bodies can be obtained only with very large telescopes,
and that the owner of a small one must stand at a great
disadvantage alongside of the fortunate possessor of a great one.
This is not true to the extent commonly supposed. Sir William
Herschel would have been delighted to view the moon through what
we should now consider a very modest instrument; and there are
some objects, especially the moon, which commonly present a more
pleasing aspect through a small telescope than through a large
one. The numerous owners of small telescopes throughout the
country might find their instruments much more interesting than
they do if they only knew what objects were best suited to
examination with the means at their command. There are many
others, not possessors of telescopes, who would like to know how
one can be acquired, and to whom hints in this direction will be
valuable. We shall therefore give such information as we are able
respecting the construction of a telescope, and the more
interesting celestial objects to which it may be applied.

Whether the reader does or does not feel competent to undertake
the making of a telescope, it may be of interest to him to know
how it is done. First, as to the general principles involved, it
is generally known that the really vital parts of the telescope,
which by their combined action perform the office of magnifying
the object looked at, are two in number, the OBJECTIVE and the
EYE-PIECE. The former brings the rays of light which emanate from
the object to the focus where the image of the object is formed.
The eye-piece enables the observer to see this image to the best
advantage.

The functions of the objective as well as those of the eye-piece
may, to a certain extent, each be performed by a single lens.
Galileo and his contemporaries made their telescopes in this way,
because they knew of no way in which two lenses could be made to
do better than one. But every one who has studied optics knows
that white light passing through a single lens is not all brought
to the same focus, but that the blue light will come to a focus
nearer the objective than the red light. There will, in fact, be a
succession of images, blue, green, yellow, and red, corresponding
to the colors of the spectrum. It is impossible to see these
different images clearly at the same time, because each of them
will render all the others indistinct.

The achromatic object-glass, invented by Dollond, about 1750,
obviates this difficulty, and brings all the rays to nearly the
same focus. Nearly every one interested in the subject is aware
that this object-glass is composed of two lenses--a concave one of
flint-glass and a convex one of crown-glass, the latter being on
the side towards the object. This is the one vital part of the
telescope, the construction of which involves the greatest
difficulty. Once in possession of a perfect object-glass, the rest
of the telescope is a matter of little more than constructive
skill which there is no difficulty in commanding.

The construction of the object-glass requires two completely
distinct processes: the making of the rough glass, which is the
work of the glass-maker; and the grinding and polishing into
shape, which is the work of the optician. The ordinary glass of
commerce will not answer the purpose of the telescope at all,
because it is not sufficiently clear and homogeneous. OPTICAL
GLASS, as it is called, must be made of materials selected and
purified with the greatest care, and worked in a more elaborate
manner than is necessary in any other kind of glass. In the time
of Dollond it was found scarcely possible to make good disks of
flint-glass more than three or four inches in diameter. Early in
the present century, Guinand, of Switzerland, invented a process
by which disks of much larger size could be produced. In
conjunction with the celebrated Fraunhofer he made disks of nine
or ten inches in diameter, which were employed by his colaborer in
constructing the telescopes which were so famous in their time. He
was long supposed to be in possession of some secret method of
avoiding the difficulties which his predecessors had met. It is
now believed that this secret, if one it was, consisted
principally in the constant stirring of the molten glass during
the process of manufacture. However this may be, it is a curious
historical fact that the most successful makers of these great
disks of glass have either been of the family of Guinand, or
successors, in the management of the family firm. It was Feil, a
son-in-law or near relative, who made the glass from which Clark
fabricated the lenses of the great telescope of the Lick
Observatory. His successor, Mantois, of Paris, carried the art to
a point of perfection never before approached. The transparency
and uniformity of his disks as well as the great size to which he
was able to carry them would suggest that he and his successors
have out-distanced all competitors in the process. He it was who
made the great 40-inch lens for the Yerkes Observatory.

As optical glass is now made, the material is constantly stirred
with an iron rod during all the time it is melting in the furnace,
and after it has begun to cool, until it becomes so stiff that the
stirring has to cease. It is then placed, pot and all, in the
annealing furnace, where it is kept nearly at a melting heat for
three weeks or more, according to the size of the pot. When the
furnace has cooled off, the glass is taken out, and the pot is
broken from around it, leaving only the central mass of glass.
Having such a mass, there is no trouble in breaking it up into
pieces of all desirable purity, and sufficiently large for
moderate-sized telescopes. But when a great telescope of two feet
aperture or upward is to be constructed, very delicate and
laborious operations have to be undertaken. The outside of the
glass has first to be chipped off, because it is filled with
impurities from the material of the pot itself. But this is not
all. Veins of unequal density are always found extending through
the interior of the mass, no way of avoiding them having yet been
discovered. They are supposed to arise from the materials of the
pot and stirring rod, which become mixed in with the glass in
consequence of the intense heat to which all are subjected. These
veins must, so far as possible, be ground or chipped out with the
greatest care. The glass is then melted again, pressed into a flat
disk, and once more put into the annealing oven. In fact, the
operation of annealing must be repeated every time the glass is
melted. When cooled, it is again examined for veins, of which
great numbers are sure to be found. The problem now is to remove
these by cutting and grinding without either breaking the glass in
two or cutting a hole through it. If the parts of the glass are
once separated, they can never be joined without producing a bad
scar at the point of junction. So long, however, as the surface is
unbroken, the interior parts of the glass can be changed in form
to any extent. Having ground out the veins as far as possible, the
glass is to be again melted, and moulded into proper shape. In
this mould great care must be taken to have no folding of the
surface. Imagining the latter to be a sort of skin enclosing the
melted glass inside, it must be raised up wherever the glass is
thinnest, and the latter allowed to slowly run together beneath
it.

[Illustration with caption: THE GLASS DISK.]

If the disk is of flint, all the veins must be ground out on the
first or second trial, because after two or three mouldings the
glass will lose its transparency. A crown disk may, however, be
melted a number of times without serious injury. In many cases--
perhaps the majority--the artisan finds that after all his months
of labor he cannot perfectly clear his glass of the noxious veins,
and he has to break it up into smaller pieces. When he finally
succeeds, the disk has the form of a thin grindstone two feet or
upward in diameter, according to the size of the telescope to be
made, and from two to three inches in thickness. The glass is then
ready for the optician.

[Illustration with caption: THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL.]

The first process to be performed by the optician is to grind the
glass into the shape of a lens with perfectly spherical surfaces.
The convex surface must be ground in a saucer-shaped tool of
corresponding form. It is impossible to make a tool perfectly
spherical in the first place, but success may be secured on the
geometrical principle that two surfaces cannot fit each other in
all positions unless both are perfectly spherical. The tool of the
optician is a very simple affair, being nothing more than a plate
of iron somewhat larger, perhaps a fourth, than the lens to be
ground to the corresponding curvature. In order to insure its
changing to fit the glass, it is covered on the interior with a
coating of pitch from an eighth to a quarter of an inch thick.
This material is admirably adapted to the purpose because it gives
way certainly, though very slowly, to the pressure of the glass.
In order that it may have room to change its form, grooves are cut
through it in both directions, so as to leave it in the form of
squares, like those on a chess-board.

[Illustration with caption: THE OPTICIAN'S TOOL.]

It is then sprinkled over with rouge, moistened with water, and
gently warmed. The roughly ground lens is then placed upon it, and
moved from side to side. The direction of the motion is slightly
changed with every stroke, so that after a dozen or so of strokes
the lines of motion will lie in every direction on the tool. This
change of direction is most readily and easily effected by the
operator slowly walking around as he polishes, at the same time
the lens is to be slowly turned around either in the opposite
direction or more rapidly yet in the same direction, so that the
strokes of the polisher shall cross the lens in all directions.
This double motion insures every part of the lens coming into
contact with every part of the polisher, and moving over it in
every direction.

Then whatever parts either of the lens or of the polisher may be
too high to form a spherical surface will be gradually worn down,
thus securing the perfect sphericity of both.

[Illustration with caption: GRINDING A LARGE LENS.]

When the polishing is done by machinery, which is the custom in
Europe, with large lenses, the polisher is slid back and forth
over the lens by means of a crank attached to a revolving wheel.
The polisher is at the same time slowly revolving around a pivot
at its centre, which pivot the crank works into, and the glass
below it is slowly turned in an opposite direction. Thus the same
effect is produced as in the other system. Those who practice this
method claim that by thus using machinery the conditions of a
uniform polish for every part of the surface can be more perfectly
fulfilled than by a hand motion. The results, however, do not
support this view. No European optician will claim to do better
than the American firm of Alvan Clark & Sons in producing
uniformly good object-glasses, and this firm always does the work
by hand, moving the glass over the polisher, and not the polisher
over the glass.

Having brought both flint and crown glasses into proper figure by
this process, they are joined together, and tested by observations
either upon a star in the heavens, or some illuminated point at a
little distance on the ground. The reflection of the sun from a
drop of quicksilver, a thermometer bulb, or even a piece of broken
bottle, makes an excellent artificial star. The very best optician
will always find that on a first trial his glass is not perfect.
He will find that he has not given exactly the proper curves to
secure achromatism. He must then change the figure of one or both
the glasses by polishing it upon a tool of slightly different
curvature. He may also find that there is some spherical
aberration outstanding. He must then alter his curve so as to
correct this. The correction of these little imperfections in the
figures of the lenses so as to secure perfect vision through them
is the most difficult branch of the art of the optician, and upon
his skill in practising it will depend more than upon anything
else his ultimate success and reputation. The shaping of a pair of
lenses in the way we have described is not beyond the power of any
person of ordinary mechanical ingenuity, possessing the necessary
delicacy of touch and appreciation of the problem he is attacking.
But to make a perfect objective of considerable size, which shall
satisfy all the wants of the astronomer, is an undertaking
requiring such accuracy of eyesight, and judgment in determining
where the error lies, and such skill in manipulating so as to
remove the defects, that the successful men in any one generation
can be counted on one's fingers.

In order that the telescope may finally perform satisfactorily it
is not sufficient that the lenses should both be of proper figure;
they must also both be properly centred in their cells. If either
lens is tipped aside, or slid out from its proper central line,
the definition will be injured. As this is liable to happen with
almost any telescope, we shall explain how the proper adjustment
is to be made.

The easiest way to test this adjustment is to set the cell with
the two glasses of the objective in it against a wall at night,
and going to a short distance, observe the reflection in the glass
of the flame of a candle held in the hand. Three or four
reflections will be seen from the different surfaces. The
observer, holding the candle before his eye, and having his line
of sight as close as possible to the flame, must then move until
the different images of the flame coincide with each other. If he
cannot bring them into coincidence, owing to different pairs
coinciding on different sides of the flame, the glasses are not
perfectly centred upon each other. When the centring is perfect,
the observer having the light in the line of the axes of the
lenses, and (if it were possible to do so) looking through the
centre of the flame, would see the three or four images all in
coincidence. As he cannot see through the flame itself, he must
look first on one side and then on the other, and see if the
arrangement of the images seen in the lenses is symmetrical. If,
going to different distances, he finds no deviation from symmetry,
in this respect the adjustment is near enough for all practical
purposes.

A more artistic instrument than a simple candle is a small concave
reflector pierced through its centre, such as is used by
physicians in examining the throat.

[Illustration with caption: IMAGE OF CANDLE-FLAME IN OBJECT-
GLASS.]

[Illustration with caption: TESTING ADJUSTMENT OF OBJECT-GLASS.]

Place this reflector in the prolongation of the optical axis, set
the candle so that the light from the reflector shall be shown
through the glass, and look through the opening. Images of the
reflector itself will then be seen in the object-glass, and if the
adjustment is perfect, the reflector can be moved so that they
will all come into coincidence together.

When the objective is in the tube of the telescope, it is always
well to examine this adjustment from time to time, holding the
candle so that its light shall shine through the opening
perpendicularly upon the object-glass. The observer looks upon one
side of the flame, and then upon the other, to see if the images
are symmetrical in the different positions. If in order to see
them in this way the candle has to be moved to one side of the
central line of the tube, the whole objective must be adjusted. If
two images coincide in one position of the candle-flame, and two
in another position, so that they cannot all be brought together
in any position, it shows that the glasses are not properly
adjusted in their cell. It may be remarked that this last
adjustment is the proper work of the optician, since it is so
difficult that the user of the telescope cannot ordinarily effect
it. But the perpendicularity of the whole objective to the tube of
the telescope is liable to be deranged in use, and every one who
uses such an instrument should be able to rectify an error of this
kind.

The question may be asked, How much of a telescope can an amateur
observer, under any circumstances, make for himself? As a general
rule, his work in this direction must be confined to the tube and
the mounting. We should not, it is true, dare to assert that any
ingenious young man, with a clear appreciation of optical
principles, could not soon learn to grind and polish an object-
glass for himself by the method we have described, and thus obtain
a much better instrument than Galileo ever had at his command. But
it would be a wonderful success if his home-made telescope was
equal to the most indifferent one which can be bought at an
optician's. The objective, complete in itself, can be purchased at
prices depending upon the size.

[Footnote: The following is a rough rule for getting an idea of
the price of an achromatic objective, made to order, of the finest
quality. Take the cube of the diameter in inches, or, which is the
same thing, calculate the contents of a cubical box which would
hold a sphere of the same diameter as the clear aperture of the
glass. The price of the glass will then range from $1 to $1.75 for
each cubic inch in this box. For example, the price of a four-inch
objective will probably range from $64 to $112. Very small object-
glasses of one or two inches may be a little higher than would be
given by this rule. Instruments which are not first-class, but
will answer most of the purposes of the amateur, are much
cheaper.]

[Illustration with caption: A VERY PRIMITIVE MOUNTING FOR A
TELESCOPE.]

The tube for the telescope may be made of paper, by pasting a
great number of thicknesses around a long wooden cylinder. A yet
better tube is made of a simple wooden box. The best material,
however, is metal, because wood and pasteboard are liable both to
get out of shape, and to swell under the influence of moisture.
Tin, if it be of sufficient thickness, would be a very good
material. The brighter it is kept, the better. The work of fitting
the objective into one end of a tin tube of double thickness, and
properly adjusting it, will probably be quite within the powers of
the ordinary amateur. The fitting of the eye-piece into the other
end of the tube will require some skill and care both on his own
part and that of his tinsmith.

Although the construction of the eye-piece is much easier than
that of the objective, since the same accuracy in adjusting the
curves is not necessary, yet the price is lower in a yet greater
degree, so that the amateur will find it better to buy than to
make his eye-piece, unless he is anxious to test his mechanical
powers. For a telescope which has no micrometer, the Huyghenian or
negative eye-piece, as it is commonly called, is the best. As made
by Huyghens, it consists of two plano-convex lenses, with their
plane sides next the eye, as shown in the figure.

[Illustration with caption: THE HUYGHENIAN EYE-PIECE.]

So far as we have yet described our telescope it is optically
complete. If it could be used as a spy-glass by simply holding it
in the hand, and pointing at the object we wish to observe, there
would be little need of any very elaborate support. But if a
telescope, even of the smallest size, is to be used with
regularity, a proper "mounting" is as essential as a good
instrument. Persons unpractised in the use of such instruments are
very apt to underrate the importance of those accessories which
merely enable us to point the telescope. An idea of what is wanted
in the mounting may readily be formed if the reader will try to
look at a star with an ordinary good-sized spy-glass held in the
hand, and then imagine the difficulties he meets with multiplied
by fifty.

The smaller and cheaper telescopes, as commonly sold, are mounted
on a simple little stand, on which the instrument admits of a
horizontal and vertical motion. If one only wants to get a few
glimpses of a celestial object, this mounting will answer his
purpose. But to make anything like a study of a celestial body,
the mounting must be an equatorial one; that is, one of the axes
around which the telescope moves must be inclined so as to point
towards the pole of the heavens, which is near the polar star.
This axis will then make an angle with the horizon equal to the
latitude of the place. The telescope cannot, however, be mounted
directly on this axis, but must be attached to a second one,
itself fastened to this one.

[Illustration with caption: SECTION OF THE PRIMITIVE MOUNTING. P
P. Polar axis, bearing a fork at the upper end A. Declination axis
passing through the fork E. Section of telescope tube C. Weight to
balance the tube.]

When mounted in this way, an object can be followed in its diurnal
motion from east to west by turning on the polar axis alone. But
if the greatest facility in use is required, this motion must be
performed by clock-work. A telescope with this appendage will
commonly cost one thousand dollars and upward, so that it is not
usually applied to very small ones.

We will now suppose that the reader wishes to purchase a telescope
or an object-glass for himself, and to be able to judge of its
performance. He must have the object-glass properly adjusted in
its tube, and must use the highest power; that is, the smallest
eye-piece, which he intends to use in the instrument. Of course he
understands that in looking directly at a star or a celestial
object it must appear sharp in outline and well defined. But
without long practice with good instruments, this will not give
him a very definite idea. If the person who selects the telescope
is quite unpractised, it is possible that he can make the best
test by ascertaining at what distance he can read ordinary print.
To do this he should have an eye-piece magnifying about fifty
times for each inch of aperture of the telescope. For instance, if
his telescope is three inches clear aperture, then his eye-piece
should magnify one hundred and fifty times; if the aperture is
four inches, one magnifying two hundred times may be used. This
magnifying power is, as a general rule, about the highest that can
be advantageously used with any telescope. Supposing this
magnifying power to be used, this page should be legible at a
distance of four feet for every unit of magnifying power of the
telescope. For example, with a power of 100, it should be legible
at a distance of 400 feet; with a power of 200, at 800 feet, and
so on. To put the condition into another shape: if the telescope
will read the print at a distance of 150 feet for each inch of
aperture with the best magnifying power, its performance is at
least not very bad. If the magnifying power is less than would be
given by this rule, the telescope should perform a little better;
for instance, a three-inch telescope with a power of 60 should
make this page legible at a distance of 300 feet, or four feet for
each unit of power.

The test applied by the optician is much more exact, and also more
easy. He points the instrument at a star, or at the reflection of
the sun's rays from a small round piece of glass or a globule of
quicksilver several hundred yards away, and ascertains whether the
rays are all brought to a focus. This is not done by simply
looking at the star, but by alternately pushing the eye-piece in
beyond the point of distinct vision and drawing it out past the
point. In this way the image of the star will appear, not as a
point, but as a round disk of light. If the telescope is perfect,
this disk will appear round and of uniform brightness in either
position of the eye-piece. But if there is any spherical
aberration or differences of density in different parts of the
glass, the image will appear distorted in various ways. If the
spherical aberration is not correct, the outer rim of the disk
will be brighter than the centre when the eye-piece is pushed in,
and the centre will be the brighter when it is drawn out. If the
curves of the glass are not even all around, the image will appear
oval in one or the other position. If there are large veins of
unequal density, wings or notches will be seen on the image. If
the atmosphere is steady, the image, when the eye-piece is pushed
in, will be formed of a great number of minute rings of light. If
the glass is good, these rings will be round, unbroken, and
equally bright. We present several figures showing how these
spectral images, as they are sometimes called, will appear; first,
when the eye-piece is pushed in, and secondly, when it is drawn
out, with telescopes of different qualities.

We have thus far spoken only of the refracting telescope, because
it is the kind with which an observer would naturally seek to
supply himself. At the same time there is little doubt that the
construction of a reflector of moderate size is easier than that
of a corresponding refractor. The essential part of the reflector
is a slightly concave mirror of any metal which will bear a high
polish. This mirror may be ground and polished in the same way as
a lens, only the tool must be convex.

[Illustration with caption: SPECTRAL IMAGES OF STARS; THE UPPER
LINE SHOWING HOW THEY APPEAR WITH THE EYE-PIECE PUSHED IN, THE
LOWER WITH THE EYE-PIECE DRAWN OUT.

A The telescope is all right
B Spherical aberration shown by the light and dark centre
C The objective is not spherical but elliptical
D The glass not uniform--a very bad and incurable case
E One side of the objective nearer than the other. Adjust it]

Of late years it has become very common to make the mirror of
glass and to cover the reflecting face with an exceedingly thin
film of silver, which can be polished by hand in a few minutes.
Such a mirror differs from our ordinary looking-glass in that the
coating of silver is put on the front surface, so that the light
does not pass through the glass. Moreover, the coating of silver
is so thin as to be almost transparent: in fact, the sun may be
seen through it by direct vision as a faint blue object. Silvered
glass reflectors made in this way are extensively manufactured in
London, and are far cheaper than refracting telescopes of
corresponding size. Their great drawback is the want of permanence
in the silver film. In the city the film will ordinarily tarnish
in a few months from the sulphurous vapors arising from gaslights
and other sources, and even in the country it is very difficult to
preserve the mirror from the contact of everything that will
injure it. In consequence, the possessor of such a telescope, if
he wishes to keep it in order, must always be prepared to resilver
and repolish it. To do this requires such careful manipulation and
management of the chemicals that it is hardly to be expected that
an amateur will take the trouble to keep his telescope in order,
unless he has a taste for chemistry as well as for astronomy.

The curiosity to see the heavenly bodies through great telescopes
is so wide-spread that we are apt to forget how much can be seen
and done with small ones. The fact is that a large proportion of
the astronomical observations of past times have been made with
what we should now regard as very small instruments, and a good
deal of the solid astronomical work of the present time is done
with meridian circles the apertures of which ordinarily range from
four to eight inches. One of the most conspicuous examples in
recent times of how a moderate-sized instrument may be utilized is
afforded by the discoveries of double stars made by Mr. S. W.
Burnham, of Chicago. Provided with a little six-inch telescope,
procured at his own expense from the Messrs. Clark, he has
discovered many hundred double stars so difficult that they had
escaped the scrutiny of Maedler and the Struves, and gained for
himself one of the highest positions among the astronomers of the
day engaged in the observation of these objects. It was with this
little instrument that on Mount Hamilton, California--afterward
the site of the great Lick Observatory--he discovered forty-eight
new double stars, which had remained unnoticed by all previous
observers. First among the objects which show beautifully through
moderate instruments stands the moon. People who want to see the
moon at an observatory generally make the mistake of looking when
the moon is full, and asking to see it through the largest
telescope. Nothing can then be made out but a brilliant blaze of
light, mottled with dark spots, and crossed by irregular bright
lines. The best time to view the moon is near or before the first
quarter, or when she is from three to eight days old. The last
quarter is of course equally favorable, so far as seeing is
concerned, only one must be up after midnight to see her in that
position. Seen through a three or four inch telescope, a day or
two before the first quarter, about half an hour after sunset, and
with a magnifying power between fifty and one hundred, the moon is
one of the most beautiful objects in the heavens. Twilight softens
her radiance so that the eye is not dazzled as it will be when the
sky is entirely dark. The general aspect she then presents is that
of a hemisphere of beautiful chased silver carved out in curious
round patterns with a more than human skill. If, however, one
wishes to see the minute details of the lunar surface, in which
many of our astronomers are now so deeply interested, he must use
a higher magnifying power. The general beautiful effect is then
lessened, but more details are seen. Still, it is hardly necessary
to seek for a very large telescope for any investigation of the
lunar surface. I very much doubt whether any one has ever seen
anything on the moon which could not be made out in a clear,
steady atmosphere with a six-inch telescope of the first class.

Next to the moon, Saturn is among the most beautiful of celestial
objects. Its aspect, however, varies with its position in its
orbit. Twice in the course of a revolution, which occupies nearly
thirty years, the rings are seen edgewise, and for a few days are
invisible even in a powerful telescope. For an entire year their
form may be difficult to make out with a small telescope. These
unfavorable conditions occur in 1907 and 1921. Between these
dates, especially for some years after 1910, the position of the
planet in the sky will be the most favorable, being in northern
declination, near its perihelion, and having its rings widely
open. We all know that Saturn is plainly visible to the naked eye,
shining almost like a star of the first magnitude, so that there
is no difficulty in finding it if one knows when and where to
look. In 1906-1908 its oppositions occur in the month of
September. In subsequent years, it will occur a month later every
two and a half years. The ring can be seen with a common, good
spy-glass fastened to a post so as to be steady. A four or five-
inch telescope will show most of the satellites, the division in
the ring, and, when the ring is well opened, the curious dusky
ring discovered by Bond. This "crape ring," as it is commonly
called, is one of the most singular phenomena presented by that
planet.

It might be interesting to the amateur astronomer with a keen eye
and a telescope of four inches aperture or upward to frequently
scrutinize Saturn, with a view of detecting any extraordinary
eruptions upon his surface, like that seen by Professor Hall in
1876. On December 7th of that year a bright spot was seen upon
Saturn's equator. It elongated itself from day to day, and
remained visible for several weeks. Such a thing had never before
been known upon this planet, and had it not been that Professor
Hall was engaged in observations upon the satellites, it would not
have been seen then. A similar spot on the planet was recorded in
1902, and much more extensively noticed. On this occasion the spot
appeared in a higher latitude from the planet's equator than did
Professor Hall's. At this appearance the time of the planet's
revolution on its axis was found to be somewhat greater than in
1876, in accordance with the general law exhibited in the
rotations of the sun and of Jupiter. Notwithstanding their
transient character, these two spots have afforded the only
determination of the time of revolution of Saturn which has been
made since Herschel the elder.

[Illustration with caption: THE GREAT REFRACTOR OF THE NATIONAL
OBSERVATORY AT WASHINGTON]

Of the satellites of Saturn the brightest is Titan, which can be
seen with the smallest telescope, and revolves around the planet
in fifteen days. Iapetus, the outer satellite, is remarkable for
varying greatly in brilliancy during its revolution around the
planet. Any one having the means and ability to make accurate
photometrical estimates of the light of this satellite in all
points of its orbit, can thereby render a valuable service to
astronomy.

The observations of Venus, by which the astronomers of the last
century supposed themselves to have discovered its time of
rotation on its axis, were made with telescopes much inferior to
ours. Although their observations have not been confirmed, some
astronomers are still inclined to think that their results have
not been refuted by the failure of recent observers to detect
those changes which the older ones describe on the surface of the
planet. With a six-inch telescope of the best quality, and with
time to choose the most favorable moment, one will be as well
equipped to settle the question of the rotation of Venus as the
best observer. The few days near each inferior conjunction are
especially to be taken advantage of.

The questions to be settled are two: first, are there any dark
spots or other markings on the disk? second, are there any
irregularities in the form of the sharp cusps? The central
portions of the disk are much darker than the outline, and it is
probably this fact which has given rise to the impression of dark
spots. Unless this apparent darkness changes from time to time, or
shows some irregularity in its outline, it cannot indicate any
rotation of the planet. The best time to scrutinize the sharp
cusps will be when the planet is nearly on the line from the earth
to the sun. The best hour of the day is near sunset, the half-hour
following sunset being the best of all. But if Venus is near the
sun, she will after sunset be too low down to be well seen, and
must be looked at late in the afternoon.

The planet Mars must always be an object of great interest,
because of all the heavenly bodies it is that which appears to
bear the greatest resemblance to the earth. It comes into
opposition at intervals of a little more than two years, and can
be well seen only for a month or two before and after each
opposition. It is hopeless to look for the satellites of Mars with
any but the greatest telescopes of the world. But the markings on
the surface, from which the time of rotation has been determined,
and which indicate a resemblance to the surface of our own planet,
can be well seen with telescopes of six inches aperture and
upward. One or both of the bright polar spots, which are supposed
to be due to deposits of snow, can be seen with smaller telescopes
when the situation of the planet is favorable.

The case is different with the so-called canals discovered by
Schiaparelli in 1877, which have ever since excited so much
interest, and given rise to so much discussion as to their nature.
The astronomer who has had the best opportunities for studying
them is Mr. Percival Lowell, whose observatory at Flaggstaff,
Arizona, is finely situated for the purpose, while he also has one
of the best if not the largest of telescopes. There the canals are
seen as fine dark lines; but, even then, they must be fifty miles
in breadth, so that the word "canal" may be regarded as a
misnomer.

Although the planet Jupiter does not present such striking
features as Saturn, it is of even more interest to the amateur
astronomer, because he can study it with less optical power, and
see more of the changes upon its surface. Every work on astronomy
tells in a general way of the belts of Jupiter, and many speculate
upon their causes. The reader of recent works knows that Jupiter
is supposed to be not a solid mass like the earth, but a great
globe of molten and vaporous matter, intermediate in constitution
between the earth and the sun. The outer surface which we see is
probably a hot mass of vapor hundreds of miles deep, thrown up
from the heated interior. The belts are probably cloudlike forms
in this vaporous mass. Certain it is that they are continually
changing, so that the planet seldom looks exactly the same on two
successive evenings. The rotation of the planet can be very well
seen by an hour's watching. In two hours an object at the centre
of the disk will move off to near the margin.

The satellites of this planet, in their ever-varying phases, are
objects of perennial interest. Their eclipses may be observed with
a very small telescope, if one knows when to look for them. To do
this successfully, and without waste of time, it is necessary to
have an astronomical ephemeris for the year. All the observable
phenomena are there predicted for the convenience of observers.
Perhaps the most curious observation to be made is that of the
shadow of the satellite crossing the disk of Jupiter. The writer
has seen this perfectly with a six-inch telescope, and a much
smaller one would probably show it well. With a telescope of this
size, or a little larger, the satellites can be seen between us
and Jupiter. Sometimes they appear a little brighter than the
planet, and sometimes a little fainter.

Of the remaining large planets, Mercury, the inner one, and Uranus
and Neptune, the two outer ones, are of less interest than the
others to an amateur with a small telescope, because they are more
difficult to see. Mercury can, indeed, be observed with the
smallest instrument, but no physical configurations or changes
have ever been made out upon his surface. The question whether any
such can be observed is still an open one, which can be settled
only by long and careful scrutiny. A small telescope is almost as
good for this purpose as a large one, because the atmospheric
difficulties in the way of getting a good view of the planet
cannot be lessened by an increase of telescopic power.

Uranus and Neptune are so distant that telescopes of considerable
size and high magnifying power are necessary to show their disks.
In small telescopes they have the appearance of stars, and the
observer has no way of distinguishing them from the surrounding
stars unless he can command the best astronomical appliances, such
as star maps, circles on his instrument, etc. It is, however, to
be remarked, as a fact not generally known, that Uranus can be
well seen with the naked eye if one knows where to look for it. To
recognize it, it is necessary to have an astronomical ephemeris
showing its right ascension and declination, and star maps showing
where the parallels of right ascension and declination lie among
the stars. When once found by the naked eye, there will, of
course, be no difficulty in pointing the telescope upon it.

Of celestial objects which it is well to keep a watch upon, and
which can be seen to good advantage with inexpensive instruments,
the sun may be considered as holding the first place. Astronomers
who make a specialty of solar physics have, especially in this
country, so many other duties, and their view is so often
interrupted by clouds, that a continuous record of the spots on
the sun and the changes they undergo is hardly possible. Perhaps
one of the most interesting and useful pieces of astronomical work
which an amateur can perform will consist of a record of the
origin and changes of form of the solar spots and faculae. What
does a spot look like when it first comes into sight? Does it
immediately burst forth with considerable magnitude, or does it
begin as the smallest visible speck, and gradually grow? When
several spots coalesce into one, how do they do it? When a spot
breaks up into several pieces, what is the seeming nature of the
process? How do the groups of brilliant points called faculae
come, change, and grow? All these questions must no doubt be
answered in various ways, according to the behavior of the
particular spot, but the record is rather meagre, and the
conscientious and industrious amateur will be able to amuse
himself by adding to it, and possibly may make valuable
contributions to science in the same way.

Still another branch of astronomical observation, in which
industry and skill count for more than expensive instruments, is
the search for new comets. This requires a very practised eye, in
order that the comet may be caught among the crowd of stars which
flit across the field of view as the telescope is moved. It is
also necessary to be well acquainted with a number of nebulae
which look very much like comets. The search can be made with
almost any small telescope, if one is careful to use a very low
power. With a four-inch telescope a power not exceeding twenty
should be employed. To search with ease, and in the best manner,
the observer should have what among astronomers is familiarly
known as a "broken-backed telescope." This instrument has the eye-
piece on the end of the axis, where one would never think of
looking for it. By turning the instrument on this axis, it sweeps
from one horizon through the zenith and over to the other horizon
without the observer having to move his head. This is effected by
having a reflector in the central part of the instrument, which
throws the rays of light at right angles through the axis.

[Illustration: THE "BROKEN-BACKED COMET-SEEKER"]

How well this search can be conducted by observers with limited
means at their disposal is shown by the success of several
American observers, among whom Messrs. W. R. Brooks, E. E.
Barnard, and Lewis Swift are well known. The cometary discoveries
of these men afford an excellent illustration of how much can be
done with the smallest means when one sets to work in the right
spirit.

The larger number of wonderful telescopic objects are to be sought
for far beyond the confines of the solar system, in regions from
which light requires years to reach us. On account of their great
distance, these objects generally require the most powerful
telescopes to be seen in the best manner; but there are quite a
number within the range of the amateur. Looking at the Milky Way,
especially its southern part, on a clear winter or summer evening,
tufts of light will be seen here and there. On examining these
tufts with a telescope, they will be found to consist of congeries
of stars. Many of these groups are of the greatest beauty, with
only a moderate optical power. Of all the groups in the Milky Way
the best known is that in the sword-handle of Perseus, which may
be seen during the greater part of the year, and is distinctly
visible to the naked eye as a patch of diffused light. With the
telescope there are seen in this patch two closely connected
clusters of stars, or perhaps we ought rather to say two centres
of condensation.

Another object of the same class is Proesepe in the constellation
Cancer. This can be very distinctly seen by the naked eye on a
clear moonless night in winter or spring as a faint nebulous
object, surrounded by three small stars. The smallest telescope
shows it as a group of stars.

Of all stellar objects, the great nebula of Orion is that which
has most fascinated the astronomers of two centuries. It is
distinctly visible to the naked eye, and may be found without
difficulty on any winter night. The three bright stars forming the
sword-belt of Orion are known to every one who has noticed that
constellation. Below this belt is seen another triplet of stars,
not so bright, and lying in a north and south direction. The
middle star of this triplet is the great nebula. At first the
naked eye sees nothing to distinguish it from other stars, but if
closely scanned it will be seen to have a hazy aspect. A four-inch
telescope will show its curious form. Not the least interesting of
its features are the four stars known as the "Trapezium," which
are located in a dark region near its centre. In fact, the whole
nebula is dotted with stars, which add greatly to the effect
produced by its mysterious aspect.

The great nebula of Andromeda is second only to that of Orion in
interest. Like the former, it is distinctly visible to the naked
eye, having the aspect of a faint comet. The most curious feature
of this object is that although the most powerful telescopes do
not resolve it into stars, it appears in the spectroscope as if it
were solid matter shining by its own light.

The above are merely selections from the countless number of
objects which the heavens offer to telescopic study. Many such are
described in astronomical works, but the amateur can gratify his
curiosity to almost any extent by searching them out for himself.

[Illustration with caption: NEBULA IN ORION]

Ever since 1878 a red spot, unlike any before noticed, has
generally been visible on Jupiter. At first it was for several
years a very conspicuous object, but gradually faded away, so that
since 1890 it has been made out only with difficulty. But it is
now regarded as a permanent feature of the planet. There is some
reason to believe it was occasionally seen long before attention
was first attracted to it. Doubtless, when it can be seen at all,
practice in observing such objects is more important than size of
telescope.





VI

WHAT THE ASTRONOMERS ARE DOING


In no field of science has human knowledge been more extended in
our time than in that of astronomy. Forty years ago astronomical
research seemed quite barren of results of great interest or value
to our race. The observers of the world were working on a
traditional system, grinding out results in an endless course,
without seeing any prospect of the great generalizations to which
they might ultimately lead. Now this is all changed. A new
instrument, the spectroscope, has been developed, the extent of
whose revelations we are just beginning to learn, although it has
been more than thirty years in use. The application of photography
has been so extended that, in some important branches of
astronomical work, the observer simply photographs the phenomenon
which he is to study, and then makes his observation on the
developed negative.

The world of astronomy is one of the busiest that can be found to-
day, and the writer proposes, with the reader's courteous consent,
to take him on a stroll through it and see what is going on. We
may begin our inspection with a body which is, for us, next to the
earth, the most important in the universe. I mean the sun. At the
Greenwich Observatory the sun has for more than twenty years been
regularly photographed on every clear day, with the view of
determining the changes going on in its spots. In recent years
these observations have been supplemented by others, made at
stations in India and Mauritius, so that by the combination of all
it is quite exceptional to have an entire day pass without at
least one photograph being taken. On these observations must
mainly rest our knowledge of the curious cycle of change in the
solar spots, which goes through a period of about eleven years,
but of which no one has as yet been able to establish the cause.

This Greenwich system has been extended and improved by an
American. Professor George E. Hale, formerly Director of the
Yerkes Observatory, has devised an instrument for taking
photographs of the sun by a single ray of the spectrum. The light
emitted by calcium, the base of lime, and one of the substances
most abundant in the sun, is often selected to impress the plate.

The Carnegie Institution has recently organized an enterprise for
carrying on the study of the sun under a combination of better
conditions than were ever before enjoyed. The first requirement in
such a case is the ablest and most enthusiastic worker in the
field, ready to devote all his energies to its cultivation. This
requirement is found in the person of Professor Hale himself. The
next requirement is an atmosphere of the greatest transparency,
and a situation at a high elevation above sea-level, so that the
passage of light from the sun to the observer shall be obstructed
as little as possible by the mists and vapors near the earth's
surface. This requirement is reached by placing the observatory on
Mount Wilson, near Pasadena, California, where the climate is
found to be the best of any in the United States, and probably not
exceeded by that of any other attainable point in the world. The
third requirement is the best of instruments, specially devised to
meet the requirements. In this respect we may be sure that nothing
attainable by human ingenuity will be found wanting.

Thus provided, Professor Hale has entered upon the task of
studying the sun, and recording from day to day all the changes
going on in it, using specially devised instruments for each
purpose in view. Photography is made use of through almost the
entire investigation. A full description of the work would require
an enumeration of technical details, into which we need not enter
at present. Let it, therefore, suffice to say in a general way
that the study of the sun is being carried on on a scale, and with
an energy worthy of the most important subject that presents
itself to the astronomer. Closely associated with this work is
that of Professor Langley and Dr. Abbot, at the Astro-Physical
Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, who have recently
completed one of the most important works ever carried out on the
light of the sun. They have for years been analyzing those of its
rays which, although entirely invisible to our eyes, are of the
same nature as those of light, and are felt by us as heat. To do
this, Langley invented a sort of artificial eye, which he called a
bolometer, in which the optic nerve is made of an extremely thin
strip of metal, so slight that one can hardly see it, which is
traversed by an electric current. This eye would be so dazzled by
the heat radiated from one's body that, when in use, it must be
protected from all such heat by being enclosed in a case kept at a
constant temperature by being immersed in water. With this eye the
two observers have mapped the heat rays of the sun down to an
extent and with a precision which were before entirely unknown.

The question of possible changes in the sun's radiation, and of
the relation of those changes to human welfare, still eludes our
scrutiny. With all the efforts that have been made, the physicist
of to-day has not yet been able to make anything like an exact
determination of the total amount of heat received from the sun.
The largest measurements are almost double the smallest. This is
partly due to the atmosphere absorbing an unknown and variable
fraction of the sun's rays which pass through it, and partly to
the difficulty of distinguishing the heat radiated by the sun from
that radiated by terrestrial objects.

In one recent instance, a change in the sun's radiation has been
noticed in various parts of the world, and is of especial interest
because there seems to be little doubt as to its origin. In the
latter part of 1902 an extraordinary diminution was found in the
intensity of the sun's heat, as measured by the bolometer and
other instruments. This continued through the first part of 1903,
with wide variations at different places, and it was more than a
year after the first diminution before the sun's rays again
assumed their ordinary intensity.

This result is now attributed to the eruption of Mount Pelee,
during which an enormous mass of volcanic dust and vapor was
projected into the higher regions of the air, and gradually
carried over the entire earth by winds and currents. Many of our
readers may remember that something yet more striking occurred
after the great cataclasm at Krakatoa in 1883, when, for more than
a year, red sunsets and red twilights of a depth of shade never
before observed were seen in every part of the world.

What we call universology--the knowledge of the structure and
extent of the universe--must begin with a study of the starry
heavens as we see them. There are perhaps one hundred million
stars in the sky within the reach of telescopic vision. This
number is too great to allow of all the stars being studied
individually; yet, to form the basis for any conclusion, we must
know the positions and arrangement of as many of them as we can
determine.

To do this the first want is a catalogue giving very precise
positions of as many of the brighter stars as possible. The
principal national observatories, as well as some others, are
engaged in supplying this want. Up to the present time about
200,000 stars visible in our latitudes have been catalogued on
this precise plan, and the work is still going on. In that part of
the sky which we never see, because it is only visible from the
southern hemisphere, the corresponding work is far from being as
extensive. Sir David Gill, astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope,
and also the directors of other southern observatories, are
engaged in pushing it forward as rapidly as the limited facilities
at their disposal will allow.

Next in order comes the work of simply listing as many stars as
possible. Here the most exact positions are not required. It is
only necessary to lay down the position of each star with
sufficient exactness to distinguish it from all its neighbors.
About 400,000 stars were during the last half-century listed in
this way at the observatory of Bonn by Argelander, Schonfeld, and
their assistants. This work is now being carried through the
southern hemisphere on a large scale by Thome, Director of the
Cordoba Observatory, in the Argentine Republic. This was founded
thirty years ago by our Dr. B. A. Gould, who turned it over to Dr.
Thome in 1886. The latter has, up to the present time, fixed and
published the positions of nearly half a million stars. This work
of Thome extends to fainter stars than any other yet attempted, so
that, as it goes on, we have more stars listed in a region
invisible in middle northern latitudes than we have for that part
of the sky we can see. Up to the present time three quarto volumes
giving the positions and magnitudes of the stars have appeared.
Two or three volumes more, and, perhaps, ten or fifteen years,
will be required to complete the work.

About twenty years ago it was discovered that, by means of a
telescope especially adapted to this purpose, it was possible to
photograph many more stars than an instrument of the same size
would show to the eye. This discovery was soon applied in various
quarters. Sir David Gill, with characteristic energy, photographed
the stars of the southern sky to the number of nearly half a
million. As it was beyond his power to measure off and compute the
positions of the stars from his plates, the latter were sent to
Professor J. C. Kapteyn, of Holland, who undertook the enormous
labor of collecting them into a catalogue, the last volume of
which was published in 1899. One curious result of this enterprise
is that the work of listing the stars is more complete for the
southern hemisphere than for the northern.

Another great photographic work now in progress has to do with the
millions of stars which it is impossible to handle individually.
Fifteen years ago an association of observatories in both
hemispheres undertook to make a photographic chart of the sky on
the largest scale. Some portions of this work are now approaching
completion, but in others it is still in a backward state, owing
to the failure of several South American observatories to carry
out their part of the programme. When it is all done we shall have
a picture of the sky, the study of which may require the labor of
a whole generation of astronomers.

Quite independently of this work, the Harvard University, under
the direction of Professor Pickering, keeps up the work of
photographing the sky on a surprising scale. On this plan we do
not have to leave it to posterity to learn whether there is any
change in the heavens, for one result of the enterprise has been
the discovery of thirteen of the new stars which now and then
blaze out in the heavens at points where none were before known.
Professor Pickering's work has been continually enlarged and
improved until about 150,000 photographic plates, showing from
time to time the places of countless millions of stars among their
fellows are now stored at the Harvard Observatory. Not less
remarkable than this wealth of material has been the development
of skill in working it up. Some idea of the work will be obtained
by reflecting that, thirty years ago, careful study of the heavens
by astronomers devoting their lives to the task had resulted in
the discovery of some two or three hundred stars, varying in their
light. Now, at Harvard, through keen eyes studying and comparing
successive photographs not only of isolated stars, but of clusters
and agglomerations of stars in the Milky Way and elsewhere,
discoveries of such objects numbering hundreds have been made, and
the work is going on with ever-increasing speed. Indeed, the
number of variable stars now known is such that their study as
individual objects no longer suffices, and they must hereafter be
treated statistically with reference to their distribution in
space, and their relations to one another, as a census classifies
the entire population without taking any account of individuals.

The works just mentioned are concerned with the stars. But the
heavenly spaces contain nebulae as well as stars; and photography
can now be even more successful in picturing them than the stars.
A few years ago the late lamented Keeler, at the Lick Observatory,
undertook to see what could be done by pointing the Crossley
reflecting telescope at the sky and putting a sensitive
photographic plate in the focus. He was surprised to find that a
great number of nebulae, the existence of which had never before
been suspected, were impressed on the plate. Up to the present
time the positions of about 8000 of these objects have been
listed. Keeler found that there were probably 200,000 nebulae in
the heavens capable of being photographed with the Crossley
reflector. But the work of taking these photographs is so great,
and the number of reflecting telescopes which can be applied to it
so small, that no one has ventured to seriously commence it. It is
worthy of remark that only a very small fraction of these objects
which can be photographed are visible to the eye, even with the
most powerful telescope.

This demonstration of what the reflecting telescope can do may be
regarded as one of the most important discoveries of our time as
to the capabilities of astronomical instruments. It has long been
known that the image formed in the focus of the best refracting
telescope is affected by an imperfection arising from the
different action of the glasses on rays of light of different
colors. Hence, the image of a star can never be seen or
photographed with such an instrument, as an actual point, but only
as a small, diffused mass. This difficulty is avoided in the
reflecting telescope; but a new difficulty is found in the bending
of the mirror under the influence of its own weight. Devices for
overcoming this had been so far from successful that, when Mr.
Crossley presented his instrument to the Lick Observatory, it was
feared that little of importance could be done with it. But as
often happens in human affairs outside the field of astronomy,
when ingenious and able men devote their attention to the careful
study of a problem, it was found that new results could be
reached. Thus it was that, before a great while, what was supposed
to be an inferior instrument proved not only to have qualities not
before suspected, but to be the means of making an important
addition to the methods of astronomical investigation.

In order that our knowledge of the position of a star may be
complete, we must know its distance. This can be measured only
through the star's parallax--that is to say, the slight change in
its direction produced by the swing of our earth around its orbit.
But so vast is the distance in question that this change is
immeasurably small, except for, perhaps, a few hundred stars, and
even for these few its measurement almost baffles the skill of the
most expert astronomer. Progress in this direction is therefore
very slow, and there are probably not yet a hundred stars of which
the parallax has been ascertained with any approach to certainty.
Dr. Chase is now completing an important work of this kind at the
Yale Observatory.

To the most refined telescopic observations, as well as to the
naked eye, the stars seem all alike, except that they differ
greatly in brightness, and somewhat in color. But when their light
is analyzed by the spectroscope, it is found that scarcely any two
are exactly alike. An important part of the work of the astro-
physical observatories, especially that of Harvard, consists in
photographing the spectra of thousands of stars, and studying the
peculiarities thus brought out. At Harvard a large portion of this
work is done as part of the work of the Henry Draper Memorial,
established by his widow in memory of the eminent investigator of
New York, who died twenty years ago.

By a comparison of the spectra of stars Sir William Huggins has
developed the idea that these bodies, like human beings, have a
life history. They are nebulae in infancy, while the progress to
old age is marked by a constant increase in the density of their
substance. Their temperature also changes in a way analogous to
the vigor of the human being. During a certain time the star
continually grows hotter and hotter. But an end to this must come,
and it cools off in old age. What the age of a star may be is hard
even to guess. It is many millions of years, perhaps hundreds,
possibly even thousands, of millions.

Some attempt at giving the magnitude is included in every
considerable list of stars. The work of determining the magnitudes
with the greatest precision is so laborious that it must go on
rather slowly. It is being pursued on a large scale at the Harvard
Observatory, as well as in that of Potsdam, Germany.

We come now to the question of changes in the appearance of bright
stars. It seems pretty certain that more than one per cent of
these bodies fluctuate to a greater or less extent in their light.
Observations of these fluctuations, in the case of at least the
brighter stars, may be carried on without any instrument more
expensive than a good opera-glass--in fact, in the case of stars
visible to the naked eye, with no instrument at all.

As a general rule, the light of these stars goes through its
changes in a regular period, which is sometimes as short as a few
hours, but generally several days, frequently a large fraction of
a year or even eighteen months. Observations of these stars are
made to determine the length of the period and the law of
variation of the brightness. Any person with a good eye and skill
in making estimates can make the observations if he will devote
sufficient pains to training himself; but they require a degree of
care and assiduity which is not to be expected of any one but an
enthusiast on the subject. One of the most successful observers of
the present time is Mr. W. A. Roberts, a resident of South Africa,
whom the Boer war did not prevent from keeping up a watch of the
southern sky, which has resulted in greatly increasing our
knowledge of variable stars. There are also quite a number of
astronomers in Europe and America who make this particular study
their specialty.

During the past fifteen years the art of measuring the speed with
which a star is approaching us or receding from us has been
brought to a wonderful degree of perfection. The instrument with
which this was first done was the spectroscope; it is now replaced
with another of the same general kind, called the spectrograph.
The latter differs from the other only in that the spectrum of the
star is photographed, and the observer makes his measures on the
negative. This method was first extensively applied at the Potsdam
Observatory in Germany, and has lately become one of the
specialties of the Lick Observatory, where Professor Campbell has
brought it to its present degree of perfection. The Yerkes
Observatory is also beginning work in the same line, where
Professor Frost is already rivalling the Lick Observatory in the
precision of his measures.

Let us now go back to our own little colony and see what is being
done to advance our knowledge of the solar system. This consists
of planets, on one of which we dwell, moons revolving around them,
comets, and meteoric bodies. The principal national observatories
keep up a more or less orderly system of observations of the
positions of the planet