s the old man had
said to Filion Lacasse the saddler, his brain was like a pair of shears--
it went clip, clip, clip right through everything.  He now hoped that his
new apprentice, with the hand of a master-workman, would go clip, clip
through madame's inquisitiveness.  He was not disappointed, for he heard
Charley say:

"One person in the witness-box at a time, Madame.  Till Jo Portugais is
cross-examined and steps down, I don't see what I can do!"

"But you are a Protestant!" said the woman snappishly.  This man was
only a tailor, dressed in fulled cloth, and no doubt his past life would
not bear inspection; and she was the Notary's wife, and had said to
people in the village that she would find out the man's history from
himself.

"That is one good reason why I should not go to confession," he replied
casually, and turned to a table where he had been cutting a waistcoat--
for the first time in his life.

"Do you think I'm going to stand your impertinence?  Do you know who I
am?"

Charley calmly put up his monocle.  He looked at the foolish little woman
with so cruel a flash of the eye that she shrank back.

"I should know you anywhere," he said.

"Come, Stephan," she said nervously to her boy, and pulled him towards
the door.

On the instant Charley's feeling changed.  Was he then going to carry the
old life into the new, and rebuke a silly garish woman whose faults were
generic more than personal?  He hurried forward to the door and
courteously opened it for her.

"Permit me, Madame," he said.

She saw that there was nothing ironical in this politeness.  She had a
sudden apprehension of an unusual quality called "the genteel," for no
storekeeper in Chaudiere ever opened or shut a shop-door for anybody.
She smiled a vacuous smile; she played "the lady" terribly, as, with a
curious conception of dignity, she held her body stiff as a ramrod, and
with a prim merci sailed into the street.

This gorgeous exit changed her opinion of the man she had been unable to
catechise.  Undoubtedly he had snubbed her--that was the word she used in
her mind--but his last act had enabled her, in the sight of several
habitants and even of Madame Dugal, "to put on airs," as the charming
Madame Dugal said afterwards.

Thinking it better to give the impression that she had had a successful
interview, she shook her head mysteriously when asked about M'sieu', and
murmured, "He is quite the gentleman!" which she thought a socially
distinguished remark.

When she had gone, Charley turned to old Louis.

"I don't want to turn your customers away," he said quietly, "but there
it is!  I don't need to answer questions as a part of the business, do
I?"

There was a sour grin on the face of old Trudel.  He grunted some
inaudible answer, then, after a pause, added: "I'd have been hung for
murder, if she'd answered the question I asked her once as I wanted her
to."

He opened and shut his shears with a sardonic gesture.

Charley smiled, and went to the window.  For a minute he stood watching
Madame Dauphin and Rosalie at the post-office door.  The memory of his
talk with Rosalie was vivid to him at the moment.  He was thinking also
that he had not a penny in the world to pay for the rest of the paper he
had bought.  He turned round and put on his coat slowly.

"What are you doing that for?" asked the old man, with a kind of snarl,
yet with trepidation.

"I don't think I'll work any more to-day."

"Not work!  Smoke of the devil, isn't Sunday enough to play in?  You're
not put out by that fool wife of Dauphin's?"

"Oh no--not that!  I want an understanding about wages."

To Louis the dread crisis had come.  He turned a little green, for he was
very miserly-for the love of God.

He had scarcely realised what was happening when Charley first sat down
on the bench beside him.  He had been taken by surprise.  Apart from the
excitement of the new experience, he had profited by the curiosity of the
public, for he had orders enough to keep him busy until summer, and he
had had to give out work to two extra women in the parish, though he had
never before had more than one working for him.  But his ruling passion
was strong in him.  He always remembered with satisfaction that once when
the Cure was absent and he was supposed to be dying, a priest from
another parish came, and, the ministrations over, he had made an offering
of a gold piece.  When the young priest hesitated, his fingers had crept
back to the gold piece, closed on it, and drawn it back beneath the
coverlet again.  He had then peacefully fallen asleep.  It was a gracious
memory.

"I don't need much, I don't want a great deal," continued Charley when
the tailor did not answer, "but I have to pay for my bed and board, and I
can't do it on nothing."

"How have you done it so far?" peevishly replied the tailor.

"By working after hours at carpentering up there"--he made a gesture
towards Vadrome Mountain.  "But I can't go on doing that all the time,
or I'll be like you too soon."

"Be like me!"  The voice of the tailor rose shrilly.

"Be like me!  What's the matter with me?"

"Only that you're in a bad way before your time, and that you mayn't get
out of this hole without stepping into another.  You work too hard,
Monsieur Trudel."

"What do you want--wages?"

Charley inclined his head.  "If you think I'm worth them."

The tailor viciously snipped a piece of cloth.  "How can I pay you wages,
if you stand there doing nothing?"  "This is my day for doing nothing,"
Charley answered pleasantly, for the tailor-man amused him, and the
whimsical mental attitude of his past life was being brought to the
surface by this odd figure, with big spectacles pushed up on a yellow
forehead, and shrunken hands viciously clutching the shears.

"You don't mean to say you're not going to work to-day, and this suit of
clothes promised for to-morrow night--for the Manor House too!"

With a piece of chalk Charley idly made heads on brown paper.  "After
all, why should clothes be the first thing in one's mind--when they are
some one else's!  It's a beautiful day outside.  I've never felt the sun
so warm and the air so crisp and sweet--never in all my life."

"Then where have you lived?" snapped out the tailor with a sneer.
"You must be a Yankee--they have only what we leave over down there!"
--he jerked his head southward.  "We don't stop to look at weather here.
I suppose you did where you come from?"

Charley smiled in a distant sort of way.  "Where I came from, when we
weren't paid for our work we always stopped to consider our health--and
the weather.  I don't want a great deal.  I put it to you honestly.  Do
you want me?  If you do, will you give me enough to live on--enough to
buy a suit of clothes a year, to pay for food and a room?  If I work for
you for nothing, I have to live on others for nothing, or kill myself as
you're doing."

There was no answer at once, and Charley went on: "I came to you because
I saw you wanted help badly.  I saw that you were hard-pushed and sick--"

"I wasn't sick," interrupted the tailor with a snarl.

"Well, overworked, which is the same thing in the end.  I did the best I
could: I gave you my hands--awkward enough they were at first, I know,
but--"

"It's a lie.  They weren't awkward," churlishly cut in the tailor.

"Well, perhaps they weren't so awkward, but they didn't know quite what
to do--"

"You knew as well as if you'd been taught," came back in a growl.

"Well, then, I wasn't awkward, and I had a knack for the work.  What was
more, I wanted work.  I wanted to work at the first thing that appealed
to me.  I had no particular fancy for tailoring--you get bowlegged in
time!"--the old spirit was fighting with the new--"but here you were at
work, and there I was idle, and I had been ill, and some one who wasn't
responsible for me--a stranger-worked for me and cared for me.  Wasn't it
natural, when you were playing the devil with yourself, that I should
step in and give you a hand?  You've been better since--isn't that so?"
The tailor did not answer.

"But I can't go on as we are, though I want only enough to keep me
going," Charley continued.

"And if I don't give you what you want, you'll leave?"

"No.  I'm never going to leave you.  I'm going to stay here, for you'll
never get another man so cheap; and it suits me to stay--you need some
one to look after you."

A curious soft look suddenly flashed into the tailor's eyes.

"Will you take on the business after I'm gone?" he asked at last.
"It's along time to look ahead, I know," he added quickly, for not in
words would he acknowledge the possibility of the end.

"I should think so," Charley answered, his eyes on the bright sun and the
soft snow on the trees beyond the window.

The tailor snatched up a pattern and figured on it for a moment.
Then he handed it to Charley.  "Will that do?" he asked with anxious,
acquisitive look, his yellow eyes blinking hard.

Charley looked at it musingly, then said "Yes, if you give me a room
here."

"I meant board and lodging too," said Louis Trudel with an outburst of
eager generosity, for, as it was, he had offered about one-half of what
Charley was worth to him.

Charley nodded.  "Very well, that will do," he said, and took off his
coat and went to work.  For a long time they worked silently.  The tailor
was in great good-humour; for the terrible trial was over, and he now had
an assistant who would be a better tailor than himself.  There would be
more profit, more silver nails for the church door, and more masses for
his soul.

"The Cure says you are all right.  .  .  .  When will you come here?" he
said at last.

"To-morrow night I shall sleep here," answered Charley.

So it was arranged that Charley should come to live in the tailor's
house, to sleep in the room which the tailor had provided for a wife
twenty-five years before--even for her that was now known as Madame
Dauphin.

All morning the tailor chuckled to himself.  When they sat down at noon
to a piece of venison which Charley had prepared himself--taking the
frying-pan out of the hands of Margot Patry, the old servant, and cooking
it to a turn--Louis Trudel saw his years lengthen to an indefinite
period.  He even allowed himself to nervously stand up, bow, shake
Charley's hand jerkingly, and say:

"M'sieu', I care not what you are or where you come from, or even if
you're a Protestant, perhaps an Englishman.  You're a gentleman and a
tailor, and old Louis Trudel will not forget you.  It shall be as you
said this morning--it is no day for work.  We will play, and the clothes
for the Manor can go to the devil.  Smoke of hell-fire, I will go and
have a pipe with that, poor wretch the Notary!"

So, a wonderful thing happened.  Louis Trudel, on a week-day and a
market-day, went to smoke a pipe with Narcisse Dauphin, and to tell him
that M. Mallard was going to stay with him for ever, at fine wages.  He
also announced that he had paid this whole week's wages in advance; but
he did not tell what he did not know--that half the money had already
been given to old Margot, whose son lay ill at home with a broken leg,
and whose children were living on bread and water.  Charley had slowly
drawn from the woman the story of her life as he sat by the kitchen fire
and talked to her, while her master was talking to the Notary.




CHAPTER XVII

THE TAILOR MAKES A MIDNIGHT FORAY

Since the day Charley had brought home the paper bought at the post-
office, and water-marked Kathleen, he had, at odd times, written down
his thoughts, and promptly torn the paper up again or put it in the fire.
In the repression of the new life, in which he must live wholly alone, so
far as all past habits of mind were concerned, it was a relief to record
his passing reflections, as he had been wont to do when the necessity for
it was less.  Writing them here was like the bursting of an imprisoned
stream; it was relaxing the ceaseless eye of vigilance; freeing an
imprisoned personality.  This personality was not yet merged into that
which must take its place, must express itself in the involuntary acts
which tell of a habit of mind and body--no longer the imitative and the
histrionic, but the inherent and the real.

On the afternoon of the day that old Louis agreed to give him wages, and
went to smoke a pipe with the Notary, Charley scribbled down his thoughts
on this matter of personality and habit.

"Who knows," he wrote, "which is the real self?  A child comes into the
world gin-begotten, with the instinct for liquor in his brain, like the
scent of the fox in the nostrils of the hound.  And that seems the real.
But the same child caught up on the hands of chance is carried into
another atmosphere, is cared for by ginhating minds and hearts: habit
fastens on him--fair, decent, and temperate habit--and he grows up like
the Cure yonder, a brother of Aaron.  Which is the real?  Is the instinct
for the gin killed, or covered?  Is the habit of good living mere habit
and mere acting, in which the real man never lives his real life, or is
it the real life?

"Who knows!  Here am I, born with a question in my mouth, with the ever-
present 'non possumus' in me.  Here am I, to whom life was one poor
futility; to whom brain was but animal intelligence abnormally developed;
to whom speechless sensibility and intelligence was the only reality; to
whom nothing from beyond ever sent a flash of conviction, an intimation,
into my soul--not one.  To me God always seemed a being of dreams, the
creation of a personal need and helplessness, the despairing cry of the
victims of futility--And here am I flung like a stone from a sling into
this field where men believe in God as a present and tangible being; who
reply to all life's agonies and joys and exultations with the words
'C'est le bon Dieu.' And what shall I become?  Will habit do its work,
and shall I cease to be me?  Shall I, in the permanency of habit, become
like unto this tailor here, whose life narrows into one sole cause; whose
only wish is to have the Church draw the coverlet of forgiveness and
safety over him; who has solved all questions in a blind belief or an
inherited predisposition--which?  This stingy, hard, unhappy man--how
should he know what I am denied!  Or does he know?  Is it all illusion?
If there is a God who receives such devotion, to the exclusion of natural
demand and spiritual anxieties, why does not this tailor 'let his light
so shine before men that they may see his good works, and glorify his
Father which is in heaven?' That is it.  Therefore, wherefore, tailor-
man?  Therefore, wherefore, God?  Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-
man!"

Seated on his bench in the shop, with his eyes ever and anon raised
towards the little post-office opposite, he wrote these words.
Afterwards he sat and thought till the shadows deepened, and the tailor
came in to supper.  Then he took up the pieces of paper, and, going to
the fire, which was still lighted of an evening, thrust them inside.

Louis Trudel saw the paper burning, and, glancing down, he noticed that
one piece--the last--had slipped to the floor and was lying under the
table.  He saw the pencil still in Charley's hand.  Forthwith his natural
suspicion leaped up, and the cunning of the monomaniac was upon him.
With all his belief in le bon Dieu and the Church, Louis Trudel trusted
no one.  One eye was ever open to distrust man, while the other was ever
closed with blind belief in Heaven.

As Charley stooped to put wood in the fire, the tailor thrust a foot
forward and pushed the piece of paper further under the table.

That night the tailor crept down into the shop, felt for the paper in the
dark, found it, and carried it away to his room.  All kinds of thoughts
had raged through his diseased mind.  It was a letter, perhaps, and if a
letter, then he would gain some facts about the man's life.  But if it
was a letter, why did he burn it?  It was said that he never received a
letter and never sent one, therefore it was little likely to be a letter.
if not a letter, then what could it be?  Perhaps the man was English and
a spy of the English government, for was there not disaffection in some
of the parishes?  Perhaps it was a plan of robbery.  To such a state of
hallucination did his weakened mind come, that he forgot the kindly
feeling he had had for this stranger who had worked for him without pay.
Suspicion, the bane of sick old age, was hot on him.  He remembered that
M'sieu' had put an arm through his when they went upstairs, and that now
increased suspicion.  Why should the man have been so friendly?  To lull
him into confidence, perhaps, and then to rob and murder him in his
sleep.  Thank God, his ready money was well hid, and the rest was safe in
the bank far away!  He crept back to his room with the paper in his hand.
It was the last sheet of what Charley had written, and had been
accidentally brushed off on the floor.  It was in French, and, holding
the candle close, he slowly deciphered the crabbed, characteristic
handwriting.

His eyes dilated, his yellow cheeks took on spots of unhealthy red, his
hand trembled.  Anger seized him, and he mumbled the words over and over
again to himself.  Twice or thrice, as the paper lay in one hand, he
struck it with the clinched fist of the other, muttering and distraught.

"This tailor here.  .  .  .  This stingy, hard, unhappy man.  .  .  .  If
there is a God!  .  .  .  Therefore, wherefore, tailor-man?  .  .  .
Therefore, wherefore, God?  .  .  .  Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-
man!"

Hatred of himself, blasphemy, the profane and hellish humour of--of the
infidel!  A Protestant heretic--he was already damned; a robber--you
could put him in jail; a spy--you could shoot him or tar and feather him;
a murderer--you could hang him.  But an infide--this was a deadly poison,
a black danger, a being capable of all crimes.  An infidel--"Therefore,
wherefore, tailor-man?  .  .  .  Therefore, wherefore, God?  .  .  .
Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-man!"

The devil laughing--the devil incarnate come to mock a poor tailor, to
sow plague through a parish where all were at peace in the bosom of the
Church.  The tailor had three ruling passions--cupidity, vanity, and
religion.  Charley had now touched the three, and the whole man was
alive.  His cupidity had been flattered by the unpaid service of a
capable assistant, but now he saw that he was paying the devil a wage.
His vanity was overwhelmed by a satanic ridicule.  His religion and his
God had been assaulted in so shameful a way that no punishment could be
great enough for the man of hell.  In religion he was a fanatic; he was a
demented fanatic now.

He thrust the paper into his pocket, then crept out into the hall and to
the door of Charley's bedroom.  He put his ear to the door.  After a
moment he softly raised the latch, and opened the door and listened
again.  'M'sieu' was in a deep sleep.

Louis Trudel scarcely knew why he had listened, why he had opened the
door and stood looking at the figure in the bed, barely definable in the
semi-darkness of the room.  If he had meant harm to the helpless man, he
had brought no weapon; if he had been curious, there the man was
peacefully sleeping!

His sick, morbid imagination was so alive, that he scarcely knew what he
did.  As he stood there listening, hatred and horror in his heart, a
voice said to him: "Thou shalt do no murder."  The words kept ringing in
his ears.  Yet he had not thought of murder.  The fancied command itself
was his first temptation towards such a deed.  He had thought of raising
the parish, of condign punishment of many sorts, but not this.  As he
closed the door softly, killing entered his mind and stayed there.  "Thou
shalt not" had been the first instigation to "Thou shalt."

It haunted him as he returned to his room, undressed himself, and went
to bed.  He could not sleep.  "Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-man!"
The challenge had been to himself.  He must respond to it.  The duty lay
with him; he must answer this black infidel for the Church, for faith,
for God.

The more he thought of it, the more Charley's face came before him, with
the monocle shining and hard in the eye.  The monocle haunted him.  That
was the infidel's sign.  "Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-man!"  What
sign should he show?

Presently he sat up straight in bed.  In another minute he was out and
dressing.  Five minutes later he was on his way to the parish church.
When he reached it he took a tool from his pocket and unscrewed a small
iron cross from the front door.  It was a cross which had been blessed by
the Pope, and had been brought to Chaudiere by the beloved mother of the
Cure, now dead.

"When I have done with it I will put it back," he said, as he thrust it
inside his shirt, and hurried stealthily back to his house.  As he got
into bed he gave a noiseless, mirthless laugh.  All night he lay with his
yellow eyes wide open, gazing at the ceiling.  He was up at dawn,
hovering about the fire in the shop.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE STEALING OF THE CROSS

If Charley had been less engaged with his own thoughts, he would have
noticed the curious baleful look in the eyes of the tailor; but he was
deeply absorbed in a struggle that had nothing to do with Louis Trudel.

The old fever of thirst and desire was upon him.  All morning the door of
Jolicoeur's saloon was opening and shutting before his mind's eye, and
there was a smell of liquor everywhere.  It was in his nostrils when the
hot steam rose from the clothes he was pressing, in the thick odour of
the fulled cloth, in the melting snow outside the door.

Time and again he felt that he must run out of the shop and away to the
little tavern where white whiskey was sold to unwise habitants.  But he
fought on.  Here was the heritage of his past, the lengthening chain of
slavery to his old self--was it his real self?  Here was what would
prevent him from forgetting all that he had been and not been, all the
happiness he might have had, all that he had lost--the ceaseless
reminder.  He was still the victim to a poison which gave not only a
struggle of body, but a struggle of soul--if he had a soul.

"If he had a soul!"  The phrase kept repeating itself to him even as he
fought the fever in his throat, resisting the temptation to take that
medicine which the Curb's brother had sent him.

"If he had a soul!"  The thinking served as an antidote, for by the
ceaseless iteration his mind was lulled into a kind of drowse.  Again and
again he went to the pail of water that stood on the window-sill, and
lifting it to his lips, drank deep and full, to quench the wearing
thirst.

"If he had a soul!"  He looked at Louis Trudel, silent and morose, the
clammy yellow of a great sickness in his face and hands, but his mind
only intent on making a waistcoat--and the end of all things very near!
The words he had written the night before came to him: "Therefore,
wherefore, tailor-man?  Therefore, wherefore, God?  .  .  .  Show me a
sign from Heaven, tailor-man!"  As if in reply to his thoughts there came
the sound of singing, and of bells ringing in the parish church.

A procession with banners was coming near.  It was a holy day, and
Chaudiere was mindful of its duties.  The wanderers of the parish had
come home for Easter.  All who belonged to Chaudiere and worked in the
woods or shanties, or lived in big cities far away, were returned--those
who could return--to take the holy communion in the parish church.
Yesterday the parish had been alive with a pious hilarity.  The great
church had been crowded beyond the doors, the streets had been full of
cheerily dressed habitants.  There had, however, come a sudden chill to
the seemly rejoicings--the little iron cross blessed by the Pope had been
stolen from the door of the church!

The fact had been told to the Cure as he said the Mass, and from the
altar steps, before going to the pulpit, he referred to the robbery with
poignant feeling; for the relic had belonged to a martyr of the Church,
who, two centuries before, had laid down his life for the Master on the
coast of Africa.

Louis Trudel had heard the Cure's words, and in his place at the rear of
the church he smiled sourly to himself.  In due time the little cross
should be returned, but it had work to do first.  He did not take the
holy communion this Easter day, or go to confession as was his wont.
Not, however, until a certain day later did the Cure realise this, though
for thirty years the tailor had never omitted his Easter-time duties.

The people guessed and guessed, but they knew not on whom to cast
suspicion at first.  No sane Catholic of Chaudiere could possibly have
taken the holy thing.  Presently a murmur crept about that M'sieu' might
have been the thief.  He was not a Catholic, and--who could tell?  Who
knew where he came from?  Who knew what he had been?  Perhaps a jail-
bird-robber-murderer!  Charley, however, stitched on, intent upon his own
struggle.

The procession passed the doorway: men bearing banners with sacred texts,
acolytes swinging censers, a figure of the Saviour carved in wood borne
aloft, the Cure under a silk canopy, and a long line of habitants
following with sacred song.  People fell upon their knees in the street
as the procession passed, and the Cure's face was bent here and there,
his hand raised in blessing.

Old Louis got up from his bench, and, putting on a coat over his wool
jacket, hastened to the doorway, knelt down, made the sign of the cross,
and said a prayer.  Then he turned quickly towards Charley, who, looking
at the procession, then at the tailor, then back again at the procession,
smiled.

Charley was hardly conscious of what he did.  His mind had ranged far
beyond this scene to the large issues which these symbols represented.
Was it one universal self-deception?  Was this "religion" the pathetic,
the soul-breaking make-believe of mortality?  So he smiled--at himself,
at his own soul, which seemed alone in this play, the skeleton in armour,
the thing that did not belong.  His own words written that fateful day
before he died at the Cote Dorion came to him:

"Sacristan, acolyte, player, or preacher, Each to his office, but who
holds the key?  Death, only Death, thou, the ultimate teacher, Wilt show
it to me!"

He was suddenly startled from his reverie, through which the procession
was moving--a cloud of witnesses.  It was the voice of Louis Trudel,
sharp and piercing:

"Don't you believe in God and the Son of God?"

"God knows!" answered Charley slowly in reply--an involuntary
exclamation of helplessness, an automatic phrase deflected from its first
significance to meet a casual need of the mind.  Yet it seemed like
satire, like a sardonic, even vulgar, humour.  So it struck Louis Trudel,
who snatched up a hot iron from the fire and rushed forward with a snarl.
So astounded was Charley that he did not stir.  He was not prepared for
the sudden onslaught.  He did not put up his hand even, but stared at the
tailor, who, within a foot of him, stopped short with the iron poised.

Louis Trudel repented in time.  With the cunning of the monomaniac he
realised that an attack now might frustrate his great stroke.  It would
bring the village to his shop door, precipitate the crisis upon the wrong
incident.

As it chanced, only one person in Chaudiere saw the act.  That was
Rosalie Evanturel across the way.  She saw the iron raised, and looked
for M'sieu' to knock the tailor down; but, instead, she beheld the tailor
go back and put the iron on the fire again.  She saw also that M'sieu'
was speaking, though she could hear no words.

Charley's words were simple enough.  "I beg your pardon, Monsieur," he
said across the room to old Louis; "I meant no offence at all.  I was
trying to think it out in a human sort of way.  I suppose I wanted a sign
from Heaven--wanted too much, no doubt."

The tailor's lips twitched, and his hand convulsively clutched the shears
at his side.

"It is no matter now," he answered shortly.  "I have had signs from
Heaven; perhaps you will have one too!"

"It would be worth while," rejoined Charley musingly.  Charley wondered
bitterly if he had made an irreparable error in saying those ill-chosen
words.  This might mean a breach between them, and so make his position
in the parish untenable.  He had no wish to go elsewhere--where could he
go?  It mattered little what he was, tinker or tailor.  He had now only
to work his way back to the mind of the peasant; to be an animal with
intelligence; to get close to mother earth, and move down the declivity
of life with what natural wisdom were possible.  It was his duty to adapt
himself to the mind of such as this tailor; to acquire what the tailor
and his like had found--an intolerant belief and an inexpensive security,
to be got through yielding his nature to the great religious dream.  And
what perfect tranquillity, what smooth travelling found therein.

Gazing across the street towards the little post-office, he saw Rosalie
Evanturel at the window.  He fell to thinking about her.  Rosalie, on her
part, kept wondering what old Louis' violence meant.

Presently she saw a half-dozen men come quickly down the street, and,
before they reached the tailorshop, stand in a group talking excitedly.
Afterwards one came forward from the others quickly--Filion Lacasse the
saddler.  He stopped short at the tailor's door.  Looking at Charley, he
exclaimed roughly:

"If you don't hand out the cross you stole from the church door, we'll
tar and feather you, M'sieu'."  Charley looked up, surprised.  It had
never occurred to him that they could associate him with the theft.
"I know nothing of the cross," he said quietly.  "You're the only heretic
in the place.  You've done it.  Who are you?  What are you doing here in
Chaudiere?"

"Working at my trade," was Charley's quiet answer.  He looked towards
Louis Trudel, as though to see how he took this ugly charge.

Old Louis responded at once.  "Get away with you, Filion Lacasse," he
croaked.  "Don't come here with your twaddle.  M'sieu' hasn't stole the
cross.  What does he want with a cross?  He's not a Catholic."

"If he didn't steal the cross, why, he didn't," answered the saddler;
"but if he did, what'll you say for yourself, Louis?  You call yourself a
good Catholic--bah!--when you've got a heretic living with you."

"What's that to you?" growled the tailor, and reached out a nervous hand
towards the iron.  "I served at the altar before you were born.  Sacre!
I'll make your grave-clothes yet, and be a good Catholic when you're in
the churchyard.  Be off with you.  Ach," he sharply added, when Filion
did not move, "I'll cut your hair for you!"  He scrambled off the bench
with his shears.

Filion Lacasse disappeared with his friends, and the old man settled back
on his bench.

Charley, looking up quietly from his work, said "Thank you, Monsieur."

He did not notice what an evil look was in Louis Trudel's face as it
turned towards him, but Rosalie Evanturel, standing outside, saw it; and
she stole back to the post-office ill at ease and wondering.

All that day she watched the tailor's shop, and even when the door was
shut in the evening, her eyes were fastened on the windows.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Is the habit of good living mere habit and mere acting
Suspicion, the bane of sick old age






THE RIGHT OF WAY

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 3.



XIX.      THE SIGN FROM HEAVEN
XX.       THE RETURN OF THE TAILOR
XXI.      THE CURE HAS AN INSPIRATION
XXII.     THE WOMAN WHO SAW
XXIII.    THE WOMAN WHO DID NOT TELL
XXIV.     THE SEIGNEUR TAKES A HAND IN THE GAME
XXV.      THE COLONEL TELLS HIS STORY
XXVI.     A SONG, A BOTTLE, AND A GHOST
XXVII.    OUT ON THE OLD TRAIL
XXVIII.   THE SEIGNEUR GIVES A WARNING



CHAPTER XIX

THE SIGN FROM HEAVEN

The agitation and curiosity possessing Rosalie all day held her in the
evening when the wooden shutters of the tailor's shop were closed and
only a flickering light showed through the cracks.  She was restless and
uneasy during supper, and gave more than one unmeaning response to the
remarks of her crippled father, who, drawn up for supper in his wheel-
chair, was more than usually inclined to gossip.

Damase Evanturel's mind was stirred concerning the loss of the iron
cross; the threat made by Filion Lacasse and his companions troubled him.
The one person beside the Cure, Jo Portugais, and Louis Trudel, to whom
M'sieu' talked much, was the postmaster, who sometimes met him of an
evening as he was taking the air.  More than once he had walked behind
the wheel-chair and pushed it some distance, making the little crippled
man gossip of village matters.

As the two sat at supper the postmaster was inclined to take a serious
view of M'sieu's position.  He railed at Filion Lacasse; he called the
suspicious habitants clodhoppers, who didn't know any better--which was
a tribute to his own superior birth; and at last, carried away by a
feverish curiosity, he suggested that Rosalie should go and look through
the cracks in the shutters of the tailor-shop and find out what was going
on within.  This was indignantly rejected by Rosalie, but the more she
thought, the more uneasy she became.  She ceased to reply to her father's
remarks, and he at last relapsed into gloom, and said that he was tired
and would go to bed.  Thereupon she wheeled him inside his bedroom, bade
him good-night, and left him to his moodiness, which, however, was soon
absorbed in a deep sleep, for the mind of the little grey postmaster
could no more hold trouble or thought than a sieve.

Left alone, Rosalie began to be tortured.  What were they doing in the
house opposite?

Go and look through the windows?  But she had never spied on people in
her life!  Yet would it be spying?  Would it not be pardonable?  In the
interest of the man who had been attacked in the morning by the tailor,
who had been threatened by the saddler, and concerning whom she had seen
a signal pass between old Louis and Filion Lacasse, would it not be a
humane thing to do?  It might be foolish and feminine to be anxious, but
did she not mean well, and was it not, therefore, honourable?

The mystery inflamed her imagination.  Charley's passiveness when he was
assaulted by old Louis and afterwards threatened by the saddler seemed to
her indifference to any sort of danger--the courage of the hopeless life,
maybe.  Instantly her heart overflowed with sympathy.  Monsieur was not a
Catholic perhaps?  Well, so much the more he should be befriended, for he
was so much the more alone and helpless.  If a man was born a Protestant
--or English--he could not help it, and should not be punished in this
world for it, since he was sure to be punished in the next.

Her mind became more and more excited.  The postoffice had been long
since closed, and her father was asleep--she could hear him snoring.  It
was ten o'clock, and there was still a light in the tailor's shop.
Usually the light went out before nine o'clock.  She went to the post-
office door and looked out.  The streets were empty; there was not a
light burning anywhere, save in the house of the Notary.  Down towards
the river a sleigh was making its way over the thin snow of spring, and
screeching on the stones.  Some late revellers, moving homewards from the
Trois Couronnes, were roaring at the top of their voices the habitant
chanson, 'Le Petit Roger Bontemps':

                   "For I am Roger Bontemps,
                         Gai, gai, gai!
                    With drink I am full and with joy content,
                         Gai, gaiment!"

The chanson died away as she stood there, and still the light was burning
in the shop opposite.  A thought suddenly came to her.  She would go over
and see if the old housekeeper, Margot Patry, had gone to bed.  Here was
the solution to the problem, the satisfaction of modesty and propriety.

She crossed the street quickly, hurried round the corner of the house,
and was passing the side-window of the shop, when a crack in the shutters
caught her eye.  She heard something fall on the floor within.  Could it
be that the tailor and M'sieu' were working at so late an hour?  She had
an irresistible impulse, and glued her eye to the crack.

But presently she started back with a smothered cry.  There by the great
fireplace stood Louis Trudel picking up a red-hot cross with a pair of
pincers.  Grasping the iron firmly just below the arms of the cross, the
tailor held it up again.  He looked at it with a wild triumph, yet with a
malignancy little in keeping with the object he held--the holy relic he
had stolen from the door of the parish church.  The girl gave a low cry
of dismay.

She saw old Louis advance stealthily towards the door of the shop leading
into the house.  In bewilderment, she stood still an instant, then, with
a sudden impulse, she ran to the kitchen-door and tried it softly.  It
was not locked.  She opened it, entered quickly, and found old Margot
standing in the middle of the room in her night-dress.

"Oh, Rosalie, Rosalie!" cried the old woman, "something's going to
happen.  M'sieu' Trudel has been queer all evening.  I peeped in the key-
hole of the shop just now, and--"

"Yes, yes, I've seen too.  Come!" said Rosalie, and going quickly to the
door, opened it, and passed through to another room.  Here she opened
another door, leading into the hall between the shop and the house.
Entering the hall, she saw a glimmer of light above.  It was the reddish
glow of the iron cross held by old Louis.  She crept softly up the stone
steps.  She heard a door open very quietly.  She hurried now, and came to
the landing.  She saw the door of Charley's room open--all the village
knew what room he slept in--and the moonlight was streaming in at the
window.

She saw the sleeping man on the bed, and the tailor standing over him.
Charley was lying with one arm thrown above his head; the other lay over
the side of the bed.

As she rushed forward, divining old Louis' purpose, the fiery cross
descended, and a voice cried: "'Show me a sign from Heaven, tailor-man!'"

This voice was drowned by that of another, which, gasping with agony out
of a deep sleep, as the body sprang upright, cried: "God-oh God!"
Rosalie's hand grasped old Louis' arm too late.  The tailor sprang back
with a horrible laugh, striking her aside, and rushed out to the landing.

"Oh, Monsieur, Monsieur!" cried Rosalie, and, snatching a scarf from her
bosom, thrust it in upon the excoriated breast, as Charley, hardly
realising what had happened, choked back moans of pain.

"What did he do?" he gasped.

"The iron cross from the church door!" she answered.  "A minute, one
minute, Monsieur!"

She rushed out upon the landing in time to see the tailor stumble on the
stairs and fall head forwards to the bottom, at the feet of Margot Patry.

Rosalie paid no heed to the fallen man.  "Oil!  flour!  Quick!" she
cried.  "Quick!  Quick!"  She stepped over the body of the tailor,
snatched at Margot's arm, and dragged her into the kitchen.  "Quick-oil
and flour!"

The old woman showed her where they were, moaning and whining.

"He tried to kill Monsieur," cried Rosalie,  "burned him on the breast
with the holy cross!"

With oil and flour she hurried back, over the body of the tailor, up the
stairs, and into Charley's room.  Charley was now out of bed and half
dressed, though choking with pain, and preserving consciousness only by a
great effort.

"Good Mademoiselle!" he said.

She took the scarf off gently, soaked it in oil and splashed it with
flour, and laid it quickly back on the burnt flesh.

Margot came staggering into the room.

"I cannot rouse him.  I cannot rouse him.  He is dead!  He is dead!" she
whimpered.

"He--"

Charley swayed forward towards the woman, recovered himself, and said:

"Now not a word of what he did to me, remember.  Not one word, or you
will go to jail with him.  If you keep quiet, I'll say nothing.  He
didn't know what he was doing."  He turned to Rosalie.  "Not a word of
this, please," he moaned.  "Hide the cross."

He moved towards the door.  Rosalie saw his purpose, and ran out ahead of
him and down the stairs to where the tailor lay prone on his face, one
hand still holding the pincers.  The little iron cross lay in a dark
corner.  Stooping, she lifted up the tailor's head, then felt his heart.

"He is not dead," she cried.  "Quick, Margot, some water," she added, to
the whimpering woman.  Margot tottered away, and came again presently
with the water.

"I will go for some one to help," Rosalie said, rising to her feet, as
she saw Charley come slowly down the staircase, his face white with
misery.  She ran and took his arm to help him down.

"No, no, dear Mademoiselle," he said; "I shall be all right presently.
You must get help to carry him up stairs.  Bring the Notary; he and I can
carry him up."

"You, Monsieur!  You--it would kill you!  You are terribly hurt."

"I must help to carry him, else people will be asking questions," he
answered painfully.  "He is going to die.  It must not be known--you
understand!"  His eyes searched the floor until they found the cross.
Rosalie picked it up with the pincers.  "It must not be known what he did
to me," Charley said to the muttering and weeping old woman.  He caught
her shoulder with his hand, for she seemed scarcely to heed.

She nodded.  "Yes, yes, M'sieu', I will never speak."  Rosalie was
standing in the door.  "Go quickly, Mademoiselle," he said.  She
disappeared with the iron cross, and flying across the street, thrust it
inside the post-office, then ran to the house of the Notary.




CHAPTER XX

THE RETURN OF THE TAILOR

Twenty minutes later the tailor was lying in his bed, breathing, but
still unconscious, the Notary, M'sieu', and the doctor of the next
parish, who by chance was in Chaudiere, beside him.  Charley's face was
drawn and haggard with pain, for he had helped to carry old Louis to bed,
though every motion of his arms gave him untold agony.  In the doorway
stood Rosalie and Margot Patry.

"Will he live?" asked the Notary.

The doctor shook his head.  "A few hours, perhaps.  He fell downstairs?"

Charley nodded.  There was silence for some time, as the doctor went on
with his ministrations, and the Notary sat drumming his fingers on the
little table beside the bed.  The two women stole away to the kitchen,
where Rosalie again pressed secrecy on Margot.  In the interest of the
cause she had even threatened Margot with a charge of complicity.  She
had heard the phrase "accessory before the fact," and she used it now
with good effect.

Then she took some fresh flour and oil, and thrust them inside the
bedroom door where Charley now sat clinching his hands and fighting down
the pain.  Careful as ever of his personal appearance, however, he had
brushed every speck of flour from his clothes, and buttoned his coat up
to the neck.

Nearly an hour passed, and then the Cure appeared.  When he entered the
sick man's room, Charley followed, and again Rosalie and old Margot came
and stood within the doorway.

"Peace be to this house!" said the Cure.  He had a few minutes of
whispered conversation with the doctor, and then turned to Charley.

"He fell down-stairs, Monsieur?  You saw him fall?"

"I was in my room--I heard him fall, Cure."

"Had he been ill during the day?"

"He appeared to be feeble, and he seemed moody."

"More than usual, Monsieur?"  The Cure had heard of the incident of the
morning when Filion Lacasse accused Charley of stealing the cross.

"Rather more than usual, Monsieur."

The Cure turned towards the door.  "You, Mademoiselle Rosalie, how came
you to know?"

"I was in the kitchen with Margot, who was not well."

The Cure looked at Margot, who tearfully nodded.  "I was ill," she said,
"and Rosalie was here with me.  She helped M'sieu' and me.  Rosalie is a
good girl, and kind to me," she whimpered.

The Cure seemed satisfied, and after looking at the sick man for a
moment, he came close to Charley.  "I am deeply pained at what happened
to-day," he said courteously.  "I know you have had nothing to do with
the beloved little cross."

The Notary tried to draw near and listen, but the Cure's look held him
back.  The doctor was busy with his patient.

"You are only just, Monsieur," said Charley in response, wishing that
these kind eyes were fixed anywhere than on his face.

All at once the Cure laid a hand upon his arm.  "You are ill," he said
anxiously.  "You look very ill indeed.  See, Vaudrey," he added to the
doctor, "you have another patient here!"

The friendly, oleaginous doctor came over and peered into Charley's face.
"Ill-sure enough!" he said.  "Look at this sweat!" he pointed to the
drops of perspiration on Charley's forehead.  "Where do you suffer?"

"Severe pains all through my body," Charley answered simply, for it
seemed easier to tell the truth, as near as might be.

"I must look to you," said the doctor.  "Go and lie down, and I will come
to you."

Charley bowed, but did not move.  Just then two things drew the attention
of all: the tailor showed returning consciousness, and there was noise of
many voices outside the house and the tramping of feet below-stairs.

"Go and tell them no one must come up," said the doctor to the Notary,
and the Cure made ready to say the last offices for the dying.

Presently the noise below-stairs diminished, and the priest's voice rose
in the office, vibrating and touching.  The two women sank to their
knees, the doctor followed, his eyes still fixed on the dying man.
Presently, however, Charley did the same; for something penetrating and
reasonable in the devotion touched him.

All at once Louis Trudel opened his eyes.  Staring round with acute
excitement, his eyes fell on the Cure, then upon Charley.

"Stop--stop, M'sieu' le Cure!" he cried.  "There's other work to do."
He gasped and was convulsed, but the pallor of his face was alive with
fire from the distempered eyes.  He snatched from his breast the paper
Charley had neglected to burn.  He thrust it into the Curb's hand.

"See--see!" he croaked.  "He is an infidel--black infidel--from hell!"
His voice rose in a kind of shriek, piercing to every corner of the
house.  He pointed at Charley with shaking finger.

"He wrote it there--on that paper.  He doesn't--believe in God."

His strength failed him, his hand clutched tremblingly at the air.  He
laughed, a dry, crackling laugh, and his mouth opened twice or thrice to
speak, but gasping breaths only came forth.  With a last effort, however-
-as the priest, shocked, stretched out his hand and said: "Have done,
have done, Trudel!"--he cried, in a voice that quavered shrilly:

"He asked--tailor-man--sign--from--Heaven.  Look-look!"  He pointed
wildly at Charley.  "I--gave him--sign of--"

But that was the end.  With a shudder the body collapsed in a formless
heap, and the tailor-man was gone to tell of the work he had done for his
faith on earth.




CHAPTER XXI

THE CURE HAS AN INSPIRATION

White and malicious faces peered through the doorway.  There was an ugly
murmur coming up the staircase.  Many habitants had heard Louis Trudel's
last words, and had passed them on with vehement exaggeration.

Chaudiere had been touched in its most superstitious corner.
Protestantism was a sin, but atheism was a crime against humanity.
The Protestant might be the victim of a mistake, but the atheist was the
deliberate son of darkness, the source of fearful dangers.  An atheist in
their midst was like a scorpion in a flower-bed--no one could tell when
and where he would sting.  Rough misdemeanours among them had been many,
there had once been a murder in the parish, but the undefined horrors of
infidelity were more shameful than crimes the eye could see.

To the minds of these excited people the tailor-man's death was due to
the infidel before them.  They were ready to do all that might become a
Catholic intent to avenge the profaned honour of the Church and the
faith.  Bodily harm was the natural form for their passion to take.

"Bring him out--let us have him!" they cried with fierce gestures, to
which Rosalie Evanturel turned a pained, indignant face.

As the Curb stood with the paper in his hand, his face set and bitter,
Rosalie made a step forward.  She meant to tell the truth about Louis
Trudel, and show how good this man was, who stood charged with an
imaginary crime.  But she met the warning eye of the man himself, calm
and resolute, she saw the suffering in the face, endured with what
composure! and she felt instantly that she must obey him, and that--who
could tell?--his plan might be the best in the end.  She looked at the
Cure anxiously.  What would he say and do?  In the Cure's heart and
mind a great struggle was going on.  All his inherent prejudice, the
hereditary predisposition of centuries, the ingrain hatred of atheism,
were alive in him, hardening his mind against the man before him.  His
first impulse was to let Charley take his fate at the hands of the people
of Chaudiere, whatever it might be.  But as he looked at the man, as he
recalled their first meeting, and remembered the simple, quiet life he
had lived among them--charitable, and unselfish--the barriers of creed
and habit fell down, and tears unbidden rushed into his eyes.

The Cure had, all at once, the one great inspiration of his life--its one
beautiful and supreme imagining.  For thus he reasoned swiftly:

Here he was, a priest who had shepherded a flock of the faithful passed
on to him by another priest before him, who again had received them from
a guardian of the fold--a family of faithful Catholics whose thoughts
never strayed into forbidden realms.  He had done no more than keep them
faithful and prevent them from wandering--counselling, admonishing,
baptising, and burying, giving in marriage and blessing, sending them on
their last great journey with the cachet of Holy Church upon them.  But
never once, never in all his life, had he brought a lost soul into the
fold.  If he died to-night, he could not say to St. Peter, when he
arrived at Heaven's gate: "See, I have saved a soul!"  Before
the Throne he could not say to Him who cried: "Go ye into all the world
and preach the gospel to every creature"--he could not say: "Lord,
by Thy grace I found this soul in the wilderness, in the dark and the
loneliness, having no God to worship, denial and rebellion in his heart;
and behold, I took him to my breast, and taught him in Thy name, and led
him home to Thy haven, the Church!"

Thus it was that the Cure dreamed a dream.  He would set his life to
saving this lost soul.  He would rescue him from the outer darkness.

His face suffused, he handed the paper in his hand back to the man who
had written the words upon it.  Then he lifted his hand against the
people at the door and the loud murmuring behind them.

"Peace--peace!" he said, as though from the altar.  "Leave this room of
death, I command you.  Go at once to your homes.  This man"--he pointed
to Charley--"is my friend.  Who seeks to harm him, would harm me.  Go
hence and pray.  Pray for yourselves, pray for him, and for me; and pray
for the troubled soul of Louis Trudel.  Go in peace."

Soon afterwards the house was empty, save for the Cure, Charley, old
Margot, and the Notary.

That night Charley sat in the tailor's bedroom, rigid and calm, though
racked with pain, and watched the candles flickering beside the dead
body.  He was thinking of the Cure's last words to the people.

"I wonder--I wonder," he said, and through his eyeglass he stared at the
crucifix that threw a shadow on the dead man's face.  Morning found him
there.  As dawn crept in he rose to his feet.  "Whither now?" he said,
like one in a dream.




CHAPTER XXII

THE WOMAN WHO SAW

Up to the moment of her meeting with Charley, Rosalie Evanturel's life
had been governed by habit, which was lightly coloured by temperament.
Since the eventful hour on Vadrome Mountain it had become a life of
temperament, in which habit was involuntary and mechanical.  She did her
daily duties with a good heart, but also with a sense superior to the
practical action.  This grew from day to day, until, in the tragical days
wherein she had secretly played a great part, she moved as in a dream,
but a dream so formal that no one saw any change taking place in her,
or associated her with the events happening across the way.

She had been compelled to answer many questions, for it was known she was
in the tailor's house when Louis Trudel fell down-stairs, but what more
was there to tell than that she had run for the Notary, and sent word to
the Cure, and that she was present when the tailor died, charging M'sieu'
with being an infidel?  At first she was ill disposed to answer any
questions, but she soon felt that attitude would only do harm.  For the
first time in her life she was face to face with moral problems--the
beginning of sorrow, of knowledge, and of life.

In all secrets there is a kind of guilt, however beautiful or joyful they
may be, or for what good end they may be set to serve.  Secrecy means
evasion, and evasion means a problem to the moral mind.  To the primitive
mind, with its direct yes and no, there is danger of it becoming a
tragical problem ere it is realised that truth is various and diverse.
Perhaps even with that Mary who hid the matter in her heart--the
exquisite tragedy and glory of Christendom--there was a delicate feeling
of guilt, the guilt of the hidden though lofty and beautiful thing.

If secrecy was guilt, then Charley and Rosalie were bound together by a
bond as strong as death: Rosalie held the key to a series of fateful days
and doings.

In ordinary course, they might have known each other for five years and
not have come to this sensitive and delicate association.  With one great
plunge she had sprung into the river of understanding.  In the moment
that she had thrust her scarf into his scorched breast, in that little
upper room, the work of years had been done.

As long as he lived, that mark must remain on M'sieu's breast--the red,
smooth scar of a cross!  She had seen the sort of shining scar a bad burn
makes, and at thought of it she flushed, trembled, and turned her head
away, as though some one were watching her.  Even in the night she
flushed and buried her face in the pillow when the thought flashed
through her mind; though when she had soaked the scarf in oil and flour
and laid it on the angry wound she had not flushed at all, was
determined, quiet, and resourceful.

That incident had made her from a girl into a woman, from a child of the
convent into a child of the world.  She no longer thought and felt as she
had done before.  What she did think or feel could not easily have been
set down, for her mind was one tremulous confusion of unusual thoughts,
her heart was beset by new feelings, her imagination, suddenly finding
itself, was trying its wings helplessly.  The past was full of wonder and
event, the present full of surprises.

There was M'sieu' established already in Louis Trudel's place, having
been granted a lease of the house and shop by the Curte, on the part of
the parish, to which the property had been left; receiving also a gift of
the furniture and of old Margot, who remained where she had been so many
years.  She could easily see Charley at work--pale and suffering still
--for the door was generally open in the sweet April weather, with the
birds singing, and the trees bursting into blossom.  Her wilful
imagination traced the cross upon his breast--it almost seemed as if it
were outside upon his clothes, exposed to every eye, a shining thing all
fire, not a wound inside, for which old Margot prepared oiled linen now.

The parish was as perturbed as her own mind, for the mystery of the
stolen cross had never been cleared up, and a few still believed that
M'sieu' had taken it.  They were of those who kept hinting at dark things
which would yet be worked upon the infidel in the tailor's shop.  These
were they to whom the Curb's beautiful ambition did not appeal.  He had
said that if the man were an infidel, then they must pray that he be
brought into the fold; but a few were still suspicious, and they said in
Rosalie's presence: "Where is the little cross?  M'sieu' knows."

He did know.  That was the worst of it.  The cross was in her possession.
Was it not necessary, then, to quiet suspicion for his sake?  She had
locked the relic away in a cupboard in her bedroom, and she carried the
key of it always in her pocket.  Every day she went and looked at it, as
at some ghostly token.  To her it was a symbol, not of supernatural
things, but of life in its new reality to her.  It was M'sieu', it was
herself, it was their secret--she chafed inwardly that Margot should
share a part of that secret.  If it were only between their two selves--
between M'sieu' and herself!  If Margot--she paused suddenly, for she was
going to say, If Margot would only die!  She was not wicked enough to
wish that; yet in the past few weeks she had found herself capable of
thinking things beyond the bounds of any past experience.

She found a solution at last.  She would go to-night secretly and nail
the cross again on the church door, and so stop the chatter of evil
tongues.  The moon set very early now, and as every one in Chaudiere was
supposed to be in bed by ten o'clock, the chances of not being seen were
in her favour.  She received the final impetus to her resolution by a
quarrelsome and threatening remark of Jo Portugais to some sharp-tongued
gossip in the post-office.  She was glad that Jo should defend M'sieu',
but she was jealous of his friendship for the tailor.  Besides, did there
not appear to be a secret between Jo and M'sieu'?  Was it not possible
that Jo knew where M'sieu' came from, and all about him?  Of late Jo had
come in and gone out of the shop oftener than in the past, had even
brought her bunches of mosses for her flower-pots, the first budding
lilacs, and some maple-sugar made from the trees on Vadrome Mountain.
She remembered that when she was a girl at school, years ago--ten years
ago--Jo Portugais, then scarcely out of his teens, a cheerful, pleasant,
quick-tempered lad, had brought her bunches of the mountain-ash berry;
that once he had mended the broken runner of her sled; and yet another
time had sent her a birch-bark valentine at the convent, where it was
confiscated by the Mother Superior.  Since those days he had become a
dark morose figure, living apart from men, never going to confession,
seldom going to Mass, unloving and unlovable.

There was only one other person in the parish more unloved.  That was the
woman called Paulette Dubois, who lived in the little house at the outer
gate of the Manor.  Paulette Dubois had a bad name in the parish--so bad
that all women shunned her, and few men noticed her.  Yet no one could
say that at the present time she did not live a careful life, justifying,
so far as eye could see, the protection of the Seigneur, M. Rossignol,
a man of queer habits and queerer dress, a dabbler in physical science,
a devout Catholic, and a constant friend of the Cure.  He it was who,
when an effort was made to drive Paulette out of the parish, had said
that she should not go unless she wished; that, having been born in
Chaudiere, she had a right to live there and die there; and if she had
sinned there, the parish was in some sense to blame.  Though he had no
lodge-gates, and though the seigneury was but a great wide low-roofed
farmhouse, with an observatory, and a chimney-piece dating from the time
of Louis the Fourteenth, the Seigneur gave Paulette Dubois a little hut
at his outer gate, which had been there since the great Count Frontenac
visited Chaudiere.  Probably Rosalie spoke to Paulette Dubois more often
than did any one else in the parish, but that was because the woman came
for little things at the shop, and asked for letters, and every week sent
one--to a man living in Montreal.  She sent these letters, but not more
than once in six months did she get a reply, and she had not had one in
a whole year.  Yet every week she asked, and Rosalie found it hard to
answer her politely, and sometimes showed it.

So it was that the two disliked each other without good cause, save that
they were separated by a chasm as wide as a sea.  The one disliked the
other because she must recognise her; the other chafed because she could
be recognised by Rosalie officially only.

The late afternoon of the day in which Rosalie decided to nail the cross
on the church door again, Paulette arrived to ask for letters at the
moment that the office wicket was closed, and Rosalie had answered that
it was after office hours, and had almost closed the door in her face.
As she turned away Jo Portugais came out of the tailor-shop opposite.  He
saw Paulette, and stood still an instant.  She did the same.  A strange
look passed across the face of each, then they turned and went in
opposite directions.

Never in her life had time gone so slowly with Rosalie.  She watched the
clock.  A dozen times she went to the front door and looked out.  She
tried to read--it was no use; she tried to spin-her fingers trembled; she
sorted the letters in the office again, and rearranged every letter and
parcel and paper in its little pigeonhole--then did it all over again.
She took out again the letter Paulette had dropped in the letter-box; it
was addressed in the name of the man at Montreal.  She looked at it in a
kind of awe, as she had ever done the letters of this woman who was
without the pale.  They had a sense of mystery, an air of forbidden
imagination.

She put the letter back, went to the door again, and looked out.  It was
now time to go.  Drawing a hood over her head, she stepped out into the
night.  There was a little frost, though spring was well forward, and the
smell of the rich earth and the budding trees was sweet to the sense.
The moon had just set, but the stars were shining, and here and there
patches of snow on the hillside and in the fields added to the light.
Yet it was not bright enough to see far, and as Rosalie moved down the
street she did not notice a figure at a little distance behind, walking
on the new-springing grass by the roadside.  All was quiet at the tavern;
there was no light in the Notary's house--as a rule, he sat up late,
reading; and even the fiddle of Maximilian Cour, the baker, was silent.
The Cure's windows were dark, and the church with its white tin spire
stood up sentinel-like above the village.

Rosalie had the fateful cross in her hand as she softly opened the gate
of the churchyard and approached the great oak doors.  Taking a screw-
driver and some screws from her pocket, she felt with a finger for the
old screw-holes in the door.  Then she began her work, looking fearfully
round once or twice at first.  Presently, however, because the screws
were larger than the old ones, it became much harder; the task called
forth more strength, and drove all thought of being seen out of her mind
for a space.  At last, however, she gave the final turn to the handle,
and every screw was in its place, its top level and smooth with the iron
of the cross.  She stopped and looked round again with an uneasy feeling.
She could see no one, hear no one, but she began to tremble, and,
overcome, she fell on her knees before the door, and, with her fingers on
the foot of the little cross, prayed passionately; for herself, for
Monsieur.

Suddenly she heard footsteps inside the church.  They were coming towards
the doorway, nearer and nearer.  At first she was so struck with terror
that she could not move.  Then with a little cry she sprang to her feet,
rushed to the gate, threw it open, ran out into the road, ind wildly on
towards home.  She did not stop for at least three hundred yards.
Turning and looking back she saw at the church door a pale round light.
With another cry she sped on, and did not pause till she reached the
house.  Then, bursting in and locking the door, she hurried to her room,
undressed quickly, got into bed without saying her prayers, and buried
her face in the pillow, shivering and overwrought.

The footsteps she had heard were those of the Cure and Jo Portugais.  The
Cure had sent for Jo to do some last work upon a little altar, to be used
the next day for the first time.  The carpenter and the carver in wood
who were responsible for the work had fallen victims to white whiskey on
the very last day of their task, and had been driven from the church by
the Cure, who then sent for Jo.  Rosalie had not seen the light at the
shrine, as it was on the side of the church farthest from the village.

Their labour finished, the two came towards the front door, the Cure's
lantern in his hand.  Opening the door, Jo heard the sound of footsteps
and saw a figure flying down the road.  As the Cure came out
abstractedly, he glanced sorrowfully towards the place where the little
cross was used to be.  He gave a wondering cry, and almost dropped the
lantern.

"See, see, Portugais," he said, "our little cross again!"  Jo nodded.
"So it seems, Monsieur," he said.

At that instant he saw a hood lying on the ground, and as the Cure held
up the lantern, peering at the little cross, he hastily picked it up and
thrust it inside his coat.

"Strange--very strange!" said the Cure.  "It must have been done while
we were inside.  It was not there when we entered."

"We entered by the vestry door," said Jo.

"Ah, true-true," responded the Cure.

"It comes as it went," said Jo.  "You can't account for some things."

The Cure turned and looked at Jo curiously.  "Are you then so
superstitious, Jo?  Nonsense; it is the work of human hands--very human
hands," he added sadly.

"There is nothing to show," said the Cure, seeing Jo's glance round.

"As you see, M'sieu' le Cure."

"Well, it is a mystery which time no doubt will clear up.  Meanwhile, let
us be thankful to God," said the Cure.

They parted, the Cure going through a side-gate into his own garden,
Jo passing out of the churchyard-gate through which Rosalie had gone.
He looked down the road towards the village.

"Well!" said a voice in his ear.  Paulette Dubois stood before him.

"It was you, then," he said, with a glowering look.  "What did you want
with it?"

"What do you want with the hood in your coat there?"  She threw her head
back with a spiteful laugh.  "Whose do you think it is?" he said
quietly.

"You and the schoolmaster made verses about her once."

"It was Rosalie Evanturel?" he asked, with aggravating composure.

"You have the hood-look at it!  You saw her running down the road; I saw
her come, watched her, and saw her go.  She is a thief--pretty Rosalie--
thief and postmistress!  No doubt she takes letters too."

"The ones you wait for, and that never come--eh?"  Her face darkened with
rage and hatred.  "I will tell the world she's a thief," she sneered.

"Who will believe you?"

"You will."  She was hard and fierce, and looked him in the eyes
squarely.  "You'll give evidence quick enough, if I ask you."

"I wouldn't do anything you asked me to-nothing, if it was to save my
life."

"I'll prove her a thief without you.  She can't deny it."

"If you try it, I'll--"  He stopped, husky and shaking.

"You'll kill me, eh?  You killed him, and you didn't hang.  Oh no, you
wouldn't kill me, Jo," she added quickly, in a changed voice.  "You've
had enough of that kind of thing.  If I'd been you, I'd rather have hung
--ah, sure!"  She suddenly came close to him.  "Do you hate me so bad,
Jo?" she said anxiously.  "It's eight years--do you hate me so bad as
then?"

"You keep your tongue off Rosalie Evanturel," he said, and turned on his
heel.

She caught his arm.  "We're both bad, Jo.  Can't we be friends?" she
said eagerly, her voice shaking.

He did not reply.

"Don't drive a woman too hard," she said between her teeth.

"Threats!  Pah!" he rejoined.  "What do you think I'm made of?"

"I'll find that out," she said, and, turning on her heel, ran down the
road towards the Manor House.  "What had Rosalie to do with the cross?"
Jo said to himself.  "This is her hood."  He took it out and looked at
it.  "It's her hood--but what did she want with the cross?"

He hurried on, and as he neared the post-office he saw the figure of a
woman in the road.  At first he thought it might be Rosalie, but as he
came nearer he saw it was not.  The woman was muttering and crying.  She
wandered to and fro bewilderedly.  He came up, caught her by the arm, and
looked into her face.

It was old Margot Patry.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE WOMAN WHO DID NOT TELL

"Oh, M'sieu', I am afraid."

"Afraid of what, Margot?"

"Of the last moment, M'sieu' le Cure."

"There will be no last moment to your mind--you will not know it when it
comes, Margot."

The woman trembled.  "I am not sorry to die.  But I am afraid; it is so
lonely, M'sieu' le Cure."

"God is with us, Margot."

"When we are born we do not know.  It is on the shoulders of others.
When we die we know, and we have to answer."

"Is the answering so hard, Margot?"

The woman shook her head feebly and sadly, but did not speak.

"You have been a good mother, Margot."  She made no sign.

"You have been a good neighbour; you have done unto others as you would
be done by."

She scarcely seemed to hear.

"You have been a good servant--doing your duty in season and out of
season; honest and just and faithful."

The woman's fingers twitched on the coverlet, and she moved her head
restlessly.

The Curb almost smiled, for it seemed as if Margot were finding herself
wanting.  Yet none in Chaudiere but knew that she had lived a blameless
life--faithful, friendly, a loving and devoted mother, whose health had
been broken by sleepless attendance at sick-beds by night, while doing
her daily work at the house of the late Louis Trudel.

"I will answer for the way you have done your duty, Margot," said the
Cure.  "You have been a good daughter of the Church."

He paused a minute, and in the pause some one rose from a chair by the
window and looked out on the sunset sky.  It was Charley.  The woman
heard, and turned her eyes towards him.  "Do you wish him to go?" asked
the Cure.

"No, no--oh no, M'sieu'!" she said eagerly.  She had asked all day that
either Rosalie or M'sieu' should be in the room with her.  It would seem
as though she were afraid she had not courage enough to keep the secret
of the cross without their presence.  Charley had yielded to her request,
while he shrank from granting it.  Yet, as he said to himself, the woman
was keeping his secret--his and Rosalie's--and she had some right to make
demand.

When the Cure asked the question of old Margot, he turned expectantly,
and with a sense of relief.  He thought it strange that the Cure should
wish him to remain.  The Cure, on his part, was well pleased to have him
in the influence of a Christian death-bed.  A time must come when the
last confidences of the dying woman could be given to no ears but his
own, but meanwhile it was good that M'sieu' should be there.

"M'sieu' le Cure," said the dying woman, "must I tell all?"

"All what, Margot?"

"All that is sin?"

"There is no must, Margot."

"If you should ask me, M'sieu'--"

She paused, and the man at the window turned and looked curiously at her.
He saw the problem in the woman's mind: had she the right to die with the
secret of another's crime upon her mind?

"The priest does not ask, Margot: it is you who confess your sins.  That
is between you and God."

The Cure spoke firmly, for he wanted the man at the window to clearly
understand.

"But if there are the sins of others, and you know, and they trouble your
soul, M'sieu'?"

"You have nothing to do with the sins of others; it is enough to repent
of your own sins.  The priest has nothing to do with any sins but those
confessed by the sinner to himself.  Your own sins are your sole concern
to-night, Margot."

The woman's face seemed to clear a little, and her eyes wandered to the
man at the window with less anxiety.  Charley was wondering whether,
after all, she would have the courage to keep her word, whether spiritual
terror would surmount the moral attitude of honour.  He was also
wondering how much right he had to put the strain upon the woman in her
desperate hour.  "How long did the doctor say I could live?" the woman
asked presently.

"Till morning, perhaps, Margot."

"I should like to live till sunrise," she answered, "till after
breakfast.  Rosalie makes good tea," she added musingly.

The Cure almost smiled.  "There is the Living Bread, my daughter."

She nodded.  "But I should like to see the sunrise and have Rosalie bring
me tea," she persisted.

"Very well, Margot.  We will ask God for that."

Her mind flew back again to the old question.

"Is it wrong to keep a secret?" she asked, her face turned away from the
man at the window.

"If it is the secret of a sin, and the sin is your own--yes, Margot."

"And if the sin is not your own?"

"If you share the sin, and if the secret means injury to others, and a
wrong is being done, and the law can right that wrong, then you must go
to the law, not to your priest."

The Cure's look was grave, even anxious, for he saw that the old woman's
mind was greatly disturbed.  But her face cleared now, and stayed so.
"It has all been a mix and a muddle," she answered; "and it hurt my poor
head, M'sieu' le Cure, but now I think I under stand.  I am not afraid;
I will confess."

The Cure had made it clear to her that she could carry to her grave the
secret of the little cross and the work it had done, and so keep her word
and still not injure her chances of salvation.  She was content.  She no
longer needed the helpful presence of M'sieu' or Rosalie.  Charley
instinctively felt what was in her mind, and came towards the bed.

"I will tell Mademoiselle Rosalie about the tea," he said to her.

She looked up at him, almost smiling.  "Thank you, good M'sieu'," she
said.

"I will confess now, M'sieu' le Cure" she continued.  Charley left the
room.

Towards morning Margot waked out of a brief sleep, and found the Cure and
his sister and others about her bed.

"Is it near sunrise?" she whispered.

"It is just sunrise.  See; God has been good," answered the Cure, drawing
open the blind and letting in the first golden rays.

Rosalie entered the room with a cup of tea, and came towards the bed.

Old Margot looked at the girl, at the tea, and then at the Cure.

"Drink the tea for me, Rosalie," she whispered.  Rosalie did as she was
asked.

She looked round feebly; her eyes were growing filmy.  "I never gave--so
much--trouble--before," she managed to say.  "I never had--so much--
attention....  I can keep--a secret too," she said, setting her lips
feebly with pride.  "But I--never--had--so much--attention--before; have
I--Rosalie?"

Rosalie did not need to answer, for the woman was gone.  The crowning
interest of her life had come all at the last moment, as it were, and she
had gone away almost gladly and with a kind of pride.

Rosalie also had a hidden pride: the secret was now her very own--hers
and M'sieu's.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE SEIGNEUR TAKES A HAND IN THE GAME

It was St. Jean Baptiste's day, and French Canada was en fete.  Every
seigneur, every cure, every doctor, every notary--the chief figures in a
parish--and every habitant was bent for a happy holiday, dressed in his
best clothes, moved in his best spirits, in the sweet summer weather.

Bells were ringing, flags were flying, every road and lane was filled
with caleches and wagons, and every dog that could draw a cart pulled big
and little people, the old and the blind and the mendicant, the happy and
the sour, to the village, where there were to be sports and speeches,
races upon the river, and a review of the militia, arranged by the member
of the Legislature for the Chaudiere-half of the county.  French soldiers
in English red coats and carrying British flags were straggling along the
roads to join the battalion at the volunteers' camp three miles from the
town, and singing:

                   "Brigadier, respondez Pandore--
                    Brigadier, vous avez raison."

It was not less incongruous and curious when one group presently broke
out into 'God save the Queen', and another into the 'Marseillaise', and
another still into 'Malbrouck s'en va t'en guerre'.  At last songs and
soldiers were absorbed in the battalion at the rendezvous, and 1the long
dusty march to the village gave a disciplined note to the gaiety of the
militant habitant.

At high noon Chaudiere was filled to overflowing.  There were booths and
tents everywhere--all sorts of cheap-jacks vaunted their wares, merry-go-
rounds and swings and shooting-galleries filled the usual spaces in the
perspective.  The Cure, M. Rossignol the Seigneur, and the Notary stood
on the church steps viewing the scene and awaiting the approach of the
soldier-citizens.  The Seigneur and the Cure had ceased listening to the
babble of M. Dauphin, who seemed not to know that his audience closed its
ears and found refuge in a "Well, well!" or "Think of that!" or an
abstracted "You surprise me!"

The Notary talked on with eager gesture and wreathing smile, shaking back
his oiled ringlets as though they trespassed on his smooth, somewhat
jaundiced cheeks, until it began to dawn upon him that there was no coin
of real applause to be got at this mint.  Fortune favoured him at the
critical juncture, for the tailor walked slowly past them, looking
neither to right nor to left, his eyes cast upon the ground, apparently
oblivious to all round him.  Almost opposite the church door, however,
Charley was suddenly stopped by Filion Lacasse, who ran out from a group
before the tavern, and, standing in front of him with outstretched hand,
said loudly:

"M'sieu', it's all right.  What you said done it, sure!  I'm a thousand
dollars richer to-day.  You may be an infidel, but you have a head, and
you save me money, and you give away your own, and that's good enough for
me,"--he wrung Charley's hand,--"and I don't care who knows it--sacre!"

Charley did not answer him, but calmly withdrew his hand, smiled, raised
his hat at the lonely cheer the saddler raised, and passed on, scarce
conscious of what had happened.  Indeed he was indifferent to it, for he
had a matter on his mind this day which bitterly absorbed him.

But the Notary was not indifferent.  "Look there, what do you think of
that?" he asked querulously.  "I am glad to see that Lacasse treats
Monsieur well," said the Cure.

"What do you think of that, Monsieur?" repeated the Notary excitedly to
the Seigneur.

The Seigneur put his large gold-handled glass to his eye and looked
interestedly after Charley for a moment, then answered: "Well, Dauphin,
what?"

"He's been giving Filion Lacasse advice about the old legacy business,
and Filion's taken it; and he's got a thousand dollars; and now there's
all that fuss.  And four months ago Filion wanted to tar and feather him
for being just what he is to-day--an infidel--an infidel!"

He was going to say something else, but he did not like the look the Cure
turned on him, and he broke off short.

"Do you regret that he gave Lacasse good advice?" asked the Cure.

"It's taking bread out of other men's mouths."

"It put bread into Filion's mouth.  Did you ever give Lacasse advice?
The truth now, Dauphin!" said the Seigneur drily.

"Yes, Monsieur, and sound advice too, within the law-precedent and code
and every legal fact behind."  The Seigneur was a man of laconic speech.
"Tut, tut, Dauphin; precedent and code and legal fact are only good when
there's brain behind 'em.  The tailor yonder has brains."

"Ah, but what does he know about the law?" answered Dauphin, with
acrimonious voice but insinuating manner, for he loved to stand well with
the Seigneur.

"Enough for the saddler evidently," sharply rejoined the Seigneur.

Dauphin was fighting for his life, as it were.  His back was to the wall.
If this man was to be allowed to advise the habitants of Chaudiere on
their disputes and "going to law," where would his own prestige be?
His vanity had been deeply wounded.

"It's guesswork with him.  Let him stick to his trade as I stick to mine.
That sort of thing only does harm."

"He puts a thousand dollars into the saddler's pocket: that's a positive
good.  He may or may not take thereby ten dollars out of your pocket:
that's a negative injury.  In this case there was no injury, for you had
already cost Lacasse--how much had you cost him, Dauphin?" continued the
Seigneur, with a half-malicious smile.  "I've been out of Chaudiere for
near a year; I don't know the record--how much, eh, Dauphin?"

The Notary was too offended to answer.  He shook his ringlets back
angrily, and a scarlet spot showed on each straw-coloured cheek.

"Twenty dollars is what Lacasse paid our dear Dauphin," said the Cure
benignly, "and a very proper charge.  Lacasse probably gave Monsieur
there quite as much, and Monsieur will give it to the first poor man he
meets, or send it to the first sick person of whom he hears."

"My own opinion is, he's playing some game here," said the Notary.

"We all play games," said the Seigneur.  "His seems to give him hard work
and little luxury.  Will you bring him to see me at the Manor, my dear
Cure?" he added.  "He will not go.  I have asked him."

"Then I shall visit him at his tailor-shop," said the Seigneur.  "I need
a new suit."

"But you always had your clothes made in Quebec, Monsieur," said the
Notary, still carping.

"We never had such a tailor," answered the Seigneur.

"We'll hear more of him before we're done with him," obstinately urged
the Notary.

"It would give Dauphin the greatest pleasure if our tailor proved to be a
murderer or a robber.  I suppose you believe that he stole our little
cross here," the Cure added, turning to the church door, where his eye
lingered lovingly on the relic, hanging on a pillar just inside, whither
he had had it removed.

"I'm not sure yet he hadn't something to do with it," was the stubborn
response.

"If he did, may it bring him peace at last!" said the Cure piously.
"I have set my heart on nailing him to our blessed faith as that cross
is fixed to the pillar yonder--'I will fasten him like a nail in a sure
place,' says the Book.  I take it hard that my friend Dauphin will not
help me on the way.  Suppose the man were evil, then the Church should
try to snatch him like a brand from the burning.  But suppose that in his
past there was no wrong necessary to be hidden in the present--and this
I believe with all my heart; suppose that he was wronged, not wronging:
then how much more should the Church strive to win him to the light!
Why, man, have you no pride in Holy Church?  I am ashamed of you,
Dauphin, with your great intelligence, your wide reading.  With our
knowledge of the world we should be broader."

The Seigneur's eyes were turned away, for there was in them at once
humour and a suspicious moisture.  Of all men in the world he most
admired the Cure, for his utter truth and nobility; but he could not
help smiling at his enthusiasm--his dear Cure turned evangelist like any
"Methody"!--and at the appeal of the Notary on the ground of knowledge
of the world.  He was wise enough to count himself an old fogy, a
provincial, and "a simon-pure habitant," but of the three he only had any
knowledge of life.  As men of the world the Cure and the Notary were sad
failures, though they stood for much in Chaudiere.  Yet this detracted
nothing from the fine gentlemanliness of the Cure or the melodramatic
courtesy of the Notary.

Amused and touched as the Seigneur had been at the Cure's words, he
turned now and said: "Always on the weaker side, Cure; always hoping the
best from the worst of us."

"I am only following an example at my door--you taught us all charity and
justice," answered M. Loisel, looking meaningly at the Seigneur.  There
was silence a little while, for all three were thinking of the woman of
the hut, at the gate of the Seigneur's manor.

On this topic M. Dauphin was not voluble.  His original kindness to the
woman had given him many troubled hours at home, for Madame Dauphin had
construed his human sympathy into the dark and carnal desires of the
heart, and his truthful eloquence had made his case the worse.  A
miserable sentimentalist, the Notary was likely to be misunderstood for
ever, and one or two indiscretions of his extreme youth had been a weapon
against him through the long years of a blameless married life.

He heaved a sigh of sympathy with the Cure now.  "She has not come back
yet?" he said to the Seigneur.  "No sign of her.  She locked up and
stepped out, so my housekeeper says, about the time--"

"The day of old Margot's funeral," interposed the Notary.  "She'd had a
letter that day, a letter she'd been waiting for, and abroad she went--
alas! the flyaway--from bad to worse, I fear--ah me!"

The Seigneur turned sharply on him.  "Who told you she had a letter that
day, for which she had been waiting?" he said.

"Monsieur Evanturel."

The Seigneur's face became sterner still.  "What business had he to know
that she received a letter that day?"

"He is postmaster," innocently replied the Notary.  "He is the devil!"
said the Seigneur tartly.  "I beg your pardon, Cure; but it is
Evanturel's business not to know what letters go to and fro in that
office.  He should be blind and dumb, so far as we all are concerned."

"Remember that Evanturel is a cripple," the Cure answered gently.  "I am
glad, very glad it was not Rosalie."

"Rosalie has more than usual sense for her sex," gruffly but kindly
answered the Seigneur, a look of friendliness in his eyes.  "I shall talk
to her about her father; I can't trust myself to speak to the man."

"Rosalie is down there with Madame Dauphin," said the Notary, pointing.
"Shall I ask her to come?"

The Seigneur nodded.  He was magistrate and magnate, and he was the
guarantor of the post-office, and of Rosalie and her father.  His eyes
fixed in reverie on Rosalie; he and the Cure passively waited her
approach.

She came over, pale and a little anxious, but with a courageous look.
She had a vague sense of trouble, and she feared it might be the little
cross, that haunting thing of all these months.

When she came near, the Cure greeted her courteously, and then, taking
the Notary by the arm, led him away.

The Seigneur and Rosalie being left alone, the girl said: "You wish to
speak with me, Monsieur?"

The Seigneur scrutinised her sharply.  Though her colour came and went,
her look was frank and fearless.  She had had many dark hours since that
fateful month of April.  At night, trying to sleep, she had heard the
ghostly footsteps in the church, which had sent her flying homeward.
Then, there was the hood.  She had waited on and on, fearing word would
come that it had been found in the churchyard, and that she had been seen
putting the cross back upon the church door.  As day after day passed she
had come at length to realise that, whatever had happened to the hood,
she was not suspected.  Yet the whole train of circumstances had a
supernatural air, for the Cure and Jo Portugais had not made public their
experience on the eventful night; she had been educated in a land of
legend and superstition, and a deep impression had been made upon her
mind, giving to her other new emotions a touch of pathos, of imagination,
and adding character to her face.  The old Seigneur stroked his chin as
he looked at her.  He realised that a change had come upon her, that she
had developed in some surprising way.

"What has happened--who has happened, Mademoiselle Rosalie?" he asked.
He had suddenly made up his mind about that look in her face--he thought
it the woman in her which answers to the call of man, not perhaps any
particular man, but man the attractive influence, the complement.

Her eyes dropped, then raised frankly to his.  "I don't know,"--adding,
with a quick humour, for he had been very friendly with her, and joked
with her in his dry way all her life; "do you, Monsieur?"

He pulled his nose with a quick gesture habitual to him, and answered
slowly and meaningly: "The government's a good husband and pays regular
wages, Mademoiselle.  I'd stick to government."

"I am not asking for a divorce, Monsieur."

He pulled his nose again delightedly--so many people were pathetically
in earnest in Chaudiere--even the Cure's humour was too mediaeval and
obvious.  He had never before thought Rosalie so separate from them all.
All at once he had a new interest in her.  His cheek flushed a little,
his eye kindled, humour relaxed his lips.

"No other husband would intrude so little," he rejoined.

"True, there's little love lost between us, Monsieur."  She felt
exhilaration in talking with him, a kind of joy in measuring word against
word; yet a year ago she would have done no more than smile respectfully
and give a demure reply if the Seigneur had spoken to her like this.

The Seigneur noted the mixed emotions in her face and the delicate
alertness of expression.  As a man of the world, he was inclined to
believe that only one kind of experience can bring such looks to a
woman's face.  He saw in her the awakening of the deeper interests of
life, the tremulous apprehension of nascent emotions and passions which,
at some time or other, give beauty and importance to the nature of every
human being.  It did not occur to him that the tailor--the mysterious
figure in the parish--might be responsible.  He was observant, but not
imaginative; he was moved by what he saw, in a quiet, unexplainable
manner.

"The government is the best sort of husband.  From the other sort you
would get more kisses and less ha'pence," he continued.

"That might be a satisfactory balance-sheet, Monsieur."

"Take care, Mademoiselle Rosalie," he rejoined, half seriously, "that you
don't miss the ha'pence before you get the kisses."

She turned pale in very fear.  What was he going to say?  Was the post-
office to be taken from them?  She came straight to the point.

"What have I done wrong, Monsieur?  I've never kept the mail-stage
waiting; I've never left the mailbag unlocked; I've never been late in
opening the wicket; I've never been careless, and no one's ever
complained of a lost letter."

The Seigneur saw her agitation, and was sorry for her.  He came to the
point as she had done:

"We will have you made postmistress--you alone, Rosalie Evanturel.  I've
made up my mind to that.  But you'll promise not to get married--eh?
Anyhow, there's no one in the parish for you to marry.  You're too well-
born and you've been too well educated for a habitant's wife--and the
Cure or I can't marry you."

He was not taken back to see her flush deeply, and it pleased him to see
this much life rising to his own touch, this much revelation to give his
mind a new interest.  He had come to that age when the mind is surprised
to find that the things that once charmed charm less, and the things once
hated are less acutely repulsive.  He saw her embarrassment.  He did not
know that this was the first time that she had ever thought of marriage
since it ceased to be a dream of girlhood, and, by reason of thinking
much on a man, had become a possibility, which, however, she had never
confessed to herself.  Here she was faced by it now in the broad open
day: a plain, hard statement, unrelieved by aught save the humour of the
shrewd eyes bent upon her.

She did not answer him at once.  "Do you promise not to marry so useless
a thing as man, and to remain true to the government?" he continued.

"If I wished to marry a man, I should not let the government stand in my
way," she said, in brave confusion.

"But do you wish to marry any man?" he asked abruptly, even petulantly.

"I have not asked myself that question, Monsieur, and--should you ask it,
unless--" she said, and paused with as pretty and whimsical a glance of
merriment as could well be.

He burst out laughing at the swift turn she had given her reply, and at
the double suggestion.  Then he suddenly changed.  A curious expression
filled his eyes.  A smile, almost beautiful, came to his lips.

"'Pon my honour," he said, in a low tone, "you have me caught!  And I beg
to say--I beg to say," he added, with a flush mounting in his own face, a
sudden inspiration in his look, "that if you do not think me too old and
crabbed and ugly, and can endure me, I shall be profoundly happy if you
will marry me, Rosalie."

He stood upright, holding himself very hard, for this idea had shot into
his mind all in an instant, though, unknown to himself, it had been
growing for years, cherished by many a kind act to her father and by a
simple gratitude on her part.  He had spoken without feeling the
absurdity of the proposal.  He had never married, and he was unprepared
to make any statement on such a theme; but now, having made it somehow,
he would stand by it, in spite of any and all criticism.  He had known
Rosalie since her birth, her education was as good as a convent could
secure, she was the granddaughter of a notable seigneur, and here she
was, as fine a type of health, beauty and character as man could wish--
and he was only fifty!  Life was getting lonelier for him every day,
and, after all, why should he leave distant relations and the Church his
worldly goods?  All this flashed through his mind as he waited for her
answer.  Now it seemed to him that he had meant to say this thing for
many years.  He had seen an awakening in her--he had suddenly been
awakened himself.

"Monsieur, Monsieur," she said in a bewildered way, "do not amuse
yourself at my expense."

"Would it be that, then?" he said, with a smile, behind which there was
determination and self-will.  "I want you to marry me; I do with all my
heart.  You shall have those ha'pence, and the kisses too, if so be you
will take them--or not, as you will, Rosalie."

"Monsieur," she gasped, for something caught her in the throat, and the
tears started to her eyes, "ask me to forget that you have ever said
those words.  Oh, Monsieur, it is not possible, it never could be
possible!  I am only the postmaster's daughter."

"You are my wife, if you will but say the word," he answered, "and I as
proud a husband as the land holds!"

"You were always kind to me, Monsieur," she rejoined, her lips trembling;
"won't you be so still?"

"I am too old?" he asked.

"Oh no, it is not that," she replied.

"You have as good manners as my mother had.  You need not fear comparison
with any lady in the land.  Have I not known you all your life?  I know
the way you have come, and your birth is as good as mine."

"Ah, it is not that, Monsieur!"

"I give you my word that I do not come to you because no one else would
have me," he said with a curious simplicity.  "I never asked a woman to
marry me--never!  You are the first.  There was talk once--but it was all
false.  I never meant to ask any one to marry me.  But I have the wish
now which I never had in my youth.  I thought best of myself always; now,
I think--I think better of you than--"

"Oh, Monsieur, I beg of you, no more!  I cannot; oh, I cannot--"

"You--but no; I will not ask you, Mademoiselle.  If you have some one
else in your heart, or want some one else there, that is your affair, not
mine--undoubtedly.  I would have tried to make you happy; you would have
had peace and comfort all your life; you could have trusted me--but there
it is.  .  .  ."  He felt all at once that he was unfair to her, that he
had thrust upon her too hard a problem in too troubled an hour.

"I could trust you with my life, Monsieur Rossignol," she replied.  "And
I love you in a way that a man may be loved to no one's harm or sorrow:
it is true that!" She raised her eyes to his simply, trustingly.

He looked at her steadily for a moment.  "If you change your mind--"

She shook her head sadly.

"Good, then," he went on, for he thought it wise not to press her now,
though he had no intention of taking her no as final.  "I'll keep an eye
on you.  You'll need me some day soon; I can do things that the Cure
can't, perhaps."  His manner changed still more.  "Now to business," he
continued.  "Your father has been talking about letters received and sent
from the post-office.  That is punishable.  I am responsible for you
both, and if it is reported, if the woman were to report it--you know
the letter I mean--there would be trouble.  You do not talk.  Now I am
going to ask the government to make you sole postmistress, with full
responsibility.  Then you must govern your father--he hasn't as much
sense as you."

"Monsieur, we owe you so much!  I am deeply grateful, and, whatever you
do for us, you may rely on me to do my duty."

They could scarcely hear each other speak now, for the soldiers were
coming nearer, and the fife-and-drum bands were screeching, 'Louis the
King was a Soldier'.

"Then you will keep the government as your husband?" he asked, with
forced humour, as he saw the Cure and the Notary approaching.

"It is less trouble, Seigneur," she answered, with a smile of relief.

M. Rossignol turned to the Cure and the Notary.  "I have just offered
Mademoiselle a husband she might rule in place of a government that rules
her, and she has refused," he said in the Cure's ear, with a dry laugh.

"She's a sensible girl, is Rosalie," said the Cure, not apprehending.

The soldiers were now opposite the church, and riding at their head was
the battalion Colonel, also member of the Legislature.

They all moved down, and Rosalie disappeared in the crowd.  As the
Seigneur and the Cure greeted the Colonel, the latter said:

"At luncheon I'll tell you one of the bravest things ever seen.  Happened
half-hour ago at the Red Ravine.  Man who did it wore an eye-glass--said
he was a tailor."




CHAPTER XXV

THE COLONEL TELLS HIS STORY

The Colonel had lunched very well indeed.  He had done justice to every
dish set before him; he had made a little speech, congratulating himself
on having such a well-trained body of men to command, and felicitating
Chaudiere from many points of view.  He was in great good-humour with
himself, and when the Notary asked him--it was at the Manor, with the
soldiers resting on the grass without--about the tale of bravery he had
promised them, he brought his fist down on the table with great intensity
but little noise, and said:

"Chaudiere may well be proud of it.  I shall refer to it in the
Legislature on the question of roads and bridges--there ought to be a
stone fence on that dangerous road by the Red Ravine--Have I your
attention?"

He stood up, for he was an excitable and voluble Colonel, and he loved
oration as a cat does milk.  With a knife he drew a picture of the locale
on the table cloth.  "Here I was riding on my sorrel, all my noble
fellows behind, the fife and drums going as at Louisburg--that day!
Martial ardour united to manliness and local pride--follow me?  Here we
were, Red Ravine left, stump fences and waving fields of grain right.
From military point of view, bad position--ravine, stump fence, brave
soldiers in the middle, food for powder--catch it?--see?"

He emptied his glass, drew a long breath, and again began, the carving-
knife cutting a rhetorical path before him.  "I was engaged upon the
military problem--demonstration in force, no scouts ahead, no rearguard,
ravine on the right, stump fence on the left, red coats, fife-and-drum
band, concealed enemy--follow me?  Observant mind always sees problems
everywhere--unresting military genius accustoms intelligence to all
possible contingencies--'stand what I mean?"

The Seigneur took a pinch of snuff, and the Cure, whose mind was
benevolent, listened with the gravest interest.

"At the juncture when, in my mind's eye, I saw my gallant fellows
enfiladed with a terrible fire, caught in a trap, and I, despairing,
spurring on to die at their headhave I your attention?--just at that
moment there appeared between the ravine and the road ahead a man.  He
wore an eye-glass; he seemed an unconcerned spectator of our movements
--so does the untrained, unthinking eye look out upon destiny!  Not far
away was a wagon, in it a man.  Wagon bisecting our course from a cross-
road--"

He drew a line on the table-cloth with the carvingknife, and the Notary
said: "Yes, yes, the concession road."

"So, Messieurs.  There were we, a battalion and a fife-and-drum band;
there was the man with the eyeglass, the indifferent spectator, yet the
engine of fate; there was the wagon, a mottled horse, and a man driving--
catch it?  The mottled horse took fright at our band, which at that
instant strikes up 'The Chevalier Drew his Sabre'.  He shies from the
road with a leap, the man falls backwards into the wagon, and the reins
drop.  The horse dashes from the road into the open, and rushes on to the
ravine.  What good now to stop the fifes and drums-follow me?  What can
we, an armed force, bandoleered, knapsacked, sworded, rifled, impetuous,
brave, what can we do before this tragedy?  The man in the wagon
senseless, the flying horse, the ravine, death!  How futile the power of
man--'stand what I mean?"

"Why didn't your battalion shoot the horse?" said the Seigneur drily,
taking a pinch of snuff.  "Monsieur," said the Colonel, "see the irony,
the implacable irony of fate--we had only blank cartridge!  But see you,
here was this one despised man with an eye-glass, a tailor--takes nine
tailors to make a man!--between the ravine and the galloping tragedy.
His spirit arrayed itself like an army with banners, prepared to wrestle
with death as Jacob wrestled with his shadow all the night 'sieur le
Cure!"

The Cure bowed; the Notary shook back his oiled locks in excitement.

"Awoke a whole man--nine-ninths, as in Adam--in the obscure soul of the
tailor, and, rushing forward, he seized the mottled horse by the bridle
as he galloped upon the chasm:  The horse dragged him on--dragged him on
--on--on.  We, an army, so to speak, stood and watched the Tailor and the
Tragedy!  All seemed lost, but, by the decree of fate--"

"The will of God," said the Cure softly.

"By the great decree, the man was able to stop the horse, not a half-
dozen feet from the ravine.  The horse and the insensible driver were
spared death--death.  So, Messieurs, does bravery come from unexpected
places--see?"

The Seigneur, the Cure, and even the Notary clapped their hands, and
murmured praises of the tailor-man.  But the Colonel did not yet take his
seat.

"But now, mark the sequel," he said.  "As I galloped over, I saw the
tailor look into the wagon, and turn away quickly.  He waited by the
horse till I came near, and then walked off without a word.  I rode up,
and tapped him with my sword upon the shoulder.  'A noble deed, my good
man,' said I.  'I approve of your conduct, and I will remember it in the
Legislature when I address the committee of the whole house on roads and
bridges.'  What do you think was his reply to my affable words?  When I
tapped him approvingly on the shoulder a second time, he screwed his eye-
glass in his eye, and, with no emotion, though my own eyes were full of
tears, he said, in a tone of affront, 'Look after the man there,
constable,' and pointed to the wagon.  Constable--mon Dieu!  Gross
manners even for a tailor!"

"I had not thought his manners bad," said the Cure, as the Colonel sat
down, gulped a glass of brandy-andwater, and mopped his forehead.

"A most remarkable tailor," said the Seigneur, peering into his snuff-
box.

"And the driver of the mottled horse?" asked the Notary.

"Knocked senseless.  One of my captains soon restored him.  He followed
us into the village.  He is a quack-doctor.  I suppose he is now selling
tinctures, pulling teeth, and driving away rheumatics.  He gave me his
card.  I told him he should leave one on the tailor."

With a flourish he threw a professional card upon the table, before the
Cure.

The Cure picked it up and read:

                         JOHN BROWN, B.A., M.D.,

          Healer of Ailments that Defy the Ordinary Skill of Ordinary
          Medical Men.  Rheumatism, Sciatica, Headache, Toothache,
          Asthma, Ague, Pleurisy, Gout, and all Chronic Diseases Yield
          Instantly to the Power of his Medicines.

     Dr. Brown will publicly treat the most stubborn cases, laying
     himself open to the derision of mankind if he does not instantly
     give relief and benefit.  His whole career has been a blessing to
     his fellows, and his journey now through this country, fresh from
     his studies in the Orient, is to introduce his remedies to a
     suffering world, for the conquest of malady, not for personal
     profit.

                         JOHN BROWN, B.A., M.D.,

          Specialist in Chronic Diseases and General Practitioner.




CHAPTER XXVI

A SONG, A BOTTLE, AND A GHOST

All day John Brown, ex-clergyman and quack-doctor, harangued the people
of Chaudiere from his gaily-painted wagon.  He had the perfect gift of
the charlatan, and he had discovered his metier.  Inclined to the
picturesque by nature, melodramatic and empirical, his earlier career had
been the due fruit of habit and education.  As a dabbler in mines he had
been out of his element.  He lacked the necessary reticence, and arsenic
had not availed him, though it had tempted Billy Wantage to forgery; and
because Billy hid himself behind the dismal opportunity of silence, had
ruined the name of a dead man called Charley Steele.  Since Charley's
death John Brown had never seen Billy: he had left the town one woful
day an hour after Billy had told him of the discovery Charley had made.
From a far corner of the country he had read the story of Charley's
death; of the futile trial of the river-drivers afterwards, ending in
acquittal, and the subsequent discovery of the theft of the widows' and
orphans' trust-moneys.

On this St. Jean Baptiste's day he was thinking of anything and
everything else but Charley Steele.  Nothing could have been a better
advertisement for him than the perilous incident at the Red Ravine.
Falling backwards when the horse suddenly bolted, his head had struck the
medicine-chest, and he had lain insensible till brought back to
consciousness by the good offices of the voluble Colonel.  He had not,
therefore, seen Charley.  It was like him that his sense of gratitude
to the unknown tailor should be presently lost in exploiting the interest
he created in the parish.  His piebald horse, his white "plug" hat, his
gaily painted wagon, his flamboyant manner, and, above all, the
marvellous tale of his escape from death, were more exciting to the
people of Chaudiere than the militia, the dancing-bears, the shooting-
galleries, or the boat-races.  He could sing extremely well--had he not
trained his own choir when he was a parson? had not Billy approved his
comic songs?--and these comic songs, now sandwiched between his cures
and his sales, created much laughter.  He cured headaches, toothaches,
rheumatism, and all sorts of local ailments "with despatch."
He miraculously juggled away pains by what he called his Pain Paint,
and he stopped a cough by a laugh and a dose of his Golden Pectoral.
In the exuberance of trade, which steadily increased till sundown,
he gave no thought to the tailor, to whom, however, he had sent by a
messenger a two-dollar bill and two bottles of Pain Paint, with the
lordly announcement that he would call in the evening and "present his
compliments and his thanks."  The messenger left the Pain Paint on the
door-step of the tailor-shop, and the two dollars he promptly spent at
the Trois Couronnes.

Rosalie Evanturel rescued the bottles from the doorstep and awaited
Charley's return to his shop, that she might take them over to him, and
so have an excuse to speak with him; for to-day her heart and mind were
full of him.  He had done a brave thing for the medicine-man, and had
then fled from public gaze as a brave man should.  There was no one to
compare with him.  Not even the Cure was his superior in ability, and
certainly he was a greater man--though seemingly only a tailor--than M.
Rossignol.  M. Rossignol--she flushed.  Who could have believed that the
Seigneur would say those words to her this morning--to her, Rosalie
Evanturel, who hadn't five hundred dollars to her name?  That she should
be asked to be Madame Rossignol!  Confusion mingled with her simple
pride, and she ran out into the street, to where her father sat listening
to the medicine-man singing, in doubtful French:

                   "I am a waterman bold,
                    Oh, I'm a waterman bold:
                    But for my lass I have great fear,
                    Yes, in the isles I have great fear,
                    For she is young, and I am old,
                    And she is bien gentille!"

It was night now.  The militia had departed, their Colonel roaring
commands at them out of a little red drill-book; the older people had
gone to their homes, but festive youth hovered round the booths and
sideshows, the majority enjoying themselves at some expense in the
medicine-man's encampment.

As Rosalie ran towards the crowd she turned a wistful glance to the
tailor-shop.  Not a sign of life there!  She imagined M'sieu' to be at
Vadrome Mountain, until, glancing round the crowd at the quack-doctor's
wagon, she saw Jo Portugais gloomily watching the travelling tinker of
human bodies.  Evidently M'sieu' was not at Vadrome Mountain.

He was not far from her.  At the side of the road, under a huge maple-
tree with wide-spreading branches, Charley stood and watched John Brown
performing behind the flaring oil-lights stuck on poles round his wagon,
his hat now on, now off; now singing a comic song in English---'I found
Y' in de Honeysuckle Paitch;' now a French chanson--'En Revenant de St.
Alban;' now treating a stiff neck or a bent back, or giving momentary
help to the palsy of an old man, or again making a speech.

Charley was in touch again with the old life, but in a kind of fantasy
only--a staring, high-coloured dream.  This man--John Brown--had gone
down before his old ironical questioning, had been, indirectly, the means
of disgracing his name.  A step forward to that wagon, a word uttered,
a look, and he would have to face again the life he had put by for ever,
would have to meet a hard problem and settle it--to what misery and
tragedy, who might say?  Under this tree he was M. Mallard, the infidel
tailor, whose life was slowly entering into the life of this place called
Chaudiere, slowly being acted upon by habit, which, automatically
repeated, at length becomes character.  Out in that red light, before
that garish wagon, he would be Charley Steele, barrister, 'flaneur', and
fop, who, according to the world, had misused a wife, misled her brother,
robbed widows and orphans, squandered a fortune, become drunkard and
wastrel, and at last had lost his life in a disorderly tavern at the Cote
Dorion.  This man before him had contributed to his disgrace; but once he
had contributed to John Brown's disgrace; and to-day he had saved John
Brown's life.  They were even.

All the night before, all this morning, he had fought a fierce battle
with his past--with a raging thirst.  The old appetite had swept over him
fiercely.  All day he had moved in a fevered conflict, which had lifted
him away from the small movements of everyday life into a region where
only were himself and one strong foe, who tirelessly strove with him.
In his old life he had never had a struggle of any sort.  His emotions
had been cloaked, his soul masked, there had been a film before his eyes,
he had worn an armour of selfishness on a life which had no deep
problems, because it had no deep feelings--a life never rising to the
intellectual prowess for which it was fitted, save when under the
stimulus of liquor.

From the moment he had waked from a long seven months' sleep in the hut
on Vadrome Mountain, new deep feelings had come to him as he faced
problems of life.  Fighting had begun from that hour--a fighting which
was putting his nature through bitter mortal exercises, yet, too, giving
him a sense of being he had never known.  He had now the sweetness of
earning daily bread by the work of his hands; of giving to the poor, the
needy, and the afflicted; of knowing for the first time in his life that
he was not alone in the world.  Out of the grey dawn of life a woman's
voice had called to him; the look of her face had said to him: "Viens
ici!  Viens ici!"--"Come to me!  Come to me!"

But with that call there was the answer of his soul, the desolating cry
of the dispossessed Lear-" Never--never--never--never--never!"

He had not questioned himself concerning Rosalie--had dared not to do so.
But now, as he stood under the great tree, within hand-touch of the old
life, in imminent danger of being thrust back into it, the question of
Rosalie came upon him with all the force of months of feeling behind it.
Thus did he argue with himself:

"Do I love her?  And if I love her, what is to be done?  Marry her, with
a wife living?  Marry her while charged with a wretched crime?  Would
that be love?  But suppose I never were discovered, and we might live
here for ever, I as 'Monsieur Mallard,' in peace and quiet all the days
of our life?  Would that be love?  .  .  .  Could there be love with a
vital secret, like, a cloud between, out of which, at any hour, might
spring discovery?  Could I build our life upon a silence which must be a
lie?  Would I not have to face the question, Does any one know cause or
just impediment why this woman should not be married to this man?  Tell
Rosalie all, and let the law separate myself and Kathleen?  That would
mean Billy's ruin and imprisonment, and Kathleen's shame, and it might
not bring Rosalir.  She is a Catholic, and her Church would not listen to
it.  Would I have the right to bring trouble into her life?  To wrong one
woman should seem enough for one lifetime!"

At that instant Rosalie, who had been on the outskirts of the crowd,
moved into his line of vision.  The glare from the lights fell on her
face as she stood by her father's chair, looking curiously at the quack-
doctor who, having sold many bottles of his medicines, noy picked up a
guitar and began singing an old dialect chanson of Saintonge:

                   "Voici, the day has come
                    When Rosette leaves her home!
                    With fear she walks in the sun,
                    For Raoul is ninety year,
                    And she not twenty-one.
                    La petit' Rosette,
                    She is not twenty-one.

                   "He takes her by the hand,
                    And to the church they go;
                    By parents 'twas well meant,
                    But is Rosette content?
                    'Tis gold and ninety year
                    She walks in the sun with fear,
                    La petit' Rosette,
                    Not twenty-one as yet!"

Charley's eyes, which had watched her these months past, noted the
deepening colour of the face, the glow in the eyes, the glances of keen
but agitated interest towards the singer.  He could not translate her
looks; and she, on her part, had she been compelled to do so, could only
have set down a confusion of sensations.

In Rosette she saw herself, Rosalie Evanturel; in the man "de quatre-
vingt-dix ans," who was to marry this Rosette of Saintonge, she saw M.
Rossignol.  Disconcerting pictures of a possible life with the Seigneur
flitted before her mind.  She beheld herself, young, fresh-cheeked, with
life beating high and all the impulses of youth panting to use, sitting
at the head of the seigneury table.  She saw herself in the great pew at
Mass, stiff with dignity, old in the way of manorial pride--all laughter
dead in her, all spring-time joy overshadowed by the grave decorum of the
Manor, all the imagination of her dreaming spirit chilled by the presence
of age, however kindly and quaint and cheerful.

She shuddered, and dropped her eyes upon the ground, as, to the laughter
and giggling of old and young gathered round the wagon, the medicine-man
sang:

                   "He takes her by the hand,
                    And to her chamber fair--"

Then, suddenly turning, she vanished into the night, followed by the
feeble inquiry of her father's eyes, the anxious look in Charley's.

Charley could not read her tale.  He had, however, a hot impulse to
follow and ask her if she would vanish from the scene if the medicine-man
should sing of Rosette and a man of thirty, not ninety, years.  The fight
he had had all day with his craving for drink had made him feverish, and
all his emotions--unregulated, under the command of his will only--were
in high temperature.  A reckless feeling seized him.  He would go to
Rosalie, look into her eyes, and tell her that he loved her, no matter
what the penalty of fate.  He had never loved a human being, and the
sudden impulse to cry out in the new language was driving him to follow
the girl whose spirit for ever called to him.

He made a step forward to follow her, but stopped short, recalled to
caution and his danger by the voice of the medicine-man:

"I had a friend once--good fellow, bad fellow, cleverest chap I ever
knew.  Tremendous fop--ladies loved him--cheeks like roses--tongue like
sulphuric acid.  Beautiful to look at.  Clothes like a fashion-plate--got
any fashion-plates in Chaudiere? 'who's your tailor?'" he added, in the
slang of the hour, with a loud laugh, then stopped suddenly and took off
his hat.  "I forgot," he added, with upturned eyes and a dramatic
seriousness, "your tailor saved my life to-day-henceforth I am the friend
of all tailors.  Well, to continue.  My friend that was--I call him my
friend, though he ruined me and ruined others,--didn't mean to, but he
did just the same,--he came to a bad end.  But he was a great man while
he lived.  And what I'm coming to is this, the song he used to sing when,
in youthful exuberance, we went on the war-path like our young friend
over there"--he pointed to a young habitant farmer, who was trying hard
to preserve equilibrium--"Brown's Golden Pectoral will cure that cough,
my friend!" he added, as the young man, gloomily ashamed of the laughter
of the crowd, hiccoughed and turned away to the tree under which Charley
Steele stood.  "Well," he went on, "I was going to say that my friend's
name was Charley, and the song he used to sing when the roosters waked
the morn was called 'Champagne Charlie.'  He was called 'Champagne
Charlie'--till he came to a bad end."

He twanged his guitar, cleared his throat, winked at Maximilian Cour the
baker, and began:

         "The way I gained my title's by a hobby which I've got
          Of never letting others pay, however long the shot;
          Whoever drinks at my expense is treated all the same;
          Whoever calls himself my friend, I make him drink champagne.
          Some epicures like Burgundy, Hock, Claret, and Moselle,
          But Moet's vintage only satisfies this champagne swell.
          What matter if I go to bed and head is muddled thick,
          A bottle in the morning sets me right then very quick.
          Champagne Charlie is my name;
          Champagne Charlie is my name.
          Who's the man with the heart so young,
          Who's the man with the ginger tongue?
          Champagne Charlie is his name!"

Under the tree, Charley Steele listened to this jaunty epitaph on his old
self.  At the first words of the coarse song there rushed on him the
dreaded thirst.  He felt his veins beating with desire, with anger,
disgust, and shame; for there was John Brown, to the applause of the
crowd, imitating his old manner, his voice, his very look.  He started
forward, but the drunken young habitant lurched sideways under the tree
and collapsed upon the ground, a bottle of whiskey falling out of his
pocket and rolling almost to his own feet.

                    "Champagne Charlie is my name,"

sang the medicine-man.  All Charley's old life surged up in him as dyked
water suddenly bursts bounds and spreads destruction.  He had an
uncontrollable impulse.  As a starving animal snatches at the first food
offered it, he stooped, with a rattle in his throat, seized the bottle,
uncorked it, put it to his lips, and drank--drank--drank.

Then he turned and plunged away into the trees.  The sound of the song
followed him.  It came to him, the last refrain, sung loudly to the
laughter of the crowd, in imitation of his own voice as it used to be
--it had been a different voice during this past year.  He turned with
headlong intention, and, as the last notes of the song and the applause
that followed it, died away, threw back his head and sang out of the
darkness:

                    "Champagne Charlie is my name--"

With a shrill laugh, like the half-mad cry of an outcast soul, he flung
away farther into the trees.

There was a sudden silence.  The crowd turned with half-apprehensive
laughter to the trees.  Upon John Brown the effect was startling.  His
face blanched, his eyes grew large with terror, his mouth opened in
helpless agitation.  Charley Steele was lying under the waters of the
great river, his bones rotting there for a year, yet here was his voice
coming out of the night, in response to his own grotesque imitation of
the dead man.  Seeing his agitation, women turned pale, men felt their
flesh creep, imagination gave a thrilling coldness to the air.  For a
moment the silence was unbroken.  Then John Brown stretched out his hand
and said, in a hoarse whisper:

"It was his voice--Charley's voice, and he's been dead a year!"

Within half-an-hour, in utter collapse and fright, he was being driven to
the next parish by two young habitants whom he paid to accompany him.




CHAPTER XXVII

OUT ON THE OLD TRAIL

There was one person in the crowd surrounding the medicine-man's wagon
who had none of that superstitious thrill which had scattered the
habitants into little awe-stricken groups, and then by twos and threes to
their homes; none of that fear which had reduced the quack-doctor to such
nervous collapse that he would not spend the night in the village.  Jo
Portugais had recognised the voice--that of Charley Steele the lawyer who
had saved him from hanging years ago.  It was little like the voice of
M'sieu'!  There was that in it which frightened him.  He waited until he
had seen the quackdoctor start for the next parish, then he went slowly
down the street.  There were people still about, so he walked on towards
the river.  When he returned, the street was empty.  Keeping in the
shadow of the trees, he went to Charley's house.  There was a light in a
window.  He went to the back door and tried it.  It was not locked, and,
without knocking, he stepped inside the kitchen.  Here was no light, and
he passed into the hallway and on to a little room opening from the
tailorshop.  He knocked; then, not waiting for response, opened the door
and entered.

Charley was standing before a mirror, holding a pair of scissors.  He
turned abruptly, and said forbiddingly: "I am at my toilet!"

Then, turning again to the mirror, with a shrug of the shoulders, he
raised the shears to his beard.  Before he could use them, Jo's hand was
on his arm.

"Stop that, M'sieu'!" he said huskily.

Charley had drunk nearly a whole bottle of cheap whiskey within an hour.
He was intoxicated, but, as had ever been the case with him, his brain
was working clearly, his hand was steady; he was in that wide dream of
clear-seeing and clear-knowing which, in old days, had given him glimpses
of the real life from which, in the egotism of the non-intime, he had
been shut out.  Looking at Jo now, he was possessed by a composed
intoxication like that in which he had moved during that last night at
the Cote Dorion.

But now, with the baleful crust of egotism gone, with every nerve of
life exposed, with conscience struggling to its feet from the torpor of
thirty-odd vacant years, he was as two men in one, with different lives
and different souls, yet as inseparable in their misery as those poor
victims of Gallic tyranny, chained back to back and thrown into the
Seine.

Jo's words, insistent and eager, suddenly roused in him some old memory,
which stayed his hand.

"Why should I stop?" he asked quietly, and smiling that smile which had
infuriated the river-drivers at the Cote Dorion.

"Are you going back, M'sieu?"

"Back where?"  Charley's eyes were fixed on Jo with a penetrating
intensity, heightened to a strange abstraction, as though he saw not Jo
alone, but something great distances beyond.

Jo did not answer this question directly.  "Some one came to-day--he is
gone; some one may come to-morrow--and stay," he said meaningly.

Charley went over to the fire and sat down on a bench, opening and
shutting the scissors mechanically.  Jo was in the light, and Charley's
eyes again studied him hard.

His memory was industriously feeling its way into the baffling distance.

"What if some one did come-and stay?" he urged quietly.

"You might be recognised without the beard."

"What difference would it make?"  Charley's memory was creeping close to
the hidden door.  It was feeling-feeling for the latch.

"You know best, M'sieu'."

"But what do you know?"  Charley's face now had a strained look, and he
touched his lips with his tongue.  "What John Brown knows, M'sieu'."

There flashed across Charley's mind the fatal newspaper he had read on
the day he awakened to memory again in the but on Vadrome Mountain.  He
remembered that he had put it in the fire.  But Jo might have read it
before it was spread upon the bench-put it there of purpose for him to
read.  Yet what reason could Jo have for being silent, for hiding his
secret?

There was silence for a space, in which Charley's eyes were like unmoving
sparks of steel.  He did not see Jo's face--it was in a mist--he was
searching, searching, searching.  All at once he felt the latch of the
hidden door under his finger; he saw a court-room, a judge and jury, and
hundreds of excited faces, himself standing in the midst.  He saw twelve
men file slowly into the room and take their seats-all save one, who
stood still in his place and said: "Not guilty, your Honour!"  He saw the
prisoner leave the box and step down a free man.  He saw himself coming
out into the staring summer day.  He watched the prisoner come to him and
touch his arm, and say: "Thank you, M'sieu'.  You have saved my life."
He saw himself turn to this man:

He roused from his trance, he staggered to his feet, the shears rattled
to the floor.  Lurching forward, he caught Jo Portugais by the throat,
and said, as he had said outside the court-room years ago:

"Get out of my sight.  You're as guilty as hell!"

His grip tightened--tightened on Jo's throat.  Jo did not move, though
his face grew black.  Then, suddenly, the hands relaxed, a bluish
paleness swept over the face, and Charley fell sidewise to the floor
before Jo could catch him.

All night, alone, the murderer struggled with death over the body of the
lawyer who had saved his life.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE SEIGNEUR GIVES A WARNING

Rosalie had watched a shut door for five days--a door from which, for
months past, had come all the light and glow of her life.  It framed a
figure which had come to represent to her all that meant hope and soul
and conscience-and love.  The morning after St. Jean Baptiste's day she
had awaited the opening door, but it had remained closed.  Ensued
watchful hours, and then from Jo Portugais she had learned that M'sieu'
had been ill and near to death.  She had been told the weird story of the
medicine-man and the ghostly voice, and, without reason, she took the
incident as a warning, and associated it with the man across the way.
She was come of a superstitious race, and she herself had heard and seen
things of which she never had been able to speak--the footsteps in the
church the night she had screwed the little cross to the door again; the
tiny round white light by the door of the church; the hood which had
vanished into the unknown.  One mystery fed another.  It seemed to her as
if some dreadful event were forward; and all day she kept her eyes fixed
on the tailor's door.

Dead--if M'sieu' should die!  If M'sieu' should die--it needed all her
will to prevent herself from going over and taking things in her own
hands, being his nurse, his handmaid, his slave.  Duty--to the
government, to her father?  Her heart cried out that her duty lay where
all her life was eddying to one centre.  What would the world say?  She
was not concerned for that, save for him.  What, then, would M'sieu' say?
That gave her pause.  The Seigneur's words the day before had driven her
back upon a tide of emotions which carried her far out upon that sea
where reason and life's conventions are derelicts, where Love sails with
reckless courage down the shoreless main.

"If I could only be near him!" she kept saying to herself.  "It is my
right.  I would give my life, my soul for his.  I was with him before
when his life was in danger.  It was my hand that saved him.  It was my
love that tended him.  It was my soul that kept his secret.  It was my
faith that spoke for him.  It was my heart that ached for him.  It is my
heart that aches for him now as none other in all the world can.  No one
on earth could care as I care.  Who could there be?"  Something whispered
in her ear, "Kathleen!"  The name haunted her, as the little cross had
done.  Misery and anger possessed her, and she fought on with herself
through dark hours.

Thus five days had gone, until at last a wagon was brought to the door of
the tailor-shop, and M'sieu' came out, leaning on the arm of Jo
Portugais.  There were several people in the street at the time, and they
kept whispering that M'sieu' had been at death's door.  He was pale and
haggard, with dark hollows under the eyes.  Just as he got into the wagon
the Cure came up.  They shook hands.  The Cure looked him earnestly in
the face, his lips moved, but no one could have told what he said.  As
the wagon started, Charley looked across to the post-office.  Rosalie was
standing a little back from the door, but she stepped forward now.  Their
eyes met.  Her heart beat faster, for there was a look in his eyes she
had never seen before--a look of human helplessness, of deep anxiety.  It
was meant for her--for herself alone.  She could not trust herself to go
and speak to him.  She felt that she must burst into tears.  So, with a
look of pity and pain, she watched the wagon go down the street.

Rat-tat-tat-tat-tat!--the Seigneur's gold-headed cane rattled on the
front door of the tailor-shop.  It was plain to be seen his business was
urgent.

Madame Dauphin came hurrying from the postoffice, followed by Maximilian
Cour and Filion Lacasse.  "Ah, M'sieu', the tailor will not answer.
There's no use knocking--not a bit, M'sieu' Rossignol," said Madame.

The Seigneur turned querulously upon the Notary's wife, yet with a glint
of hard humour in his eye.  He had no love for Madame Dauphin.  He
thought she took unfair advantages of M. Dauphin, whom also he did not
love, but whose temperament did him credit.

"How should Madame know whether or no the gentleman will answer?  Does
Madame share the gentleman's confidence, perhaps?" he remarked.

Madame did not reply at once.  She turned on the saddler and the baker.
"I hope you'll learn a lesson," she cried triumphantly.  "I've always
said the tailor was quite the gentleman; and now you see how your betters
call him.  No, M'sieu', the gentleman will not answer," she added to the
Seigneur.

"He is in bed yet, Madame?"

"His bed is empty there, M'sieu'," she said, impressively, and pointing.

"I suppose I should trust you in this matter; I suppose you should know.
But, Dauphin--what does Dauphin say?"

The saddler laughed outright.  Maximilian Cour suddenly blushed in
sympathy with Madame Dauphin, who now saw the drift of the Seigneur's
remarks, and was sensibly agitated, as the Seigneur had meant her to be.
Had she not turned Dauphin's human sympathies into a crime?  Had not the
Notary supported the Seigneur in his friendly offices to Paulette Dubois;
and had not Madame troubled her husband's life because of it?  Madame
bridled up now--with discretion, for it was not her cue to offend the
Seigneur.

"All the village knows his bed's empty there, M'sieu'," she said, with
tightening lips.

"I am subtracted from the total, then?" he asked drily.

"You have been away for the last five days--"

"Come, now, how did you know that?"

"Everybody knows it.  You went away with the Colonel and the soldiers on
St.  Jean Baptiste's day.  Since then M'sieu' the tailor has been ill.  I
should think Mrs. Flynn would have told you that, M'sieu'."

"H'm!  Would you?  Well, Mrs. Flynn has been away too--and you didn't
know that!  What is the matter with Monsieur Mallard?"

"Some kind of fever.  On St. Jean Baptiste's day he was taken ill, and
that animal Portugais took care of him all night--I wonder how M'sieu'
can have the creature about!  That St. Jean Baptiste's night was an awful
night.  Have you heard of what happened, M'sieu'?  Ghost or no ghost--"

"Come, come, I want to know about the tailor, not of ghosts," impatiently
interrupted the Seigneur.  "Tiens!  M'sieu', the tailor was ill for three
days here, and he would let no one except the Cure and Jo Portugais near
him.  I went myself to clean up and make some broth, but that toad of a
Portugais shut the door in my face.  The Cure told us to go home and
leave M'sieu' with Portugais.  He must be very sick to have that black
sheep about him--and no doctor either."

The saddler spoke up now.  "I took him a bottle of good brandy and some
buttermilk-pop and seed cake--I would give him a saddle if he had a
horse--he got my thousand dollars for me!  Well, he took them, but what
do you think?  He sent them right off to the shantyman, Gugon, who has a
broken leg.  Infidel or no, I'm on his side for sure.  And God blesses a
cheerful giver, I'm told."

It was the baker's chance, and he took it.  "I played 'The Heart Bowed
Down'-it is English-under his window, two nights ago, and he sent word
for me to come and play it again in the kitchen.  Ah, that is a good
song, 'The Heart Bowed Down.'"

"You'd be a better baker if you fiddled less," said Madame Dauphin,
annoyed at being dropped out of the conversation.

"The soul must be fed, Madame," rejoined the baker, with asperity.

"Where is the tailor now?" said the Seigneur shortly.  "At Portugais's
on Vadrome Mountain.  They say he looked like a ghost when he went.
Rosalie Evanturel saw him, but she has no tongue in her head this
morning," added Madame.

The Seigneur moved away.  "Good-bye to you--I am obliged to you, Madame.
Good-bye, Lacasse.  Come and fiddle to me some night, Cour."

He bowed to the obsequious three, and then bent his steps towards the
post-office.  They seemed about to follow him, but he stopped them with a
look.  The men raised their bonnets-rouges, the woman bowed low, and the
Seigneur entered the post-office door.

From the shadows of the office Rosalie had watched the little group
before the door of the tailor-shop.  She saw the Seigneur coming across
the street.  Suddenly she flushed deeply, for there came to her mind the
song the quack-doctor sang:

                        "Voila, the day has come
                         When Rosette leaves her home!
                         With fear she walks in the sun,
                         For Raoul is ninety year,
                         And she not twenty-one."

As M. Rossignol's figure darkened the doorway, she pretended to be busy
behind the wicket, and not to see him.  He was not sure, but he thought
it quite possible that she had seen him coming, and he put her
embarrassment down to shyness.  Naturally the poor child was not given
the chance every day to receive an offer of marriage from a seigneur.
He had made up his mind that she would be sure to accept him if he asked
her a second time.

"Ah, Ma'm'selle Rosalie," he said gaily, "what have you to say that you
should not come before a magistrate at once?"

"Nothing, if Monsieur Rossignol is to be the magistrate," she replied,
with forced lightness.

"Good!"  He looked at her quizzically through his gold-handled glass.
"I can't frighten you, I see.  Well, you must wait a little; you shall be
sworn in postmistress in three days."  His voice lowered, became more
serious.  "Tell me," he said, "do you know what is the matter with the
gentleman across the way?"  Turning, he looked across to the tailor-shop,
as though he expected "the gentleman" to appear, and he did not see her
turn pale.  When his look fell on her again, she was self-controlled.

"I do not know, Monsieur."

"You have been opposite him here these months past--did you ever see
anything not--not as it should be?"

"With him, Monsieur?  Never."

"It is as though the infidel behaved like a good Catholic and a
Christian?"

"There are good Catholics in Chaudiere who do not behave like
Christians."

"What would you say, for instance, about his past?"

"What should I say about his past, Monsieur?  What should I know?"

"You should know more than any one else in Chaudiere.  The secrets of his
breast might well be bared to you."

She started and crimsoned.  Before her eyes there came a mist obscuring
the Seigneur, and for an instant shutting out the world.  The secrets of
his breast--what did he mean?  Did he know that on Monsieur's breast was
the red scar which .  .  .

M. Rossignol's voice seemed coming from an infinite distance, and as it
came, the mist slowly passed from her eyes.

"You will know, Mademoiselle Rosalie," he was saying, "that while I
suggested that the secrets of his breast might well be bared to you, I
meant that as an honest lady and faithful postmistress they were not.  It
was my awkward joke--a stupid gambolling by an old man who ought to know
better."

She did not answer, and he continued:

"You know that you are trusted.  Pray accept my apologies."

She was herself again.  "Monsieur," she said quietly; "I know nothing of
his past.  I want to know nothing.  It does not seem to me that it is my
business.  The world is free for a man to come and go in, if he keeps the
law and does no ill--is it not?  But, in any case, I know nothing.  Since
you have said so much, I shall say this, and betray no 'secrets of his
breast'--that he has received no letter through this office since the day
he first came from Vadrome Mountain."

The Seigneur smiled.  "A wonderful tailor!  How does he carry on business
without writing letters?"

"There was a large stock of everything left by Louis Trudel, and not long
ago a commercial traveller was here with everything."

"You think he has nothing to hide, then?"

"Have not we all something to hide--with or without shame?" she asked
simply.

"You have more sense than any woman in Chaudiere, Mademoiselle."

She shook her head, yet she raised her eyes gratefully to him.

"I put faith in what you say," he continued.  "Now listen.  My brother,
the Abbe, chaplain to the Archbishop, is coming here.  He has heard of
'the infidel' of our parish.  He is narrow and intolerant--the Abbe.  He
is going to stir up trouble against the tailor.  We are a peaceful people
here, and like to be left alone.  We are going on very well as we are.
So I wanted to talk to Monsieur to-day.  I must make up my own mind how
to act.  The tailor-shop is the property of the Church.  An infidel
occupies it, so it is said; the Abbe does not like that.  I believe there
are other curious suspicions about Monsieur: that he is a robber, or
incendiary, or something of the sort.  The Abbe may take a stand, and the
Cure's position will be difficult.  What is more, my brother has friends
here, fanatics like himself.  He has been writing to them.  They are men
capable of doing unpleasant things--the Abbe certainly is.  It is fair to
warn the tailor.  Shall I leave it to you?  Do not frighten him.  But
there is no doubt he should be warned--fair play, fair play!  I hear
nothing but good of him from those whose opinions I value.  But, you see,
every man's history in this parish and in every parish of the province is
known.  This man, for us, has no history.  The Cure even admits there are
some grounds for calling him an infidel, but, as you know, he would keep
the man here, not drive him out from among us.  I have not told the Cure
about the Abbe yet.  I wished first to talk with you.  The Abbe may come
at any moment.  I have been away, and only find his letters to-day."

"You wish me to tell Monsieur?" interrupted Rosalie, unable to hold
silence any longer.  More than once during the Seigneur's disclosure she
had felt that she must cry out and fiercely repel the base insinuations
against the man she loved.

"You would do it with discretion.  You are friendly with him, are you
not?--you talk with him now and then?"

She inclined her head.  "Very well, Monsieur.  I will go to Vadrome
Mountain to-morrow," she said quietly.  Anger, apprehension, indignation,
possessed her, but she held herself firmly.  The Seigneur was doing a
friendly thing; and, in any case, she could have no quarrel with him.
There was danger to the man she loved, however, and every faculty was
alive.

"That's right.  He shall have his chance to evade the Abbe if he wishes,"
answered M. Rossignol.

There was silence for a moment, in which she was scarcely conscious of
his presence; then he leaned over the counter towards her, and spoke in a
low voice.

"What I said the other day I meant.  I do not change my mind--I am too
old for that.  Yet I'm young enough to know that you may change yours."

"I cannot change, Monsieur," she said tremblingly.

"But you will change.  I knew your mother well, I know how anxious she
was for your future.  I told her once that I should keep an eye on you
always.  Her father was my father's good friend.  I knew you when you
were in the cradle--a little brown-haired babe.  I watched you till you
went to the convent.  I saw you come back to take up the duties which
your mother laid down, alas!--"

"Monsieur--!" she said choking, and with a troubled little gesture.

"You must let me speak, Rosalie.  We got your father this post-office.
It is a poor living, but it keeps a roof over your head.  You have never
failed us you have always fulfilled our hopes.  But the best years of
your life are going, and your education and your nature have not their
chance.  Oh, I've not watched you all these years for nothing.  I never
meant to ask you to marry me.  It came to me, though, all at once, and
I know that it has been in my mind all these years--far back in my mind.
I don't ask you for my own sake alone.  Your father may grow very ill--
who can tell what may happen!"

"I should be postmistress still," she said sadly.

"As a young girl you could not have the responsibility here alone.  And
you should not waste your life it is a fine, full spirit; let the lean,
the poor-spirited, go singly.  You should be mated.  You can't marry any
of the young farmers of Chaudiere.  'Tis impossible.  I can give you
enough for any woman's needs--the world may be yours to see and use to
your heart's content.  I can give, too"--he drew himself up proudly--"
the unused emotions of a lifetime."  This struck him as a very fine and
important thing to say.

"Ah, Monsieur, that is not enough," she responded.  "What more can you
want?"

She looked up with a tearful smile.  "I will tell you one day, Monsieur."

"What day?"

"I have not picked it out in the calendar."

"Fix the day, and I will wait till then.  I will not open my mouth again
till then."

"Michaelmas day, then, Monsieur," she answered mechanically and at
haphazard, but with an urged gaiety, for a great depression was on her.

"Good.  Till Michaelmas day, then!"  He pulled his long nose, laughing
silently.  .  .  .  "I leave the tailor in your hands.  Give every man
his chance, I say.  The Abbe is a hard man, but our hearts are soft--eh,
eh, very soft!"  He raised his hat and turned to the door.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Always hoping the best from the worst of us
Have not we all something to hide--with or without shame?
In all secrets there is a kind of guilt
Pathetically  in earnest
Things that once charmed charm less






THE RIGHT OF WAY

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 4.



XXIX.     THE WILD RIDE
XXX.      ROSALIE WARNS CHARLEY
XXXI.     CHARLEY STANDS AT BAY
XXXII.    JO PORTUGAIS TELLS A STORY
XXXIII.   THE EDGE OF LIFE
XXXIV.    IN AMBUSH
XXXV.     THE COMING OF MAXIMILIAN COUR AND ANOTHER
XXXVI.    BARRIERS SWEPT AWAY
XXXVII.   THE CHALLENGE OF PAULETTE DUBOIS
XXXVIII.  THE CURE AND THE SEIGNEUR VISIT THE TAILOR
XXXIX.    THE SCARLET WOMAN
XL.       AS IT WAS IN THE BEGINNING



CHAPTER XXIX

THE WILD RIDE

There had been a fierce thunder-storm in the valley of the Chaudiere.  It
had come suddenly from the east, had shrieked over the village, levelling
fences, carrying away small bridges, and ending in a pelting hail, which
whitened the ground with pebbles of ice.  It had swept up to Vadrome
Mountain, and had marched furiously through the forest, carrying down
hundreds of trees, drowning the roars of wild animals and the crying and
fluttering of birds.  One hour of ravage and rage, and then, spent and
bodiless, the storm crept down the other side of the mountain and into
the next parish, whither the affrighted quack-doctor had betaken himself.
After, a perfect calm, a shining sun, and a sweet smell over all the
land, which had thirstily drunk the battering showers.

In the house on Vadrome Mountain the tailor of Chaudiere had watched the
storm with sympathetic interest.  It was in accord with his own feelings.
He had had a hard fight for months past, and had gone down in the storm
of his emotions one night when a song called Champagne Charlie had had a
weird and thrilling antiphonal.  There had been a subsequent debacle for
himself, and then a revelation concerning Jo Portugais.  Ensued hours and
days, wherein he had fought a desperate fight with the present--with
himself and the reaction from his dangerous debauch.

The battle for his life had been fought for him by this gloomy woodsman
who henceforth represented his past, was bound to him by a measureless
gratitude, almost a sacrament--of the damned.  Of himself he had played
no conscious part in it till the worst was over.  On the one side was the
Cure, patient, gentle, friendly, never pushing forward the Faith which
the good man dreamed should give him refuge and peace; on the other side
was the murderer, who typified unrest, secretiveness, an awful isolation,
and a remorse which had never been put into words or acts of restitution.
For six days the tailor-shop and the life at Chaudiere had been things
almost apart from his consciousness.  Ever-recurring memories of Rosalie
Evanturel were driven from his mind with a painful persistence.  In the
shadows where his nature dwelt now he would not allow her good innocence
and truth to enter.  His self-reproach was the more poignant because it
was silent.

Watching the tempest-swept valley, the tortured forest, where wild life
was in panic, there came upon him the old impulse to put his thoughts
into words, "and so be rid of them," as he was wont to say in other days.
Taking from his pocket some slips of paper, he laid them on the table
before him.  Three or four times he leaned over the paper to write, but
the noise of the storm again and again drew his look to the window.  The
tempest ceased almost as suddenly as it had come, and, as the first
sunlight broke through the flying clouds, he mechanically lifted a sheet
of the paper and held it up to the light.  It brought to his eyes the
large water-mark, Kathleen!

A sombre look passed over his face, he shifted in his chair, then bent
over the paper and began to write.  Words flowed from his pen.  The lines
of his face relaxed, his eyes lightened; he was lost in a dream.  He
thought of the present, and he wrote:

                   "Wave walls to seaward,
                    Storm-clouds to leeward,
                    Beaten and blown by the winds of the West;
                    Sail we encumbered
                    Past isles unnumbered,
                    But never to greet the green island of Rest."

He thought of Father Loisel.  He had seen the good man's lips tremble at
some materialistic words he had once used in their many talks, and he
wrote:

                        "Lips that now tremble,
                         Do you dissemble
                    When you deny that the human is best?--
                         Love, the evangel,
                         Finds the Archangel?
                    Is that a truth when this may be a jest?

                        "Star-drifts that glimmer
                         Dimmer and dimmer,
                    What do ye know of my weal or my woe?
                         Was I born under
                         The sun or the thunder?
                    What do I come from?  and where do I go?

                        "Rest, shall it ever
                         Come?  Is endeavour
                    But a vain twining and twisting of cords?
                         Is faith but treason;
                         Reason, unreason,
                    But a mechanical weaving of words?"

He thought of Louis Trudel, in his grave, and his own questioning: "Show
me a sign from Heaven, tailorman!" and he wrote:

                        "What is the token,
                         Ever unbroken,
                    Swept down the spaces of querulous years,
                         Weeping or singing
                         That the Beginning
                    Of all things is with us, and sees us, and hears?"

He made an involuntary motion of his hand to his breast, where old Louis
Trudel had set a sign.  So long as he lived, it must be there to read:
a shining smooth scar of excoriation, a sacred sign of the faith he had
never been able to accept; of which he had never, indeed, been able to
think, so distant had been his soul, until, against his will, his heart
had answered to the revealing call in a woman's eyes.  He felt her
fingers touch his breast as they did that night the iron seared him; and
out of this first intimacy of his soul he wrote:

                        "What is the token?
                         Bruised and broken,
                    Bend I my life to a blossoming rod?
                         Shall then the worst things
                         Come to the first things,
                    Finding the best of all, last of all, God?"

Like the cry of his "Aphrodite," written that last afternoon of the old
life, this plaint ended with the same restless, unceasing question.  But
there was a difference.  There was no longer the material, distant note
of a pagan mind; there was the intimate, spiritual note of a mind finding
a foothold on the submerged causeway of life and time.

As he folded up the paper to put it into his pocket, Jo Portugais entered
the room.  He threw in a corner the wet bag which had protected his
shoulders from the rain, hung his hat on a peg of the chimney-piece,
nodded to Charley, and put a kettle on the little fire.

"A big storm, M'sieu'," Jo said presently as he put some tea into a pot.

"I have never seen a great storm in a forest before," answered Charley,
and came nearer to the window through which the bright sun streamed.

"It always does me good," said Jo.  "Every bird and beast is awake and
afraid and trying to hide, and the trees fall, and the roar of it like
the roar of the chasse-galerie on the Kimash River."

"The Kimash River--where is it?"

Jo shrugged his shoulders.  "Who knows!"

"Is it a legend, then?"

"It is a river."

"And the chasse-galerie?"

"That is true, M'sieu', no matter what any one thinks.  I know; I have
seen--I have seen with my own eyes."  Jo was excited now.

"I am listening."  He took a cup of tea from Portugais and drank eagerly.

"The Kimash River, M'sieu', that is the river in the air.  On it is the
chasse-galerie.  You sell your soul to the devil; you ask him to help
you; you deny God.  You get into a canoe and call on the devil.  You are
lifted up, canoe and all, and you rush on down rapids, over falls, on the
Kimash River in the air.  The devil stands behind you and shouts, and you
sing, 'V'la! l'bon vent!  V'la l'joli vent!' On and on you go, faster and
faster, and you forget the world, and you forget yourself, and the devil
is with you in the air--in the chasse-galerie on the Kimash River."

"Jo," said Charley Steele, "do you honestly think there's a river like
that?"

'M'sieu', I know it.  I saw Ignace Latoile, who robbed a priest and got
drunk on the communion wine--I saw him with the devil in the Black Canoe
at the Saguenay.  I could see Ignace; I could see the devil; I could see
the Kimash River.  I shall ride myself some day.

"Ride where?"

"What does it matter where?"

"Why should you ride?"

"Because you ride fast with the devil."

"What is the good of riding fast?"

"In the rush a man forget."

"What does he forget, my friend?"

There was a pause, in which a man with a load of crime upon his soul
dwelt upon the words my friend, coming from the lips of one who knew the
fulness of his iniquity.  Then he answered:

"In the noise he forget that a voice is calling in his ear, 'You did It!'
He forget what he see in his dreams.  He forget the hand that touch him
on the arm when he walk in the woods alone, or lie down to sleep at
night, no one near.  He forget that some one wait--wait--wait, till he
has suffer long enough, or till, one day, he think he is happy again, and
the Thing he did is far off like a dream--to drag him out to the death he
did not die.  He forget that he is alone--all alone in the world, for
ever and ever and ever."

He suddenly sank upon the floor beside Charley, and a groan burst from
his lips.  "To have no friend--ah, it is so awful!" he said.  "Never to
see a face that look into yours, and know how bad are you, and doesn't
mind.  For five years I have live like that.  I cannot let any one be my
friend because I was that!  They seem to know--everything, everybody--
what I am.  The little children when I pass them run away to hide.  I
have wake in the night and cry out in fear, it is so lonely.  I have hear
voices round me in the woods, and I run and run and run from them, and
not leave them behind.  Three times I go to the jails in Quebec to see
the prisoners behind the bars, and watch the pains on their faces, to
understand what I escape.  Five times have I go to the courts to listen
to murderers tried, and watch them when the Jury say Guilty!  and the
Judge send them to death--that I might know.  Twice have I go to see
murderers hung.  Once I was helper to the hangman, that I might hear and
know what the man said, what he felt.  When the arms were bound, I felt
the straps on my own; when the cap come down, I gasp for breath; when the
bolt is shot, I feel the wrench and the choke, and shudder go through
myself--feel the world jerk out in the dark.  When the body is bundled in
the pit, I see myself lie still under the quick-lime with the red mark
round my throat."

Charley touched him on the shoulder.  "Jo--poor Jo, my friend!" he said.
Jo raised his eyes, red with an unnatural fire, deep with gratitude.

"As I sit at my dinner, with the sun shining and the woods green and
glad, and all the world gay, I have see what happened all over again.
I have see his strong hands; his bad face laugh at my words; I have see
him raise his riding-whip and cut me across the head.  I have see him
stagger and fall from the blows I give him with the knife--the knife
which never was found--why, I not know, for I throw it on the ground
beside him!  There, as I sit in the open day, a thousand times I have see
him shiver and fall, staring, staring at me as if he see a dreadful
thing.  Then I stand up again and strike at him--at his ghost!--as I did
that day in the woods.  Again I see him lie in his blood, straight and
white--so large, so handsome, so still!  I have shed tears--but what are
tears!  Blind with tears I have call out for the devils of hell to take
me with them.  I have call on God to give me death.  I have prayed, and I
have cursed.  Twice I have travelled to the grave where he lies.  I have
knelt there and have beg him to tell the truth to God, and say that he
torture me till I kill him.  I have beg him to forgive me and to haunt me
no more with his bad face.  But never--never--never--have I one quiet
hour until you come, M'sieu'; nor any joy in my heart till I tell you the
black truth--M'sieu'!  M'sieu!"

He buried his face between Charley's feet, and held them with his hands.

Charley laid a hand on the shaggy head as though it were that of a child.
"Be still--be still, Jo," he said gently.

Since that night of St. Jean Baptiste's festival, no word of the past,
of the time when Charley turned aside the revanche of justice from a man
called Joseph Nadeau, had been spoken between them.  Out of the delirium
of his drunken trance had come Charley's recognition of the man he knew
now as Jo Portugais.  But the recognition had been sent again into the
obscurity whence it came, and had not been mentioned since.  To outward
seeming they had gone on as before.  As Charley saw the knotted brows,
the staring eyes, the clinched hands, the figure of the woodsman rigid in
its agony of remorse, he said to himself: "What right had I to save this
man's life?  To have paid for his crime would have been easier for him.
I knew he was guilty.  Perhaps it was my duty to see that every
condition, to the last shade of the law, was satisfied, but was it
justice to the poor devil himself?  There he sits with a load on him that
weighs him down every hour of his life.  I called him back; I gave him
life; but I gave him memory and remorse, and the ghosts that haunt him:
the voice in his ear, the touch on his arm, the some one that is
'waiting--waiting--waiting!'  That is what I did, and that is what the
brother of the Cure did for me.  He drew me back.  He knew I was a
drunkard, but he drew me back.  I might have been a murderer like
Portugais.  The world says I was a thief, and a thief I am until I prove
to the world I am innocent--and wreck three lives!  How much of Jo's
guilt is guilt?  How much remorse should a man suffer to pay the debt of
a life?  If the law is an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, how
much hourly remorse and torture, such as Jo's, should balance the eye or
the tooth or the life?  I wonder, now!"

He leaned over, and, helping Jo to his feet, gently forced him down upon
a bench near.  "All right, Jo, my friend," he said.  "I understand.
We'll drink the gall together."

They sat and looked at each other in silence.

At length Charley leaned over and touched Jo on the shoulder.

"Why did you want to save yourself?" he said.

At that instant there was a knock at the door, and a voice said:
"Monsieur!--Monsieur!"

Jo sprang to his feet with a sharp exclamation, then went heavily to the
door and threw it open.




CHAPTER XXX

ROSALIE WARNS CHARLEY

Charley's eyes met Rosalie's with a look the girl had never seen in them
before.  It gave a glow to his haggard face.

Rosalie turned to Jo and greeted him with a friendlier manner than was
her wont towards him.  The nearer she was to Charley, the farther away
from him, to her mind, was Portugais, and she became magnanimous.

Jo nodded' awkwardly and left the room.  Looking after the departing
figure, Rosalie said: "I know he has been good to you, but--but do you
trust him, Monsieur?"

"Does not everybody in Chaudiere trust him?"

"There is one who does not, though perhaps that's of no consequence."

"Why do you not trust him?"

"I don't know.  I never knew him do a bad thing; I never heard of a bad
thing he has done; and--he has been good to you."

She paused, flushing as she felt the significance of her words, and
continued: "Yet there is--I cannot tell what.  I feel something.  It is
not reasonable to go upon one's feelings; but there it is, and so I do
not trust him."

"It is the way he lives, here in these lonely woods--the mystery around
him."

A change passed over her.  With the first glow of meeting the object of
her visit had receded, though since her last interview with the Seigneur
she had not rested a moment, in her anxiety to warn him of his danger.
"Oh, no," she said, lifting her eyes frankly to his: "oh, no, Monsieur!
It is not that.  There is mystery about you!"  She felt her heart beating
hard.  It almost choked her, but she kept on bravely.  "People say
strange and bad things about you.  No one knows"--she trembled under the
painful inquiry of his eyes.  Then she gained courage and went on, for
she must make it clear she trusted him, that she took him at his word,
before she told him of the peril before him--"No one knows where you came
from .  .  .  and it is nobody's business.  Some people do not believe in
you.  But I believe in you--I should believe in you if every one doubted;
for there is no feeling in me that says, 'He has done some wicked thing
that stands-between us.'  It isn't the same as with Portugais, you see--
naturally, it could not be the same."

She seemed not to realise that she was telling more of her own heart than
she had ever told.  It was a revelation, having its origin in an honesty
which impelled a pure outspokenness to himself.  Reserve, of course,
there had been elsewhere, for did not she hold a secret with him?  Had
she not hidden things, equivocated else where?  Yet it had been at his
wish, to protect the name of a dead man, for the repose of whose soul
masses were now said, with expensive candles burning.  For this she had
no repentance; she was without logic where this man's good was at stake.

Charley had before him a problem, which he now knew he never could evade
in the future.  He could solve it by none of the old intellectual means,
but by the use of new faculties, slowly emerging from the unexplored
fastnesses of his nature.

"Why should you believe in me?" he asked, forcing himself to smile, yet
acutely alive to the fact that a crisis was impending.  "You, like all
down there in Chaudiere, know nothing of my past, are not sure that I
haven't been a hundred times worse than you think poor Jo there.  I may
have been anything.  You may be harbouring a man the law is tracking
down."

In all that befell Rosalie Evanturel thereafter, never could come such
another great resolute moment.  There was nothing to support her in the
crisis but her own faith.  It needed high courage to tell this man who
had first given her dreams, then imagination, hope, and the beauty of
doing for another's well-being rather than for her own--to tell this man
that he was a suspected criminal.  Would he hate her?  Would his kindness
turn to anger?  Would he despise her for even having dared to name the
suspicion which was bringing hither an austere Abbe and officers of the
law?

"We are harbouring a man the law is tracking down," she said with an
infinite appeal in her eyes.

He did not quite understand.  He thought that perhaps she meant Jo, and
he glanced towards the door; but she kept her eyes on him, and they told
him that she meant himself.  He chilled, as though ether were being
poured through his veins.

Did the world know, then, that Charley Steele was alive?  Was the law
sending its officers to seize the embezzler, the ruffian who had robbed
widow and orphan?

If it were so.  .  .  .  To go back to the world whence he came, with the
injury he must do to others, and the punishment also that he must suffer,
if he did not tell the truth about Billy!  And Chaudiere, which, in spite
of all, was beginning to have a real belief in him--where was his
contempt for the world now!  .  .  .  And Rosalie, who trusted him--
this new element rapidly grew dominant in his thoughts-to be the common
criminal in her eyes!

His paleness gave way to a flush as like her own as could be.

"You mean me?" he asked quietly.

She had thought that his flush meant anger, and she was surprised at the
quiet tone.  She nodded assent.  "For what crime?" he asked.

"For stealing."

His heart seemed to stand still.  Then, it had come in spite of all it
had come.  Here was his resurrection, and the old life to face.

"What did I steal?" he asked with dull apathy.  "The gold vessels from
the Catholic Cathedral of Quebec, after--after trying to blow up
Government House with gunpowder."

His despair passed.  His face suddenly lighted.  He smiled.  It was so
absurd.  "Really!" he said.  "When was the place blown up?"

"Two days before you came here last year--it was not blown up; an attempt
was made."

"Ah, I did not know.  Why was the attempt made to blow it up?"

"Some Frenchman's hatred of the English, they say."

"But I am not French."

"They do not know.  You speak French as perfectly as English--ah,
Monsieur, Monsieur, I believe you are whatever you say."  Pain and appeal
rang from her lips.

"I am only an honest tailor," he answered gently.  He ruled his face to
calmness, for he read the agony in the girl's face, and troubled as he
was, he wished to show her that he had no fear.

"It is for what you were they will arrest you," she said helplessly, and
as though he needed to have all made clear to him.  "Oh, Monsieur," she
continued, in a broken voice, "it would shame me so to have you made a
prisoner in Chaudiere--before all these silly people, who turn with the
wind.  I should not lift my head--but yes, I should lift my head!" she
added hurriedly.  "I should tell them all they lied--every one--the
idiots!  The Seigneur--"

"Well, what of the Seigneur-Rosalie?"

Her own name on his lips--the sound of it dimmed her eyes.

"Monsieur Rossignol does not know you.  He neither believes nor
disbelieves.  He said to me that if you wanted consideration, to command
him, for in Chaudiere he had heard nothing but good of you.  If you
stayed, he would see that you had justice--not persecution.  I saw him
two hours ago."

She said the last words shyly, for she was thinking why the Seigneur had
spoken as he did--that he had taken her opinion of Monsieur as his guide,
and she had not scrupled to impress him with her views.  The Seigneur was
in danger of becoming prejudiced by his sentiments.

A wave of feeling passed over Charley, a rushing wave of sympathy for
this simple girl, who, out of a blind confidence, risked so much for him.
Risk there certainly was, if she--if she cared for him.  It was cruelty
not to reassure her.

Touching his breast, he said gravely: "By this sign here, I am not guilty
of the crime for which they come to seek me, Rosalie.  Nor of any other
crime for which the law might punish me--dear, noble friend."

He did so little to get such rich return.  Her eyes leaped up to brighter
degrees of light, her face shone with a joy it had never reflected
before, her blood rushed to her finger-tips.  She abruptly sat down in
a chair and buried her face in her hands, trembling.  Then, lifting her
head slowly, after a moment she spoke in a tone that told him her faith,
her gratitude--not for reassurance, but for confidence, which is as water
in a thirsty land to a woman.

"Oh, Monsieur, I thank you, I thank you from the depth of my heart; and
my heart is deep indeed, very, very deep--I cannot find what lies lowest
in it!  I thank you, because you trust me, because you make it so easy
to--to be your friend; to say 'I know' when any one might doubt you.
One has no right to speak for another till--till the other has given
confidence, has said you may.  Ah, Monsieur, I am so happy!"

In very abandonment of heart she clasped her hands and came a step nearer
to him, but abruptly stopped still; for, realising her action, timidity
and embarrassment rushed upon her.

Charley understood, and again his impulse was to say what was in his
heart and dare all; but resolution possessed him, and he said quickly:

"Once, Rosalie, you saved me--from death perhaps.  Once your hands helped
my pain--here."  He touched his breast.  "Your words now, and what you
do, they still help me--here .  .  .  but in a different way.  The
trouble is in my heart, Rosalie.  You are glad of my confidence?  Well,
I will give you more.  .  .  .  I cannot go back to my old life.  To do
so would injure others--some who have never injured me and some who have.
That is why.  That is why I do not wish to be taken to Quebec now on a
false charge.  That is all I can say.  Is it enough?"

She was about to answer, but Jo Portugais entered, exclaiming.
"M'sieu'," he cried, "men are coming with the Seigneur and Cure."

Charley nodded at Jo, then turned to Rosalie.  "You need not be seen if
you go out by the back way, Mademoiselle."  He held aside the bear-skin
curtain of the door that led into the next room.

There was a frightened look in her face.  "Do not fear for me," he
continued.  "It will come right--somehow.  You have done more for me than
any one has ever done or ever will do.  I will remember till the last
moment of my life.  Good-bye."

He laid a hand on her shoulder and gently pushed her from the room.

"God protect you!  The Blessed Virgin speak for you!  I will pray for
you," she whispered.




CHAPTER XXXI

CHARLEY STANDS AT BAY

Charley turned quickly to the woodsman.  "Listen," he said, and he told
Jo how things stood.

"You will not hide, M'sieu'?  There is time," Jo asked.

"I will not hide, Jo."

"What will you do?"

"I'll decide when they come."

There was silence for a moment, then the sound of voices on the hill-
side.

Charley's soul rose up in revolt against the danger that faced him--not
against personal peril, but the danger of being dragged back again into
the life he had come from, with all that it involved--the futility of
this charge against him!  To be the victim of an error--to go to the bar
of justice with the hand of injustice on his arm!

All at once the love of this new life welled up in him, as a spring of
water overflows its bounds.  A voice kept ringing in his ears, "I will
pray for you."  Subconsciously his mind kept saying, "Rosalie--Rosalie--
Rosalie!"  There was nothing now that he would not do to avert his being
taken away upon this ridiculous charge.  Mistaken identity?  To prove
that, he must at once prove himself--who he was, whence he came.  Tell
the Cure, and make it a point of honour for his secret to be kept?  But
once told, the new life would no longer stand by itself as the new life,
cut off from all contact with the past.  Its success, its possibility,
must lie in its absolute separateness, with obscurity behind--as though
he had come out of nothing into this very room, on that winter morning
when memory returned.

It was clear that he must, somehow, evade the issue.  He glanced at Jo,
whose eyes, strained and painful, were fixed upon the door.  Here was a
man who suffered for his sake.  .  .  .  He took a step forward, as
though with sudden resolve, but there came a knocking, and, pausing,
he motioned Jo to open the door.  Then, turning to a shelf, he took
something from it hastily, and kept it in his hand.

Jo roused himself with an effort, and opened to the knocking.

Three people entered: the Seigneur, the Cure, and the Abbe Rossignol, an
ascetic, severe man, with a face of intolerance and inflexibility.  Two
constables in plain clothes followed; one stolid, one alert, one English
and one French, both with grim satisfaction in their faces--the
successful exercise of his trade is pleasant to every craftsman.  When
they entered, Charley was standing with his back to the fireplace, his
eye-glass adjusted, one hand stroking his beard, the other held behind
his back.

The Cure came forward and shook hands in an eager friendly way.

"My dear Monsieur," said he, "I hope that you are better."

"I am quite well, thank you, Monsieur le Cure," answered Charley.
"I shall get back to work on Monday, I hope."

"Yes, yes, that is good," responded the Cure, and seemed confused.
He turned uneasily to the Seigneur.  "You have come to see my friend
Portugais," Charley remarked slowly, almost apologetically.  "I will take
my leave."  He made a step forward.  The two constables did the same, and
would have laid their hands upon his shoulder but that the Seigneur said
tartly:

"Stand off, Jack-in-boxes!"

The two stood aside, and looked covertly at the Seigneur, whose temper
seemed unusually irascible.  Charley's face showed no surprise, but he
looked inquiringly at the Cure.

"If they wish to be measured for uniforms--or manners--I will see them at
my shop," he said.

The Seigneur chuckled.  Charley stepped again towards the door.  The two
constables stood before it.  Again he turned inquiringly, this time
towards the Cure.  The Cure did not speak.

"It is you we wish to see, tailor," said the Abbe Rossignol.

Soft-tongued irony leaped to Charley's lips: "Have I, then, the honour
of including Monsieur among my customers?  I cannot recall Monsieur's
figure.  I think I should not have forgotten it."

It was now the old Charley Steele, with the new body, the new spirit, but
with the old skilful mind, aggravatingly polite, non-intime--the
intolerant face of this father of souls irritated him.

"I never forget a figure which has idiosyncrasy," he added, with a bland
eye wandering over the priest's gaunt form.  It was his old way to strike
first and heal after--"a kick and a lick," as old Paddy Wier, whom he
once saved from prison, said of him.  It was like bygone years of another
life to appear in defence when the law was tightening round a victim.
The secret spring had been touched, the ancient machinery of his mind
was working almost automatically.

The illusion was considerable, for the Seigneur had taken the only arm-
chair in the room, a little apart, as it were, filling the place of
judge.  The priest-brother, cold and inveterate, was like the attorney
for the crown.  The Cure was the clerk of the court, who could only
echo the decisions of the Judge.  The constables were the machinery of
the Law, and Jo Portugais was the unwilling witness, whose evidence would
be the crux of the case.  The prisoner--he himself was prisoner and
prisoner's counsel.

A good struggle was forward.

He had enraged the Abbe as much as he had delighted the Abbe's brother;
for nothing gave the Seigneur such pleasure as the discomfiture of the
Abbe Rossignol, chaplain and ordinary to the Archbishop of Quebec.  The
genial, sympathetic nature of the Seigneur could not even be patient with
the excessive piety of the churchman, who, in rigid righteousness, had
thrashed him cruelly as a boy.  At Charley's words upon the Abbe's
figure, gaunt and precise as a swaddled ramrod, he pulled his nose with a
grunt of satisfaction.

The Cure, the peace-maker, intervened.  The tailor's meaning was
sufficiently clear: if they had come to see him personally, then it was
natural for him to wish to know the names and stations of his guests,
and their business.  The Seigneur was aware that the tailor did know,
and he enjoyed the 'sang-froid' with which he was meeting the situation.

"Monsieur," said the Cure, in a mollifying voice, "I have ventured to
bring the Seigneur of Chaudiere"--the Seigneur stood up and bowed
gravely--"and his brother, the Abbe Rossignol, who would speak with you
on private business"--he ignored the presence of the constables.

Charley bowed to the Seigneur and the Abbe, then turned inquiringly
towards the two constables.  "Friends of my brother the Abbe," said the
Seigneur maliciously.

"Their names, Monsieur?" asked Charley.

"They have numbers," answered the Seigneur whimsically--to the Cure's
pain, for levity seemed improper at such a time.

"Numbers of names are legally suspicious, numbers for names are
suspiciously legal," rejoined Charley.  "You have pierced the disguise of
discourtesy," said the Seigneur, and, on the instant, he made up his mind
that whatever the tailor might have been, he was deserving of respect.

"You have private business with me, Monsieur?" asked Charley of the
Abbe.

The Abbe shook his head.  "The business is not private, in one sense.
These men have come to charge you with having broken into the cathedral
at Quebec and stolen the gold vessels of the altar; also with having
tried to blow up the Governor's residence."

One of the constables handed Charley the warrant.  He looked at it with a
curious smile.  It was so natural, yet so unnatural, to be thus in touch
with the habits of far-off times.

"On what information is this warrant issued?" he asked.

"That is for the law to show in due course," said the priest.

"Pardon me; it is for the law to show now.  I have a right to know."

The constables shifted from one foot to the other, looked at each other
meaningly, and instinctively felt their weapons.

"I believe," said the Seigneur evenly, "that--" The Abbe interrupted.
"He can have information at his trial."

"Excuse me, but the warrant has my endorsement," said the Seigneur, "and,
as the justice most concerned, I shall give proper information to the
gentleman under suspicion."  He waved a hand at the Abbe, as at a
fractious child, and turned courteously to Charley.

"Monsieur," he said, "on the tenth of August last the cathedral at Quebec
was broken into, and the gold altar-vessels were stolen.  You are
suspected.  The same day an attempt was made to blow up the Governor's
residence.  You are suspected."

"On what ground, Monsieur?"

"You appeared in this vicinity three days afterwards with an injury to
the head.  Now, the incendiary received a severe blow on the head from a
servant of the Governor.  You see the connection, Monsieur?"

"Where is the servant of the Governor, Monsieur?"

"Dead, unfortunately.  He told the story so often, to so much
hospitality, that he lost his footing on Mountain Street steps--you
remember Mountain Street steps possibly, Monsieur?--and cracked his head
on the last stone."

There was silence for a moment.  If the thing had not been so serious,
Charley must have laughed outright.  If he but disclosed his identity,
how easy to dispose of this silly charge!  He did not reply at once, but
looked calmly at the Abbe.  In the pause, the Seigneur added "I forgot to
add that the man had a brown beard.  You have a brown beard, Monsieur."

"I had not when I arrived here."

Jo Portugais spoke.  "That is true, M'sieu'; and what is more, I know a
newly shaved face when I see it, and M'sieu's was tanned with the sun.
It is foolish, that!"

"This is not the place for evidence," said the Abbe sharply.

"Excuse me, Abbe," said his brother; "if Monsieur wishes to have a
preliminary trial here, he may.  He is in my seigneury; he is a tenant of
the Church here--"

"It is a grave offence that an infidel, dropping down here from, who
knows where--that an acknowledged infidel should be a tenant of the
Church!"

"The devil is a tenant of the Almighty, if creation is the Almighty's,"
said Charley.

"Satan is a prisoner," snapped the Abbe.

"With large domains for exercise," retorted Charley, "and in successful
opposition to the Church.  If it is true that the man you charge is an
infidel, how does that warrant suspicion?"

"Other thefts," answered the Abbe.  "A sacred iron cross was stolen from
the door of the church of Chaudiere.  I have no doubt that the thief of
the gold vessels of the cathedral was the thief of the iron cross."

"It is not true," sullenly broke in Jo Portugais.

"What proof have you?" said the Seigneur.  Charley waved a deprecating
hand towards Jo.

"I shall not call Portugais as evidence," he said.

"You are conducting your own case?" asked the Seigneur, with a grim
smile.

"It is dangerous, I believe."

"I will take my chances," answered Charley.  "Will you tell me what
object the criminal could have in stealing the gold vessels from the
cathedral?" he added, turning to the Abbe.

"They were gold!"

"And for taking the cross from the door of the church in Chaudiere?"

"It was sacred, and he was an infidel, and hated it."

"I do not see the logic of the argument.  He stole the vessels because
they were valuable, and the iron cross because he was an infidel!  Now
how do you know that the suspected criminal was an infidel, Monsieur?"

"It is well known."

"Has he ever said so?"

"He does not deny it."

"If you were charged with being an opium-eater, does it follow that you
are one because you do not deny it?  There was a Man who was said to
blaspheme, to have all 'the crafts and assaults of the devil'--was it His
duty to deny it?  Suppose you were accused of being a highwayman, would
you be less a highwayman if you denied it?  Or would you be less guilty
if you denied it?"

"That is beside the case," said the priest with acerbity.

"Faith, I think it is the case itself," said the Seigneur with a
satisfied pull of his nose.

"But do you seriously suggest that only infidels rob churches?" Charley
persisted.

"I am not here to be cross-examined," answered the Abbe harshly.
"You are charged with robbing the cathedral and trying to blow up the
Governor's residence.  Arrest him!" he added, turning to the constables.

"Stand where you are, men," sharply threatened the Seigneur.  "There are
no lettres de cachet nowadays, Francois," he added tartly to his brother.

"If it is the exclusive temptation of an infidel to rob a church, has
infidelity also an inherent penchant for arson?  Is it a patent?  Why did
the infidel blow up the Governor's residence?" continued Charley.

"He did not blow it up, he only tried," interposed the Cure softly.

"I was not aware," said Charley.  "Well, did the man who stole the patens
from the altar--"

"They were chalices," again interrupted the Cure, with a faint smile.

"Ah, I was not aware!" again rejoined Charley.  "I repeat, what reason
had the person who stole the chalices to try to blow up the Governor's
residence?  Is it a sign of infidelity, or--"

"You can answer for that yourself," angrily interposed the Abbe.  The
strain was telling on his nerves.

"It is fair to give reasons for the suspicion," urged the Seigneur
acidly.

"As I said before, Francois, this is not the fifteenth century."

"He hated the English government," said the Abbe.  "I do not understand,"
responded Charley.  "Am I then to suppose that the alleged criminal was a
Frenchman as well as an infidel?"

There was silence, and Charley continued.  "It is an unusual thing for a
French Abbe to be so concerned for the safety of an English Protestant's
life and housing .  .  .  the Governor is a Protestant--eh?  That is,
indeed, a zeal almost Christian--or millennial."

The Abby turned to the Seigneur.  "Are you going to interfere longer with
the process of the law?"

"I think Monsieur has not quite finished his argument," said the
Seigneur, with a twist of the mouth.

"If the man was a Frenchman, why do you suspect the tailor of Chaudiere?"
asked Charley softly.  "Of course I understand the reason behind all: you
have heard that the tailor is an infidel; you have protested to the good
Cure here, and the Cure is a man who has a sense of justice, and will not
drive a poor man from his parish by Christian persecution--without cause.
Since certain dates coincide and impulses urge, you suspect the tailor.
Again, according to your mind, a man who steals holy vessels must needs
be an infidel; therefore a tailor in Chaudiere, suspected of being an
infidel, stole the holy chalices.  It might seem a fair case for a grand
jury of clericals.  But it breaks down in certain places.  Your criminal
is a Frenchman; the tailor of Chaudiere is an Englishman."

The Abbe's face was contracted with stubborn annoyance, though he held
his tongue from violence.  "Do you deny that you are French?" he asked
tartly.

"I could almost endure the suspicion because of the compliment to my
command of your charming language."

"Prove that you are an Englishman.  No one knows where you came from;
no one knows what you are.  You are a fair subject for suspicion, apart
from the evidence shown," said the Abbe, trying now to be as polite as
the tailor.

"This is a free country.  So long as the law is obeyed, one can go where
one wills without question, I take it."

"There is a law of vagrancy."

"I am a householder, a tenant of the Church, not a vagrant."

"Monsieur, you can have your choice of proving these things here or in
Quebec," said the Abbe, with angry impatience again.

"I may not be compelled to prove anything.  It is the privilege of the
law to prove the crime against me."

"You are a very remarkable tailor," said the Abbe sarcastically.

"I have not had the honour of making you even a cassock, I think.
Monsieur le Cure, I believe, approves of those I make for him.
He has a good figure, however."

"You refuse to identify yourself?" asked the Abbe, with asperity.

"I am not aware that you possess any right to ask me to do so."

The Abbe's thin lips clipped-to like shears.  He turned again towards the
officers.

"It would relieve the situation," interposed the Seigneur, "if Monsieur
could find it possible to grant the Abbe's demand."

Charley bowed to the Seigneur.  "I do not know why I should be taken for
a Frenchman or an infidel.  I speak French well, I presume, but I spoke
it from the cradle.  I speak English with equally good accent," he added,
with the glimmer of a smile; for there was a kind of exhilaration in the
little contest, even with so much at stake.  This miserable, silly charge
had that behind it which might open up a grave, make its dead to walk,
fright folk from their senses, and destroy their peace for ever.  Yet he
was cool and thinking clearly.  He measured up the Abbe in his mind,
analysed him, found the vulnerable spot in his nature, the avenue to the
one place lighted by a lamp of humanity.  He leaned a hand upon the ledge
of the chimney where he stood, and said, in a low voice:

"Monsieur l'Abbe, it is sometimes the misfortune of just men to be
terribly unjust.  'For conscience sake' is another name for prejudice--
for those antipathies which, natural to us, are, at the same time, trap-
doors, for our just intentions.  You, Monsieur, have a radical antipathy
to those men who are unable to see or to feel what you were privileged to
see and feel from the time of your birth.  You know that you are right.
Do you think that those who do not see as you do are wicked because they
were not given what you were given?  If you are right, may they, poor
folk! not be the victims of their blindness of heart--of the darkness
born with them, or of the evils that overtake them?  For conscience sake,
you would crush out evil.  To you an infidel--so called--is an evil-doer,
a peril to the peace of God.  You drive him out from among the faithful.
You heard that a tailor of Chaudiere was an infidel.  You did not prove
him one, but you, for conscience sake, are trying to remove him, by
fixing on him a crime of which he may, with slight show of reason,
be suspected.  But I ask you, would you have taken the same deep interest
in setting the law upon this suspected man did you not believe him to be
an infidel?"

He paused.  The Abbe made no reply.  The Cure was bending forward
eagerly; the Seigneur sat with his hands over the top of his cane, his
chin on his hands, never taking his eyes from him, save to glance once or
twice at his brother.  Jo Portugais was crouched on the bench, watching.

"I do not know what makes an infidel," Charley went on.  "Is it an honest
mind, a decent life, an austerity of living as great as that of any
priest, a neighbourliness that gives and takes in fairness--"

"No, no, no," interposed the Cure eagerly.  "So you have lived here,
Monsieur; I can vouch for that.  Charity and a good heart have gone with
you always."

"Do you mean that a man is an infidel because he cannot say, as Louis
Trudel said to me, 'Do you believe in God?' and replies, as I replied,
'God knows!'  Is that infidelity?  If God is God, He alone knows when the
mind or the tongue can answer in the terms of that faith which you
profess.  He knows the secret desires of our hearts, and what we believe,
and what we do not believe; He knows better than we ourselves know--if
there is a God.  Does a man conjure God, if he does not believe in God?
'God knows!' is not a statement of infidelity.  With me it was a phrase
--no more.  You ask me to bare my inmost soul.  I have not learned how
to confess.  You ask me to lay bare my past, to prove my identity.  For
conscience sake you ask that, and I for conscience sake say I will not,
Monsieur.  You, when you enter your priestly life, put all your past
behind you.  It is dead for ever: all its deeds and thoughts and desires,
all its errors--sins.  I have entered on a life here which is to me as
much a new life as your priesthood is to you.  Shall I not have the right
to say, that may not be disinterred?  Have I not the right to say, Hands
off?  For the past I am responsible, and for the past I will speak from
the past; but for the deeds of the present I will speak only from the
present.  I am not a Frenchman; I did not steal the little cross from the
church door here, nor the golden chalices in Quebec; nor did I seek to
injure the Governor's residence.  I have not been in Quebec for three
years."

He ceased speaking, and fixed his eyes on the Abbe, who now met his look
fairly.

"In the way of justice, there is nothing hidden that shall not be
revealed, nor secret that shall not be made known," answered the Abbe.
"Prove that you were not in Quebec on the day the robbery was committed."
There was silence.  The Abbe's pertinacity was too difficult.  The
Seigneur saw the grim look in Charley's face, and touched the Abbe on the
arm.  "Let us walk a little outside.  Come, Cure" he added.  "It is right
that Monsieur should have a few minutes alone.  It is a serious charge
against him, and reflection will be good for us all."

He motioned the constables from the room.  The Abby passed through the
door into the open air, and the Cure and the Seigneur went arm in arm
together, talking earnestly.  The Cure turned in the doorway.

"Courage, Monsieur!" he said to Charley, and bowed himself out.  Jo
Portugais followed.

One officer took his place at the front door and the other at the back
door, outside.

The Abby, by himself, took to walking backward and forward under the
trees, buried in gloomy reflection.  Jo Portugais caught his sleeve.

"Come with me for a moment, M'sieu'," he said.  "It is important."

The Abby followed him.




CHAPTER XXXII

JO PORTUGAIS TELLS A STORY

Jo Portugais had fastened down a secret with clasps heavier than iron,
and had long stood guard over it.  But life is a wheel, and natures move
in circles, passing the same points again and again, the points being
distant or near to the sense as the courses of life have influenced the
nature.  Confession was an old principle, a light in the way, a rest-
house for Jo and all his race, by inheritance, by disposition, and by
practice.  Again and again Jo had come round to the rest-house since one
direful day, but had not, found his way therein.  There were passwords to
give at the door, there was the tale of the journey to tell to the door-
keeper.  And this tale he had not been ready to tell.  But the man who
knew of the terrible thing he had done, who had saved him from the
consequences of that terrible thing, was in sore trouble, and this broke
down the gloomy guard he had kept over his dread secret.  He fought the
matter out with himself, and, the battle ended, he touched the door-
keeper on the arm, beckoned him to a lonely place in the trees, and knelt
down before him.

"What is it you seek?" asked the door-keeper, whose face was set and
forbidding.

"To find peace," answered the man; yet he was thinking more of another's
peril than of his own soul.  "What have I to do with the peace of your
soul?  Yonder is your shepherd and keeper," said the doorkeeper, pointing
to where two men walked arm in arm under the trees.

"Shall the sinner not choose the keeper of his sins?" said the man
huskily.

"Who has been the keeper all these years?  Who has given you peace?"

"I have had no keeper; I have had no peace these many years."

"How many years?" The Abbe's voice was low and even, and showed no
feeling, but his eyes were keenly inquiring and intent.

"Seven years."

"Is the sin that held you back from the comfort of the Church a great
one?"

"The greatest, save one."

"What would be the greatest?"

"To curse God."

"The next?"

"To murder."

The other's whole manner changed on the instant.  He was no longer the
stern Churchman, the inveterate friend of Justice, the prejudiced priest,
rigid in a pious convention, who could neither bend nor break.  The sin
of an infidel breaker of the law, that was one thing; the crime of a son
of the Church, which a human soul came to relate in its agony, that was
another.  He had a crass sense of justice, but there was in him a deeper
thing still: the revelation of the human soul, the responsibility of
speaking to the heart which has dropped the folds of secrecy, exposing
the skeleton of truth, grim and staring, to the eye of a secret earthly
mentor.

"If it has been hidden all these years, why do you tell it now, my son?"

"It is the only way."

"Why was it hidden?"

"I have come to confess," answered the man bitterly.  The priest looked
at him anxiously.  "You have spoken rightly, my son.  I am not here to
ask, but to receive."

"Forgive me, but it is my crime I would speak of now.  I choose this
moment that another should not suffer for what he did not do."

The priest thought of the man they had left in the little house, and the
crime with which he was charged, and wondered what the sinner before him
was going to say.

"Tell your story, my son, and God give your tongue the very spirit of
truth, that nothing be forgotten and nothing excused."

There was a fleeting pause, in which the colour left the priest's face,
and, as he opened the door of his mind--of the Church, secret and
inviolate--he had a pain at his heart; for beneath his arrogant
churchmanship there was a fanatical spirituality of a mediaeval kind.
His sense of responsibility was painful and intense.  The same pain
possessed him always, were the sin that of a child or a Borgia.

As he listened to the broken tale, the forest around was vocal, the
chipmunks scampered from tree to tree, the woodpecker's tap-tap, tap-tap,
went on over their heads, the leaves rustled and gave forth their divine
sweetness, as though man and nature were at peace, and there were no
storms in sky above or soul beneath, or in the waters of life that are
deeper than "the waters under the earth."

It was only a short time, but to the door-keeper and the wayfarer it
seemed hours, for the human soul travels far and hard and long in moments
of pain and revelation.  The priest in his anxiety suffered as much as
the man who did the wicked thing.  When the man had finished, the priest
said:

"Is this all?"

"It is the great sin of my life."  He shuddered, and continued: "I have
no love of life; I have no fear of death; but there is the man who saved
me years ago, who got me freedom.  He has had great sorrow and trouble,
and I would live for his sake--because he has no friend."

"Who is the man?"

The other pointed to where the little house was hidden among the trees.
The priest almost gasped his amazement, but waited.

Thereupon the woodsman told the whole truth concerning the tailor of
Chaudiere.

"To save him, I have confessed my own sin.  To you I might tell all in
confession, and the truth about him would be buried for ever.  I might
not confess at all unless I confessed my own sin.  You will save him,
father?" he asked anxiously.

"I will save him," was the reply of the priest.

"I want to give myself to justice; but he has been ill, and he may be ill
again, and he needs me."  He told of the tailor's besetting weakness, of
his struggles against it, of his fall a few days before, and the cause of
it .  .  .  told all to the man of silence.

"You wish to give yourself to justice?"

"I shall have no peace unless."

There was something martyr-like in the man's attitude.  It appealed to
some stern, martyr-like quality in the priest.  If the man would win
eternal peace so, then so be it.  His grim piety approved.  He spoke now
with the authority of divine justice.

"For one year longer go on as you are, then give yourself to justice--one
year from to-day, my son.  Is it enough?"

"It is enough."

"Absolvo te!" said the priest.




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE EDGE OF LIFE

Meantime Charley was alone with his problem.  The net of circumstances
seemed to have coiled inextricably round him.  Once, at a trial in court
in other days, he had said in his ironical way: "One hasn't to fear the
penalties of one's sins, but the damnable accident of discovery."

To try to escape now, or, with the assistance of Jo Portugais,
when en route to Quebec in charge of the constables, and find refuge and
seclusion elsewhere?  There was nothing he might ask of Portugais which
he would not do.  To escape--and so acknowledge a guilt not his own!
Well, what did it matter!  Who mattered?  He knew only too well.  The
Cure mattered--that good man who had never intruded his piety on him; who
had been from the first a discreet friend, a gentleman,--a Christian
gentleman, if there was such a sort of gentleman apart from all others.
Who mattered?  The Seigneur, whom he had never seen before, yet who had
showed that day a brusque sympathy, a gruff belief in him?  Who mattered?

Above all, Rosalie mattered.  To escape, to go from Rosalie's presence by
a dark way, as it were, like a thief in the night--was that possible?
His escape would work upon her mind.  She would first wonder, then doubt,
and then believe at last that he was a common criminal.  She was the one
who mattered in that thought of escape escape to some other parish, to
some other province, to some other country--to some other world!

To some other world?  He looked at a little bottle he held in the palm of
his hand.

A hand held aside the curtain of the door entering on the next room, and
a girl's troubled face looked in, but he did not see.

Escape to some other world?  And why not, after all?  On the day his
memory came back he had resisted the idea in this very room.  As the
fatalist he had resisted it then.  Now how poor seemed the reasons for
not having ended it all that day!  If his appointed time had been come,
the river would have ended him then--that had been his argument.  Was
that argument not belief in Somebody or Something which governed his
going or staying?  Was it not preordination?  Was not fatalism, then,
the cheapest sort of belief in an unchangeable Somebody or Something,
representing purpose and law and will?  Attribute to anything power,
and there was God, whatever His qualities, personality, or being.

The little phial of laudanum was in his hand to loosen life into
knowledge.  Was it not his duty to eliminate himself, rather than be an
unsolvable quantity in the problem of many lives?  It was neither vulgar
nor cowardly to pass quietly from forces making for ruin, and so avert
ruin and secure happiness.  To go while yet there was time, and smooth
for ever the way for others by an eternal silence--that seemed well.
Punishment thereafter, the Cure would say.  But was it not worth while
being punished, even should the Cure's fond belief in the noble fable be
true, if one saved others here?  Who--God or man--had the right to take
from him the right to destroy himself, not for fear, not through despair,
but for others' sake?  Had he not the right to make restitution to
Kathleen for having given her nothing but himself, whom she had learned
to despise?  If he were God, he would say, Do justice and fear not.  And
this was justice.  Suppose he were in a battle, with all these things
behind him, and put himself, with daring and great results, in some
forlorn hope--to die; and he died, ostensibly a hero for his country,
but, in his heart of hearts, to throw his life away to save some one he
loved, not his country, which profited by his sacrifice--suppose that
were the case, what would the world say?

"He saved others, himself he could not save"--flashed through his mind,
possessed him.  He could save others; but it was clear he could not save
himself.  It was so simple, so kind, and so decent.  And he would be
buried here in quiet, unconsecrated ground, a mystery, a tailor who,
finding he could not mend the garment of life, cast it away, and took on
himself the mantle of eternal obscurity.  No reproaches would follow him;
and he would not reproach himself, for Kathleen and Billy and another
would be safe and free to live their lives.

Far, far better for Rosalie!  She too would be saved--free from the peril
of his presence.  For where could happiness come to her from him?  He
might not love her; he might not marry her; and it were well to go now,
while yet love was not a habit, but an awakening, a realisation of life.
His death would settle this sad question for ever.  To her he would be a
softening memory as time went on.

The girl who had watched by the curtain stepped softly inside the room
.  .  .  .  she divined his purpose.  He was so intent he did not hear.

"I will do it," he said to himself.  "It is better to go than to stay.
I have never done a good thing for love of any human being.  I will do
one now."

He turned towards the window through which the sunlight streamed.
Stepping forward into the sun, he uncorked the bottle.

There was a quick step behind him, and the girl's voice said clearly:

"If you go, I go also."

He turned swiftly, cold with amazement, the blood emptied from his heart.

Rosalie stood a little distance from him, her face pale, her hands held
hard to her side.

"I understand all.  I could not go outside, I stayed there"--she pointed
to the other room--"and I know why you would die.  You would die to save
others."

"Rosalie!" he protested in a hoarse voice, and could say nothing more.

"You think that I will stay, if you go!  No, no, no--I will not.  You
taught me how to live, and I will follow you now."

He saw the strange determination of her look.  It startled him; he knew
not what to say.  "Your father, Rosalie--"

"My father will be cared for.  But who will care for you in the place
where you are going?  You will have no friends there.  You shall not go
alone.  You will need me--in the dark."

"It is good that I go," he said.  "It would be wicked, it would be
dreadful, for you to go."

"I go if you go," she urged.  "I will lose my soul to be with you; you
will want me--there!"

There was no mistaking her intention.  Footsteps sounded outside.  The
others were coming back.  To die here before her face?  To bring her to
death with him?  He was sick with despair.

"Go into the next room quickly," he said.  "No matter what comes, I will
not--on my honour!"

She threw him a look of gratitude, and, as the bearskin curtain dropped
behind her, he put the phial of laudanum in his pocket.

The door opened, and the Abbe Rossignol entered, followed by the
Seigneur, the Cure, and Jo Portugais.  Charley faced them calmly, and
waited.

The Abbe's face was still cold and severe, but his voice was human as he
said quickly: "Monsieur, I have decided to take you at your word.  I am
assured you are not the man who committed the crime.  You probably have
reasons for not establishing your identity."

Had Charley been a prisoner in the dock, he could not have had a moment
of deeper amazement--even if after the jury had said Guilty, a piece of
evidence had been handed in, proving innocence, averting the death
sentence.  A wave of excitement passed over him, leaving him cold and
still.  In the other room a girl put her hand to her mouth to stifle a
cry of joy.

Charley bowed.  "You made a mistake, Monsieur--pray do not apologise," he
said.




CHAPTER XXXIV

IN AMBUSH

Weeks went by.  Summer was done, autumn was upon the land.  Harvest-home
had gone, and the "fall" ploughing was forward.  The smell of the burning
stubble, of decaying plant and fibre, was mingling with the odours of the
orchards and the balsams of the forest.  The leafy hill-sides, far and
near, were resplendent in scarlet and saffron and tawny red.  Over the
decline of the year flickered the ruined fires of energy.

It had been a prosperous summer in the valley.  Harvests had been reaped
such as the country had not known for years--and for years there had been
great harvests.  There had not been a death in the parish all summer, and
births had occurred out of all usual proportion.

When Filion Lacasse commented thereon, and mentioned the fact that even
the Notary's wife had had the gift of twins as the crowning fulness of
the year, Maximilian Cour, who was essentially superstitious, tapped on
the table three times, to prevent a turn in the luck.

The baker was too late, however, for the very next day the Notary was
brought home with a nasty gunshot wound in his leg.  He had been lured
into duck-hunting on a lake twenty miles away, in the hills, and had been
accidentally shot on an Indian reservation, called Four Mountains, where
the Church sometimes held a mission and presented a primitive sort of
passion-play.  From there he had been brought home by his comrades, and
the doctor from the next parish summoned.  The Cure assisted the doctor
at first, but the task was difficult to him.  At the instant when the
case was most critical the tailor of Chaudiere set his foot inside the
Notary's door.  A moment later he relieved the Cure and helped to probe
for shot, and care for an ugly wound.

Charley had no knowledge of surgery, but his fingers were skilful, his
eye was true, and he had intuition.  The long operation over, the rural
physician and surgeon washed his hands and then studied Charley with
curious admiration.

"Thank you, Monsieur," he said, as he dried his hands on a towel.
"I couldn't have done it without you.  It's a pretty good job; and you
share the credit."

Charley bowed.  "It's a good thing not to halloo till you're out of the
woods," he said.  "Our friend there has a bad time before him--hein?"

"I take you.  It is so."  The man of knives and tinctures pulled his
side-whiskers with smug satisfaction as he looked into a small mirror on
the wall.  "Do you chance to know if madame has any cordials or spirits?"
he added, straightening his waistcoat and adjusting his cravat.

"It is likely," answered Charley, and moved away to the window looking
upon the street.

The doctor turned in surprise.  He was used to being waited on, and he
had expected the tailor to follow the tradition.

"We might--eh?" he said suggestively.  "It is usually the custom to
provide refreshment, but the poor woman, madame, has been greatly
occupied with her husband, and--"

"And the twins," Charley put in drily--" and a house full of work, and
only one old crone in the kitchen to help.  Still, I have no doubt she
has thought of the cordials too.  Women are the slaves of custom--ah,
here they are, as I said, and--"

He stopped short, for in the doorway, with a tray, stood Rosalie
Evanturel.  The surgeon was so intent upon at once fortifying himself
that he did not see the look which passed between Rosalie and the tailor.

Rosalie had been absent for two months.  Her father had been taken
seriously ill the day after the critical episode in the but at Vadrome
Mountain, and she had gone with him to the hospital at Quebec, for an
operation.  The Abbe Rossignol had undertaken to see them safely to the
hospital, and Jo Portugais, at his own request, was permitted to go in
attendance upon M. Evanturel.

There had been a hasty leave-taking between Charley and Rosalie, but it
was in the presence of others, and they had never spoken a word privately
together since the day she had said to him that where he went she would
go, in life or out of it.

"You have been gone two months," Charley said now, after their touch of
hands and voiceless greeting.  "Two months yesterday," she answered.

"At sundown," he replied, in an even voice.

"The Angelus was ringing," she answered calmly, though her heart was
leaping and her hands were trembling.  The doctor, instantly busy with
the cordial, had not noticed what they said.

"Won't you join me?" he asked, offering a glass to Charley.

"Spirits do not suit me," answered Charley.  "Matter of constitution,"
rejoined the doctor, and buttoned up his coat, preparing to depart.  He
came close to Charley.  "Now, I don't want to put upon you, Monsieur," he
said, "but this sick man is valuable in the parish--you take me?  Well,
it's a difficult, delicate case, and I'd be glad if I could rely on you
for a few days.  The Cure would do, but you are young, you have a sense
of things--take me?  Half the fees are yours if you'll keep a sharp eye
on him--three times a day, and be with him at night a while.  Fever is
the thing I'm afraid of--temperature--this way, please!"  He went to the
window, and for a minute engaged Charley in whispered conversation.  "You
take me?" he said cheerily at last, as he turned again towards Rosalie.

"Quite, Monsieur," answered Charley, and drew away, for he caught the
odour of the doctor's breath, and a cold perspiration broke out over him.
He felt the old desire for drink sweeping through him.  "I will do what I
can," he said.

"Come, my dear," the doctor said to Rosalie.  "We will go and see your
father."

Charley's eyes had fastened on the bottles avidly.  As Rosalie turned to
bid him good-bye, he said to her, almost hoarsely: "Take the tray back to
Madame Dauphin--please."

She flashed a glance of inquiry at him.  She was puzzled by the fire in
his eyes.  With her soul in her face as she lifted the tray, out of the
warm-beating life in her, she said in a low tone:

"It is good to live, isn't it?"

He nodded and smiled, and the trouble slowly passed from his eyes.  The
woman in her had conquered his enemy.




CHAPTER XXXV

THE COMING OF MAXIMILIAN COUR AND ANOTHER

"It is good to live, isn't it?"  In the autumn weather when the air drank
like wine, it seemed so indeed, even to Charley, who worked all day in
his shop, his door wide open to the sunlight, and sat up half the night
with Narcisse Dauphin, sometimes even taking a turn at the cradle of the
twins, while madame sat beside her husband's bed.

To Charley the answer to Rosalie's question lay in the fact that his eyes
had never been so keen, his face so alive, or his step so buoyant as in
this week of double duty.  His mind was more hopeful than it had ever
been since the day he awoke with memory restored in the silence of a
mountain hut.

He had found the antidote to his great temptation, to the lurking,
relentless habit which had almost killed him the night John Brown had
sung Champagne Charlie from behind the flaring lights.  From a
determination to fight his own fight with no material aids, he had never
once used the antidote sent him by the Cure's brother.

On St. Jean Baptiste's day his proud will had failed him; intellectual
force, native power of mind, had broken like reeds under the weight of a
cruel temptation.  But now a new force had entered into him.  As his
fingers were about to reach for the spirit-bottle in the house of the
Notary, and he had, for the first time in his life, made an appeal for
help, a woman's voice had said, "It is good to live, isn't it?" and his
hand was stayed.  A woman's look had stilled the strife.  Never before in
his life had he relied on a moral or a spiritual impulse in him.  What
of these existed in him were in unseen quantities--for which there was
neither multiple nor measure--had been primitive and hereditary, flowing
in him like a feeble tincture diluted to inefficacy.

Rosalie had resolved him back to the original elements.  The quiet days
he had spent in Chaudiere, the self-sacrifice he had been compelled to
make, the human sins, such as those of Jo Portugais and Louis Trudel,
with which he had had to do, the simplicity of the life around him--the
uncomplicated lie and the unvarnished truth, the obvious sorrow and the
patent joy, the childish faith, and the rude wickedness so pardonable
because so frankly brutal--had worked upon him.  The elemental spirit of
it all had so invaded his nature, breaking through the crust of old habit
to the new man, that, when he fell before his temptation, and his body
became saturated with liquor, the healthy natural being and the growing
natural mind were overpowered by the coarse onslaught, and death had
nearly followed.

It was his first appeal to a force outside himself, to an active
principle unfamiliar to the voluntary working of his nature, and the
answer had been immediate and adequate.  Yet what was it?  He did not
ask; he had not got beyond the mere experience, and the old questioning
habit was in abeyance.  Each new and great emotion has its dominating
moment, its supreme occasion, before taking its place in the modulated
moral mechanism.  He was touched with helplessness.

As he sat beside Narcisse Dauphin's bedside, one evening, the sick man on
his way to recovery, there came to him the text of a sermon he had once
heard John Brown preach: "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man
lay down his life for his friend."  He had been thinking of Rosalie and
that day at Vadrome Mountain.  She would not only have died with him, but
she would have died for him, if need had been.  What might he give in
return for what she gave?

The Notary interrupted his thoughts.  He had lain watching Charley for a
long time, his brow drawn down with thought.  At last he said:

"Monsieur, you have been good to me."  Charley laid a hand on the sick
man's arm.

"I don't see that.  But if you won't talk, I'll believe you think so."

The Notary shook his head.  "I've not been talking for an hour, I've no
fever, and I want to say some things.  When I've said them, I'll feel
better--voila!  I want to make the amende honorable.  I once thought
you were this and that--I won't say what I thought you.  I said you
interfered--giving advice to people, as you did to Filion Lacasse,
and taking the bread out of my mouth.  I said that!"

He paused, raised himself on his elbow, smoothed back his grizzled hair
behind his ears, looked at himself in the mirror opposite with
satisfaction, and added oracularly: "But how prone is the mind of man to
judge amiss!  You have put bread into my mouth--no, no, Monsieur, you
shall hear me!  As well as doing your own work, you have done my business
since my accident as well as a lawyer could do it; and you've given every
penny to my wife."

"As for the work I've done," answered Charley, "it was nothing--you
notaries have easy times.  You may take your turn with my shears and
needle one day."

With a dash of patronage true to his nature, "You are wonderful for a
tailor," the Notary rejoined.  Charley laughed--seldom, if ever, had he
laughed since coming to Chaudiere.  It was, however, a curious fact that
he took a real pleasure in the work he did with his hands.  In making
clothes for habitant farmers, and their sons and their sons' sons, and
jackets for their wives and daughters, he had had the keenest pleasure
of his life.

He had taken his earnings with pride, if not with exultation.  He knew
the Notary did not mean that he was wonderful as a tailor, but he
answered to the suggestion.

"You liked that last coat I made for you, then," he said drily;
"I believe you wore it when you were shot.  It was the thing for your
figure, man."

The Notary looked in the large mirror opposite with sad content.  "Ah, it
was a good figure, the first time I went to that hut at Four Mountains!"

"We can't always be young.  You have a waist yet, and your chest-barrel
gives form to a waistcoat.  Tut, tut!  Think of the twins in the way of
vainglory and hypocrisy."

"'Twins' and 'hypocrisy'; there you have struck the nail on the head,
tailor.  There is the thing I'm going to tell you about."

After a cautious glance at the door and the window, Dauphin continued in
quick, broken sentences: "It wasn't an accident at Four Mountains--not
quite.  It was Paulette Dubois--you know the woman that lives at the
Seigneur's gate?  Twelve years ago she was a handsome girl.  I fell in
love with her, but she left here.  There were two other men.  There was a
timber-merchant,--and there was a lawyer after.  The timber-merchant was
married; the lawyer wasn't.  She lived at first with the timber-merchant.
He was killed--murdered in the woods."

"What was the timber-merchant's name?" interrupted Charley in an even
voice.

"Turley--but that doesn't matter!" continued the Notary.  "He was
murdered, and then the lawyer came on the scene.  He lived with her for a
year.  She had a child by him.  One day he sent the child away to a safe
place and told her he was going to turn over a new leaf--he was going to
stand for Parliament, and she must go.  She wouldn't go without the
child.  At last he said the child was dead; and showed her the
certificate of death.  Then she came back here, and for a while, alas!
she disgraced the parish.  But all at once she changed--she got a message
that her child was alive.  To her it was like being born again.  It was
at this time they were going to drive her from the parish.  But the
Seigneur and then the Cure spoke for her, and so did I--at last."

He paused and plaintively admired himself in the mirror.  He was grateful
that he had been clean-shaved that morning, and he was content to catch
the citrine odour of the bergamot upon his hair.

New phases of the most interesting case Charley had ever defended spread
out before him--the case which had given him his friend Jo Portugais,
which had turned his own destiny.  Yet he could not quite trace in it the
vital association of this vain Notary now in the confessional mood.

"You behaved very well," said Charley tentatively.

"Ah, you say that, knowing so little!  What will you say when you know
all--ah!  That I should take a stand also was important.  Neither the
Seigneur nor the Cure was married; I was.  I have been long-suffering for
a cause.  My marital felicity has been bruised--bruised--but not broken."

"There are the twins," said Charley, with a half-closed eye.

"Could woman ask greater proof?" urged the Notary seriously, for the
other's voice had been so well masked that he did not catch its satire.
"But see my peril, and mark the ground of my interest in this poor
wanton!  Yet a woman--a woman-frail creatures, as we know, and to be
pitied, not made more pitiable by the stronger sex.  .  .  .  But, see
now!  Why should I have perilled mine own conjugal peace, given ground
for suspicion even--for I am unfortunate, unfortunate in the exterior
with which Dame Nature has honoured me!"  Again he looked in the mirror
with sad complacency.

On these words his listener offered no comment, and he continued:

"For this reason I lifted my voice for the poor wanton.  It was I who
wrote the letter to her that her child was alive.  I did it with high
purpose--I foresaw that she would change her ways if she thought her
child was living.  Was I mistaken?  No.  I am an observer of human
nature.  Intellect conquered.  'Io triumphe'.  The poor fly-away changed,
led a new life.  Ever since then she has tried to get the man--the
lawyer--to tell her where her child is.  He has not done so.  He has said
the child is dead--always.  When she seemed to give up belief, then would
come another letter to her, telling her the child was living--but not
where.  So she would keep on writing to the man, and sometimes she would
go away searching--searching.  To what end?  Nothing!  She had a letter
some months ago, for she had got restless, and a young kinsman of the
Seigneur had come to visit at the seigneury for a week, and took much
notice of her.  There was danger.  Voila, another letter."

"From you?"

"Monsieur, of course!  Will you keep a secret--on your sacred honour?"

"I can keep a secret without sacred honour."

"Ah, yes, of course!  You have a secret of your own--pardon me, I am
only saying what every one says.  Well, this is the secret of the woman
Paulette Dubois.  My cousin, Robespierre Dauphin, a notary in Quebec, is
the agent of the lawyer, the father of the child.  He pities the poor
woman.  But he is bound in professional honour to the lawyer fellow, not
to betray.  When visiting Robespierre once I found out the truth-by
accident.

"I told him what I intended.  He gave permission to tell the woman her
child was alive; and, if need be for her good, to affirm it over and over
again--no more."

"And this?" said Charley, pointing to the injured leg, for he now
associated the accident with the secret just disclosed.

"Ah, you apprehend!  You have an avocat's mind--almost.  It was at Four
Mountains.  Paulette is superstitious; so not long ago she went to live
there alone with an old half-breed woman who has second-sight.  Monsieur,
it is a gift unmistakably.  For as soon as the hag clapped eyes on me in
the hut, she said: 'There is the man that wrote you the letters.'  Well--
what!  Paulette Dubois came down on me like an avalanche--Monsieur, like
an avalanche!  She believed the old witch; and there was I lying with an
unconvincing manner"--he sighed--"lying requires practice, alas!  She saw
I was lying, and in a rage snatched up my gun.  It went off by accident,
and brought me down.  Did she relent?  Not so.  She helped to bind me up,
and the last words she said to me were: 'You will suffer; you will have
time to think.  I am glad.  You have kept me on the rack.  I shall only
be sorry if you die, for then I shall not be able to torture you till you
tell me where my child is!'  Monsieur, I lied to the last, lest she
should come here and make a noise; but I'm not sure it wouldn't have been
better to break faith with Robespierre, and tell the poor wanton where
her child is.  What would you do, Monsieur?  I cannot ask the Cure or the
Seigneur--I have reasons.  But you have the head of a lawyer--almost--and
you have no local feelings, no personal interest--eh?"

"I should tell the truth."

"Your reasons, Monsieur?"

"Because the lawyer is a scoundrel.  Your betrayal of his secret is not a
thousandth part so bad as one lie told to this woman, whose very life is
her child.  Is it a boy or a girl?"

"A boy."

"Good!  What harm can be done?  A left-handed boy is all right in the
world.  Your wife has twins--then think of the woman, the one ewe lamb of
'the poor wanton.'  If you do not tell her, you will have her here making
a noise, as you say.  I wonder she has not been here on your door-step."

"I had a letter from her to-day.  She is coming-ah, mon dieu!"

"When?"

There was a tap at the window.  The Notary started.  "Ah, Heaven, here
she is!" he gasped, and drew over to the wall.

A voice came from outside.  "Shall I play for you, Dauphin?  It is as
good as medicine."

The Notary recovered himself at once.  His volatile nature sprang back to
its pose.  He could forget Paulette Dubois for the moment.

"It is Maximilian Cour in the garden," he said happily.  Then he raised
his voice.  "Play on, baker; but something for convalescence--the return
of spring, the sweet assonance of memory."

"A September air, and a gush of spring," said the baker, trying to crane
his long neck through the window.  "Ah, there you are, Dauphin!  I shall
give you a sleep to-night like a balmy eve."  He nodded to the tailor.
"M'sieu', you shall judge if sentiment be dead.

"I have racked my heart to play this time.  I have called it, 'The Baffled
Quest of Love'.  I have taken the music of the song of Alsace, 'Le Jardin
d'Amour', and I have made variations on it, keeping the last verse of the
song in my mind.  You know the song, M'sieu':

             "'Quand je vais au jardin, Jardin d'amour,
               Je crois entendu des pas,
               Je veux fuir, et n'ose pas.
               Voici la fin du jour .  .  .
               Je crains et j'hesite,
               Mon coeur bat plus vite
               En ce sejour .  .  .
               Quand je vais an jardin, jardin d'amour.'"

The baker sat down on a stool he had brought, and began to tune his
fiddle.  From inside came the voice of the Notary.

"Play 'The Woods are Green' first," he said.  "Then the other."

The Notary possessed the one high-walled garden in the village, and
though folk gathered outside and said that the baker was playing for
the sick man, there was no one in the garden save the fiddler himself.
Once or twice a lad appeared on the top of the wall, looking over, but
vanished at once when he saw Charley's face at the window.  Long ere the
baker had finished, the song was caught up from outside, and before the
last notes of the violin had died away, twenty voices were singing it in
the street, and forty feet marched away with it into the dusk.

Darkness comes quickly in this land of brief twilight.  Presently
out of the soft shadowed stillness, broken by the note of a vagrant
whippoorwill, crept out from Maximilian Cour's old violin the music
of 'The Baffled Quest of Love'.

The baker was not a great musician, but he had a talent, a rare gift of
pathos, and an imagination untrammelled by rigorous rules of harmony and
construction.  Whatever there was in his sentimental bosom he poured into
this one achievement of his life.  It brought tears to the eyes of
Narcisse Dauphin.  It opened a gate of the garden wall, and drew inside a
girl's face, shining with feeling.

Maximilian Cour spoke for more than himself that night.  His philandering
spirit had, at middle age, begotten a desire to house itself in a quiet
place, where the blinds could be drawn close, and the room of life made
ready with all the furniture of love.  So he had spoken to his violin,
and it had answered as it had never done before.  The soul of the lean
baker touched the heart of a man whose life had been but a baffled quest,
and the spirit of a girl whose love was her sun by day, her moon by
night, and the starlight of her dreams.

From the shade of the window the man the girl loved watched her as she
sank upon the ground and clasped her hands before her in abandonment to
the music.  He watched her when the baker, at last, overcome by his own
feelings--and ashamed of them--got up and stole swiftly out of the
garden.  He watched her till he saw her drop her face in her hands;
then, opening the door and stealing out, he came and laid a hand upon
her shoulder, and she heard him say:

"Rosalie!"




CHAPTER XXXVI

BARRIERS SWEPT AWAY

Rosalie came to her feet, gasping with pleasure.  She had been unhappy
ever since she had returned from Quebec, for though she had sometimes
been brought in contact with Charley in the Notary's house since the day
of the operation, nothing had passed between them save the necessary
commonplaces of a sick-room, given a little extra colour, perhaps, by the
sense of responsibility which fell upon them both, and by that importance
which hidden sentiment gives to every motion.  The twins had been
troublesome and ill, and Madame Dauphin had begged Rosalie to come in
for a couple of hours every evening.  Thus the tailor and the girl who,
by every rule of wisdom, should have been kept as far apart as the poles,
were played into each other's hands by human kindness and damnable
propinquity.  The man, manlike, felt no real danger, because nothing was
said--after everything had been said for all time at the hut on Vadrome
Mountain.  He had not realised the true situation, because of late her
voice, like his, had been even and her hand cool and steady.  He had not
noticed that her eyes were like hungry fires, eating up her face--eating
away its roundness, and leaving a pathetic beauty behind.

It seemed to him that because there was silence--neither the written word
nor the speaking look--that all was well.  He was hugging the chain of
denial to his bosom, as though to say, "This way is safety"; he was
hiding his face from the beacon-lights of her eyes, which said: "This way
is home."

Home?  Pictures of home, of a home such as Maximilian Cour painted in his
music, had passed before him now and then since that great day on Vadrome
Mountain.  A simple fireside, with frugal but comfortable fare; a few
books; the study of the fields and woods; the daily humble task over
which he could meditate as his hands worked mechanically; the happy face
of a happy woman near--he had thought of home; and he had put it from
him.  No matter what the temptation, his must be, perhaps for ever, the
bed and board unshared.  He had had his chance in the old days, and he
had thrown it away with insolent indifference, and an unpardonable
contempt for the opinion of the world.

Now, with a blind fatuousness which had nothing to do with his old
intellectual power, but was evidence of a primitive life of feeling, had
vaguely imagined that because there were no clinging hands, or stolen
looks, or any vow or promise, that all might go on as at present--upon
the surface.  With a curious absence of his old accuracy of observation
he was treating the immediate past--his and Rosalie's past--as if it did
not actually exist; as if only the other and farther past was a tragedy,
and this nearer one a dream.

But the film fell from his eyes as Maximilian Cour played his 'Baffled
Quest', with its quaint, searching pathos; and as he saw the figure of
the girl alone in the shade of the great rose-bushes, past and present
became one, and the whole man was lost in that one word "Rosalie!" which
called her to her feet with outstretched hands.

The tears sprang to her eyes; her face upturned to his was a mute appeal,
a speechless 'Viens ici'.

Past, present, future, duty, apprehension, consequences, suddenly fell
away from Charley's mind like a garment slipping from the shoulders, and
the new man, swept off his feet by the onrush of unused and ungoverned
emotions, caught the girl to his arms with a desperate joy.

"Oh, do you care, then--for me?" wept the girl, and hid her face in his
breast.

A voice came from inside the house: "Monsieur, Monsieur--ah, come, if you
please, tailor!"

The girl drew back quickly, looked up at him for one instant with a
triumphant happy daring, then, suddenly covered with confusion, turned,
ran to the gate, opened it, passed swiftly out, and was swallowed up in
the dusk.




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE CHALLENGE OF PAULETTE DUBOIS

"Monsieur, Monsieur!" came the voice from inside the house, querulously
and anxiously.  Charley entered the Notary's bedroom.

"Monsieur," said the Notary excitedly, "she is here--Paulette is here.
My wife is asleep, thank God!  but old Sophie has just told me that the
woman asks to see me.  Ah, Heaven above, what shall I do?"

"Will you leave it to me?"

"Yes, yes, Monsieur."

"You will do exactly as I say?"

"Ah, most sure."

"Very well.  Keep still.  I will see her first.  Trust to me."  He turned
and left the room.

Charley found the woman in the Notary's office, which, while partly
detached from the house, did duty as sitting-room and library.  When
Charley entered, the room was only lighted by two candles, and Paulette's
face was hidden by a veil, but Charley observed the tremulousness of the
figure and the nervous decision of manner.  He had seen her before
several times, and he had always noticed the air, half bravado, half
shrinking, marking her walk and movements, as though two emotions were
fighting in her.  She was now dressed in black, save for one bright red
ribbon round her throat, incongruous and garish.

When she saw Charley she started, for she had expected the servant with a
message from the Notary--her own message had been peremptory.

"I wish to see the Notary," she said defiantly.

"He is not able to come to you."

"What of that?"

"Did you expect to go to his bedroom?"

"Why not?"  She was abrupt to discourtesy.

"You are neither physician, nor relative."

"I have important business."

"I transact his business for him, Madame."

"You are a tailor."

"I learned that; I am learning to be a notary."

"My business is private."

"I transact his private business too--that which his wife cannot do.
Would you prefer his wife to me?  It must be either the one or the
other."

The woman started towards the door in a rage.  He stepped between.  "You
cannot see the Notary."

"I'll see his wife, then--"

"That would only put the fat in the fire.  His wife would not listen to
you.  She is quick-tempered, and she fancies she has reasons for not
liking you."

"She's a fool.  I haven't been always particular, but as for Narcisse
Dauphin--"

"He has been a good friend to you at some expense, the world says."

The woman struggled with herself.  "The world lies!" she said at last.

"But he doesn't.  The village was against you once.  That was when the
Notary, with the Seigneur, was for you--it has cost him something ever
since, I'm told.  You've never thanked him."

"He has tortured me for years, the oily, smirking, lying--"

"He has been your best friend," he interrupted.  "Please sit down, and
listen to me for a moment."

She hesitated, then did as he asked.

"He tells me that years ago he was in love with you.  Hasn't he behaved
better than some who said they loved you?"

The woman half started up, her eyes flashing, but met a deprecating
motion of his hand and sat down again.

"He thought that if you knew your child lived, you would think better of
life--and of yourself.  He has his good points, the Notary."

"Why doesn't he tell me where my child is?"

"The Notary is in bed--you shot him!  Don't you think it is doing you a
good turn not to have you arrested?"

"It was an accident."

"Oh no, it wasn't!  You couldn't make a jury believe that.  And if you
were in prison, how could you find your child?  You see, you have treated
the Notary very badly."

She was silent, and he added, slowly: "He had good reasons for not
telling you.  It wasn't his own secret, and he hadn't come by it in a
strictly professional way.  Your child was being well cared for, and he
told you simply that it was alive--for your own sake.  But he has changed
his mind at last, and--"

The woman sprang from her seat.  "He will tell me--he will tell me?"

"I will tell you."

"Monsieur-Monsieur--ah, my God, but you are kind!  How should you know--
what do you know?"

"I give you my word that by to-morrow evening you shall know where your
child is."

For a moment she was bewildered and overcome, then a look of gratitude,
of luminous hope, covered her face, softening the hardness of its
contour, and she fell on her knees beside the table, dropped her head
in her arms, and sobbed as if her heart would break.

"My little lamb, my little, little lamb-my own dearest!" she sobbed.
"I shall have you again.  I shall have you again--all my own!"

He stood and watched her meditatively.  He was wondering why it was that
grief like this had never touched him so before.  His eyes were moist.
Though he had been many things in his life, he had never been abashed;
but a curious timidity possessed him now.

He leaned over and touched her shoulder with a kindly abruptness, a
friendly awkwardness.  "Cheer up," he said.  "You shall have your child,
if Dauphin can help you to it."

"If he ever tries to take him from me"--she sprang to her feet, her face
in a fury--"I will--"

For an instant her overpowering passion possessed her, and she stood
violent and wilful; then, under his fixed, exacting gaze, her rage
ceased; she became still and grey and quiet.

"I shall know to-morrow evening, Monsieur?  Where?"  Her voice was weak
and distant.

He thought for a time.  "At my house-at nine o'clock," he answered at
last.

"Monsieur," she said, in a choking voice, "if I get my child again, I
will bless you to my dying day."

"No, no; it will be Dauphin you must bless," he said, and opened the door
for her.  As she disappeared into the dusk and silence he adjusted his
eye-glass, and stared musingly after her, though there was nothing to see
save the summer darkness, nothing to hear save the croak of the frogs in
the village pond.  He was thinking of the trial of Joseph Nadeau, and of
a woman in the gallery, who laughed.

"Monsieur, Monsieur," called the voice of the Notary from the bedroom.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE CURE AND THE SEIGNEUR VISIT THE TAILOR

It had been a perfect September day.  The tailor of Chaudiere had been
busier than usual, for winter was within hail, and careful habitants
were renewing their simple wardrobes.  The Seigneur and the Cure arrived
together, each to order the making of a greatcoat of the Irish frieze
which the Seigneur kept in quantity at the Manor.  The Seigneur was in
rare spirits.  And not without reason; for this was Michaelmas eve, and
tomorrow would be Michaelmas day, and there was a promise to be redeemed
on Michaelmas day!  He had high hopes of its redemption according to his
own wishes; for he was a vain Seigneur, and he had had his way in all
things all his life, as everybody knew.  Importunity with discretion was
his motto, and he often vowed to the Cure that there was no other motto
for the modern world.

The Cure's visit to the tailor's shop on this particular day had unusual
interest, for it concerned his dear ambition, the fondest aspiration of
his life: to bring the infidel tailor (they could not but call a man an
infidel whose soul was negative--the word agnostic had not then become
usual) from the chains of captivity into the freedom of the Church.
The Cure had ever clung to his fond hope; and it was due to his patient
confidence that there were several parishioners who now carried Charley's
name before the shrine of the blessed Virgin, and to the little calvaries
by the road-side.  The wife of Filion Lacasse never failed to pray for
him every day.  The thousand dollars gained by the saddler on the
tailor's advice had made her life happier ever since, for Filion had
become saving and prudent, and had even got her a "hired girl."  There
were at least a half-dozen other women, including Madame Dauphin, who did
the same.

That he might listen again to the good priest on his holy hobby, inflamed
with this passion of missionary zeal, the Seigneur, this morning, had
thrown doubt upon the ultimate success of the Cure's efforts.

"My dear Cure" said the Seigneur, "it is true, I think, what the tailor
suggested to my brother--on my soul, I wonder the Abbe gave in, for
a more obstinate fellow I never knew!--that a man is born with the
disbelieving maggot in his brain, or the butterfly of belief, or
whatever it may be called.  It's constitutional--may be criminal, but
constitutional.  It seems to me you would stand more chance with the Jew,
Greek, or heretic, than our infidel.  He thinks too much--for a tailor,
or for nine tailors, or for one man."

He pulled his nose, as if he had said a very good thing indeed.  They
were walking slowly towards the village during this conversation, and the
Cure, stopping short, brought his stick emphatically down in his palm
several times, as he said:

"Ah, you will not see!  You will not understand.  With God all things are
possible.  Were it the devil himself in human form, I should work and
pray and hope, as my duty is, though he should still remain the devil to
the end.  What am I?  Nothing.  But what the Church has done, the Church
may do.  Think of Paul and Augustine, and Constantine!"

"They were classic barbarians to whom religion was but an emotion.  This
man has a brain which must be satisfied."

"I must count him as a soul to be saved through that very intelligence,
as well as through the goodness of his daily life, which, in its charity,
shames us all.  He gives all he earns to the sick and needy.  He lives on
fare as poor as the poorest of our people eat; he gives up his hours of
sleep to nurse the sick.  Dauphin might not have lived but for him.  His
heart is good, else these things were impossible.  He could not act
them."

"But that's just it, Cure.  Doesn't he act them?  Isn't it a whim?  What
more likely than that, tired of the flesh-pots of Egypt, he comes here to
live in the desert--for a sensation?  We don't know."

"We do know.  The man has had sorrow and the man has had sin.  Yes,
believe me, there is none of us that suffers as this man has suffered.
I have had many, many talks with him.  Believe me, Maurice, I speak the
truth.  My heart bleeds for him.  I think I know the thing that drove him
here amongst us.  It is a great temptation, which pursues him here--even
here, where his life is so commendable.  I have seen him fighting it.
I have seen his torture, the piteous, ignoble yielding, and the struggle,
with more than mortal energy, to be master of himself."

"It is--" the Seigneur said, then paused.

"No, no; do not ask me.  He has not confessed to me, Maurice-naturally,
nothing like that.  But I know.  I know and pity--ah, Maurice, I almost
love.  You argue, and reason, but I know this, my friend, that something
was left out of this man when he was made, and it is that thing that we
must find, or he will die among us a ruined soul, and his gravestone will
be the monument of our shame.  If he can once trust the Church, if he can
once say, 'Lord, into Thy hands I commend my spirit,' then his temptation
will vanish, and I shall bring him in--I shall lead him home."

For an instant the Seigneur looked at him in amazement, for this was a
Cure he had never known.

"Dear Cure, you are not your old self," he said gently.

"I am not myself--yes, that is it, Maurice.  I am not the old humdrum
Cure you knew.  The whole world is my field now.  I have sorrowed for
sin, within the bounds of this little Chaudiere.  Now I sorrow for
unbelief.  Through this man, through much thinking on him, I have come to
feel the woe of all the world.  I have come to hear the footsteps of the
Master near.  My friend, it is not a legend, not a belief now, it is a
presence.  I owe him much, Maurice.  In bringing him home, I shall
understand what it all means--the faith that we profess.  I shall in
truth feel that it is all real.  You see how much I may yet owe to him--
to this infidel tailor.  I only hope I have not betrayed him," he added
anxiously.  "I would keep faith with him--ah, yes, indeed!"

"I only remember that you have said the man suffers.  That is no
betrayal."

They entered the village in silence.  Presently, however, the sound of
Maximilian Cour's violin, as they passed the bakery, set the Seigneur's
tongue wagging again, and it wagged on till they came to the tailor's
shop.

"Good-day to you, Monsieur," he said, as they entered.

"Have you a hot goose for me?"

"I have, but I will not press it on you," replied Charley.

"Should you so take my question--eh?"

"Should you so take my 'anser'?"

The pun was new to the Seigneur, and he turned to the Cure chuckling.
"Think of that, Cure!  He knows the classics."  He laughed till the tears
came into his eyes.

The next few moments Charley was busy measuring the two potentates for
greatcoats.  As it was his first work for them, it was necessary for the
Cure to write down the Seigneur's measurements, as the tailor called them
off, while the Seigneur did the same when the Cure was being measured.
So intent were the three it might have been a conference of war.  The
Seigneur ventured a distant but self-conscious smile when the measurement
of his waist was called, for he had by two inches the advantage of the
Cure, though they were the same age, while he was one inch better in the
chest.  The Seigneur was proud of his figure, and, unheeding the passing
of fashions, held to the knee-breeches and silk stockings long after they
had disappeared from the province.  To the Cure he had often said that
the only time he ever felt heretical was when in the presence of the
gaitered calves of a Protestant dean.  He wore his sleeves tight and his
stock high, as in the days when William the Sailor was king in England,
and his long gold-topped Prince Regent cane was the very acme of dignity.

The measurement done, the three studied the fashion plates--mostly five
years old--as Von Moltke and Bismarck might have studied the field of
Gravelotte.  The Seigneur's remarks were highly critical, till, with a
few hasty strokes on brown paper, Charley sketched in his figure with a
long overcoat in style much the same as his undercoat, stately and
flowing and confined at the waist.

"Admirable, most admirable!" said the Seigneur.  "The likeness is
astonishing"--he admired the carriage of his own head in Charley's swift
lines--"the garment in perfect taste.  Form--there is nothing like form
and proportion in life.  It is almost a religion."

"My dear friend!" said the Cure, in amazement.

"I know when I am in the presence of an artist and his work.  Louis
Trudel had rule and measure, shears and a needle.  Our friend here has
eye and head, sense of form and creative gift.  Ah, Cure, Cure, if I were
twenty-five, with the assistance of Monsieur, I would show the bucks in
Fabrique Street how to dress.  What style is this called, Monsieur?" he
suddenly asked, pointing to the drawing.

"Style a la Rossignol, Seigneur," said the tailor.

The Seigneur was flattered out of all reason.  He looked across at the
post-office, where he could see Rosalie dimly moving in the shade of the
shop.

"Ah, if I had but ordered this coat sooner!" he said regretfully.
He was thinking that to-morrow was Michaelmas day, when he was to ask
Rosalie for her answer again, and he fancied himself appearing before
her in the gentle cool of the evening, in this coat, lightly thrown back,
disclosing his embroidered waistcoat, seals, and snowy linen.  "Monsieur,
I am highly complimented, believe me," he said.  "Observe, Cure, that
this coat is invented for me on the spot."

The Cure nodded appreciatively.  "Wonderful!  Wonderful!  But do you
not think," he added, a little wistfully--for, was he not a Frenchman,
susceptible like all his race to the appearance of things?--"do you not
think it might be too fashionable for me?"

"Not a whit--not a whit," replied the Seigneur generously.  "Should not a
Cure look distinguished--be dignified?  Consider the length, the line,
the eloquence of design!  Ah, Monsieur, once again, you are an artist!
The Cure shall wear it--indeed but he shall!  Then I shall look like him,
and perhaps get credit for some of his perfections."

"And the Cure?" said Charley.

"The Cure?--the Cure?  Tiens, a little of my worldliness will do him
good.  There are no contrasts in him.  He must wear the coat."  He waved
his walking-stick complacently, for he was thinking that the Cure's less
perfect figure would set off his own well as they walked together.  "May
I have the honour to keep this as a souvenir?" he added, picking up the
sketch.

"With pleasure," answered Charley.  "You do not need it?"

"Not at all."

The Cure looked a little disappointed, and Charley, seeing, immediately
sketched on brown paper the priestly figure in the new-created coat,
a la Rossignol.  On this drawing he was a little longer engaged, with the
result that the Cure was reproduced with a singular fidelity--in face,
figure, and expression a personality gentle yet important.

"On my soul, you shall not have it!" said the Seigneur.  "But you shall
have me, and I shall have you, lest we both grow vain by looking at
ourselves."  He thrust the sketch of himself into the Cure's hands,
and carefully rolled up that of his friend.

The Cure was amazed at this gift of the tailor, and delighted with the
picture of himself--his vanity was as that of a child, without guile or
worldliness.  He was better pleased, however, to have the drawing of his
friend by him, that vanity might not be too companionable.  He thanked
Charley with a beaming face, and then the two friends bowed and moved
towards the door.  Suddenly the Cure stopped.

"My dear Maurice," said he, "we have forgotten the important thing."

"Think of that--we two old babblers!" said the Seigneur.  He nodded for
the Cure to begin.  "Monsieur," said the Cure to Charley, "you maybe able
to help us in a little difficulty.  For a long time we have intended
holding a great mission with a kind of religious drama like that
performed at Ober-Ammergau, and called The Passion Play.  You know of it,
Monsieur?"

"Very well through reading, Monsieur."

"Next Easter we propose having a Passion Play in pious imitation of
the famous drama.  We will hold it at the Indian reservation of Four
Mountains, thus quickening our own souls and giving a good object-lesson
of the great History to the Indians."

The Cure paused rather anxiously, but Charley did not speak.  His eyes
were fixed inquiringly on the Cure, and he had a sudden suspicion that
some devious means were forward to influence him.  He dismissed the
thought, however, for this Cure was simple as man ever was made,
straightforward as the most heretical layman might demand.

The Cure, taking heart, again continued: "Now I possess an authentic
description of the Ober-Ammergau drama, giving details of its
presentation at different periods, and also a book of the play.  But
there is no one in the parish who reads German, and it occurred to the
Seigneur and myself that, understanding French so well, by chance you may
understand German also, and would, perhaps, translate the work for us."

"I read German easily and speak it fairly," Charley answered, relieved;
"and you are welcome to my services."

The Cure's pale face flushed with pleasure.  He took the little German
book from his pocket, and handed it over.

"It is not so very long," he said; "and we shall all be grateful."  Then
an inspiration came to him; his eyes lighted.

"Monsieur," he said, "you will notice that there are no illustrations in
the book.  It is possible that you might be able to make us a few
drawings--if we do not ask too much?  It would aid greatly in the matter
of costume, and you might use my library--I have a fair number of
histories."  The Cure was almost breathless, his heart thumped as he made
the request.  After a slight pause he added, hastily: "You are always
doing for others.  It is hardly kind to ask you; but we have some months
to spare; there need be no haste."  Charley hastened to relieve the
Cure's anxiety.  "Do not apologise," he said.  "I will do what I can
when I can.  But as for drawing, Monsieur, it will be but amateurish."

"Monsieur," interposed the Seigneur promptly, "if you're not an artist,
I'm damned!"

"Maurice!" murmured the Cure reproachfully.  "Can't help it, Cure.  I've
held it in for an hour.  It had to come; so there it is exploded.  I see
no damage either, save to my own reputation.  Monsieur," he added to
Charley, "if I had gifts like yours, nothing would hold me.  I should put
on more airs than Beauty Steele."

It was fortunate that, at that instant, Charley's face was turned away,
or the Seigneur would have seen it go white and startled.  Charley did
not dare turn his head for the moment.  He could not speak.  What did
the Seigneur know of Beauty Steele?

To hide his momentary confusion, he went over to the drawer of a cupboard
in the wall, and placed the book inside.  It gave him time to recover
himself.  When he turned round again his face was calm, his manner
composed.

"And who, may I ask, is Beauty Steele?" he said.  "Faith I do not know,"
answered the Seigneur, taking a pinch of snuff.  "It's years since I
first read the phrase in a letter a scamp of a relative of mine wrote me
from the West.  He had met a man of the name, who had a reputation as a
clever fop, a very handsome fellow.  So I thought it a good phrase, and
I've used it ever since on occasions.  'More airs than Beauty Steele.'
--It has a sound; it's effective, I fancy, Monsieur?"

"Decidedly effective," answered Charley quietly.  He picked up his
shears.  "You will excuse me," he said grimly, "but I must earn my
living.  I cannot live on my reputation."

The Seigneur and the Cure lifted their hats--to the tailor.

"Au revoir, Monsieur," they both said, and Charley bowed them out.

The two friends turned to each other a little way up the street.
"Something will come of this, Cure," said the Seigneur.  The Cure,
whose face had a look of happiness, pressed his arm in reply.

Inside the tailor-shop, a voice kept saying, "More airs than Beauty
Steele!"





CHAPTER XXXIX

THE SCARLET WOMAN

Since the evening in the garden when she had been drawn into Charley's
arms, and then fled from them in joyful confusion, Rosalie had been in a
dream.  She had not closed her eyes all night, or, if she closed them,
they still saw beautiful things flashing by, to be succeeded by other
beautiful things.  It was a roseate world.  To her simple nature it was
not so important to be loved as to love.  Selfishness was as yet the
minor part of her.  She had been giving all her life--to her mother, as a
child; to sisters at the convent who had been kind to her; to the poor
and the sick of the parish; to her father, who was helpless without her;
to the tailor across the way.  In each case she had given more than she
had got.  A nature overflowing with impulsive affection, it must spend
itself upon others.  The maternal instinct was at the very core of her
nature, and care for others was as much a habit as an instinct with her.
She had love to give, and it must be given.  It had been poured like the
rain from heaven on the just and the unjust; on animals as on human
beings, and in so far as her nature, in the first spring--the very April
--of its powers, could do.

Till Charley had come to Chaudiere, it had all been the undisciplined
ardour of a girl's nature.  A change had begun in the moment when she had
tearfully thrust the oil and flour in upon his excoriated breast.  Later
came real awakening, and a riotous outpouring of herself in sympathy, in
observation, in a reckless kindness which must have done her harm but
that her clear intelligence balanced her actions, and because secrecy in
one thing helped to restrain her in all.  Yet with all the fresh overflow
of her spirit, which, assisted by her new position as postmistress, made
her a conspicuous and popular figure in the parish, where officialdom had
rare honour and little labour, she had prejudices almost unworthy of her,
due though they were to radical antipathy.  These prejudices, one against
Jo Portugais and the other against Paulette Dubois, she had never been
able entirely to overcome, though she had honestly tried.  On the way
to the hospital at Quebec, however, Jo had been so careful of her father,
so respectful when speaking of M'sieu', so regardful of her own comfort,
that her antagonism to him was lulled.  But the strong prejudice against
Paulette Dubois remained, casting a shadow on her bright spirit.

All this day she had moved about in a mellow dream, very busy, scarcely
thinking.  New feelings dominated her, and she was too primitive to
analyse them and too occupied with them to realise acutely the life about
her.  Work was an abstraction, resting rather than tiring her.

Many times she had looked across at the tailor-shop, only seeing Charley
once.  She did not wish to speak with him now, nor to be near him yet;
she wanted this day for herself only.

So it was that, soon after the Cure and the Seigneur had bade good-bye to
Charley, she left the post-office and went quickly through the village
to a spot by the river, where was a place called the Rest of the
Flaxbeaters.  It was an overhanging rock which made a kind of canopy over
a sweet spring, where, in the days when their labours sounded through the
valley, the flaxbeaters from the level below came to eat their meals and
to rest.

This had always been a resort for her in the months when the flax-beaters
did not use it.  Since a child she had made the place her own.  To this
day it is called Rosalie's Dell; for are not her sorrows and joys still
told by those who knew and loved her?  and is not the parish still
fragrant with her name?  Has not her history become a living legend a
thousand times told?

Leaving the village behind her, Rosalie passed down the high-road till
she came to a path that led off through a grove of scattered pines.
There would be yet a half-hour's sun and then a short twilight, and the
river and the woods and the Rest of the Flax-beaters would be her own;
and she could think of the wonderful thing come upon her.  She had
brought with her a book of English poems, and as she went through the
grove she opened it, and in her pretty English repeated over and over to
herself:

         "My heart is thine, and soul and body render
          Faith to thy faith; I give nor hold in thrall:
          Take all, dear love!  thou art my life's defender;
          Speak to my soul!  Take life and love; take all!"

She was lifted up by the abandonment of the verse, by the fulness of her
own feelings, which had only needed a touch of beauty to give it
exaltation.  The touch had come.

She went on abstractedly to the place where she had trysted with her
thoughts only, these many years, and, sitting down, watched the sun sink
beyond the trees, the shades of evening fall.  All that had happened
since Charley came to the parish she went over in her mind.  She
remembered the day he had said this, the day he had said that; she
brought back the night--it was etched upon her mind!--when he had said
to her, "You have saved my life, Mademoiselle!"  She recalled the time
she put the little cross back on the church-door, the ghostly footsteps
in the church, the light, the lost hood.  A shudder ran through her now,
for the mystery of that hood had never been cleared up.  But the words on
the page caught her eye again:

         "My heart is thine, and soul and body render
          Faith to thy faith .  .  ."

It swallowed up the moment's agitation.  Never till this day, never till
last night, had she dared to say to herself, He loves me.  He seemed so
far above her--she never had thought of him as a tailor!--that she had
given and never dared hope to receive, had lived without anticipation
lest there should come despair.  Even that day at Vadrome Mountain she
had not thought he meant love, when he had said to her that he would
remember to the last.  When he had said that he would die for love's
sake, he had not meant her, but others--some one else whom he would save
by his death.  Kathleen, that name which had haunted her--ah, whoever
Kathleen was, or whatever Kathleen had to do with him or his life, she
had no reason to fear Kathleen now.  She had no reason to fear any one;
for had she not heard his words of love as he clasped her in his arms
last night?  Had she not fled from that enfolding, because her heart was
so full in the hour of her triumph that she could not bear more, could
not look longer into the eyes to which she had told her love before his
was spoken?

In the midst of her thoughts she heard footsteps.  She started up.
Paulette Dubois suddenly appeared in the path below.  She had taken
the river-path down from Vadrome Mountain, where she had gone to see Jo
Portugais, who had not yet returned from Quebec.  Paulette's face was
agitated, her manner nervous.  For nights she had not slept, and her
approaching meeting with the tailor had made her tremble all day.
Excited as she was, there was a wild sort of beauty in her face, and her
figure was lithe and supple.  She dressed always a little garishly, but
now there was only that band of colour round the throat, worn last night
in the talk with Charley.

To both women this meeting was as a personal misfortune, a mutual
affront.  Each had a natural antipathy.  To Rosalie the invasion of her
beloved retreat was as hateful as though the woman had purposely
intruded.

For a moment they confronted each other without speaking, then Rosalie's
natural courtesy, her instinctive good-heartedness, overcame her
irritation, and she said quietly:

"Good-evening, Madame."

"I am not Madame, and you know it," answered the woman harshly.

"I am sorry.  Good-evening, Mademoiselle," rejoined Rosalie evenly.

"You wanted to insult me.  You knew I wasn't Madame."

Rosalie shook her head.  "How should I know?  You have not always lived
in Chaudiere, you have lived in Montreal, and people often call you
Madame."

"You know better.  You know that letters come to me from Montreal
addressed Mademoiselle."

Rosalie turned as if to go.  "I do not recall what letters pass through
the post-office.  I have a good memory for forgetting.  Good-evening,"
she added, with an excess of courtesy.  Paulette read the placid scorn in
the girl's face; she did not see and would not understand that Rosalie
did not scorn her for what she had ever done, but for something that she
was.

"You think I am the dirt under your feet," she said, now white, now red,
and mad with anger.  "I'm not fit to speak with you--I'm a rag for the
dust pile!"

"I have never thought so," answered Rosalie.  "I have not liked you, but
I am sorry for you, and I never thought those things."

"You lie!" was the rejoinder; and Rosalie, turning away quickly with
trouble in her face, put her hands to her ears, and, hastening down the
hillside, did not hear the words the woman called after her.

"To-morrow every one shall know you are a thief.  Run, run, run!  You can
hear what I say, white-face!  They shall know about the little cross
to-morrow."

She followed Rosalie at a distance, her eyes blazing.  As fate would have
it, she met on the highroad the least scrupulous man in the parish, an
inveterate gossip, the keeper of the general store, whose only opposition
in business was the post-office shop.  He was the centre of the village
tittle-tattle, and worse.  With malicious speed Paulette told him how she
had seen Rosalie Evanturel nailing the little cross on the church door of
a certain night.  If he wanted proof of what she said, let him ask Jo
Portugais.

Having spat out her revenge, she went on to the village, and through it
to her house, where she prepared to visit the shop of the tailor.  Her
sense of retaliation satisfied, Rosalie passed from her mind; her child
only occupied it.  In another hour she would know where her child was--
the tailor had promised that she should.  Then perhaps she would be sorry
for the accident to the Notary; for it was an accident, in spite of
appearances.

It was dark when Paulette entered the door of the tailor's house.  When
she came out, a half-hour later, with elation in her carriage, and tears
of joy running down her face, she did not look about her; she did not
care whether or not any one saw her: she was possessed with only one
thought--her child!  She passed like a swift wind down the street, making
for home and for her departure to the hiding-place of her child.

She had not seen a figure in the shadow of a tree near by as she came
from the tailor's door.  She had not heard a smothered cry behind her.
She was not aware that in unspeakable agony another woman knocked softly
at the door of the tailor's house, and, not waiting for an answer, opened
it and entered.  It was Rosalie Evanturel.




CHAPTER XL

AS IT WAS IN THE BEGINNING

The kitchen was empty, but light fell through the door of the shop
opening upon the little hall between.  Rosalie crossed the hall and stood
in the doorway of the shop, a figure of concentrated indignation,
despair, and shame.  Leaning on his elbow Charley was bending over a book
in the light of a candle on the bench be side him.  He was reading aloud,
translating into English the German text of the narrative the Cure had
given him:

     "And because of this divine interposition, consequent upon their
     faithful prayers and their oblations, they did perform these holy
     scenes from season to season, with solemn proof of piety and godly
     living, so that it seemed the life of the Lord our Shepherd was ever
     present with them, as though, indeed, Ober-Ammergau were Nazareth or
     Jerusalem.  And the hearts of all in the land did answer daily to
     that sweet and lively faith, insomuch that even in times of war the
     zeal of the people became an holy zeal, and their warfare noble; so
     that they did accept both victory and defeat with equal humbleness.
     Because there was no war in their hearts, but peace, and they did
     fight to defend and not to acquire, they buried their foe with tears
     and their own with singleness of heart and quiet joy, for that they
     did rest from their labours.  In this manner was the great tragedy
     and glory of the world made to the people a present thing,
     transforming them to the body of the Life that hath neither spot nor
     blemish nor .  .  ."

Charley had not heard Rosalie enter, nor her footsteps in the hall.  But
now there ran through his reading a thread of something not of himself or
of it.  He had thrilled to the archaic but clear-hearted style of the old
German chronicler, and the warmth he felt had passed into his voice, so
that it became louder.

As Rosalie listened to his reading, a hundred thoughts rushed through
her mind.  Paulette Dubois, the wanton woman, had just left his doorway
secretly, yet there he was, instantly after, calmly reading a pious book!
Her mind was in tumult.  She could not reason, she could not rule her
judgment.  She only knew that the woman had come from this house, and
hurried guiltily away into the dark.  She only knew that the man the
woman had left here was the man she loved--loved more than her life, for
he embodied all her past; all her present--she knew that she could not
live without him; all her future--for where he went she would go,
whatever the fate.

Her judgment had been swept from its moorings.  She had been carried on
the wave of her heart's fever into this room, not daring to think this
or that, not planning this or that, not accusing, not reproaching, not
shaming herself and him by black suspicion, but blindly, madly demanding
to see him, to look into his eyes, to hear his voice, to know him,
whatever he was--man, lover, or devil.  She was a child-woman--a child in
her primitive feelings that threw aside all convention, because there was
no wrong in her heart; a woman, because she was possessed by a jealousy
which shamed and angered her, because its very existence put him on
trial, condemned him.  Her soul was the sport of emotions and passions
stronger than herself, because the heritage, the instinct, of all the
race of women, the eternal predisposition.  At the moment her will
was not sufficient to rule them to obedience.  She was in the first
subservience to that power which feeds the streams of human history.

As she now listened to Charley reading, a sudden revulsion of feeling
came over her.  Some note in his voice reassured her heart--if it needed
reassuring.  The quiet force of his presence stilled the tumult in her,
so that her eyes could see without mist, her heart beat without agony;
but every pulse in her was throbbing, every instinct was alive.
Presently there rushed upon her the words that had rung in her ears and
chimed in her heart at the Rest of the Flax-beaters:

         "Take all, dear love!  thou art my life's defender;
          Speak to my soul!  Take life and love; take all."

Feelings lying beneath the mad conflict of emotion which had sent her
into this room in such unmaidenly fashion--feelings that were her deepest
self-welled up.  Her breath came hard and broken.

As Charley read on, a breathing seemed to answer his own.  It became
quicker than his own, it pierced the stillness, it filled the room with
feeling, it came calling to him out of the silence.  He swung round, and
saw the girl in the doorway.

"Rosalie!" he cried, and sprang to his feet.

With a piteously pathetic cry, she flung herself on her knees beside the
tailor's bench where he worked every day, and, burying her face in her
arms as they rested on the bench, wept bitterly.

"Rosalie!" he said anxiously, leaning over her.  "What is the matter?
What has happened?"

She wept more bitterly still; she made a despairing gesture.  His hand
touched her hair; he dropped on a knee beside her.

"Oh, I am so ashamed, ashamed!  I have been so wicked," she murmured.

"Rosalie, what has happened?" he urged gently.  His own heart was
beating hard, his own eyes were responding to hers.  The new feelings
alive in him, the forces his love had awakened, which, last night, had
kept him sleepless, and had been upon him like a dream all day--they
were at height in him now.  He knew not how to command them.

"Rosalie, dearest, tell me all!" he persisted.

"I shall never--I have been--oh--you will never forgive me!" she said
brokenly.  "I knew it wasn't true, but I couldn't help it.  I saw her--
the woman--come from your house, and--"

"Hush!  For God's sake, hush!" he broke in almost harshly.  Then a
better understanding came upon him, and it made him gentle with her.

"Ah, Rosalie, you did not think!  But--but it was natural you should wish
to see me.  .  .  ."

"But, as soon as I saw you, I knew that--that--" She broke down again and
wept.

"I will tell you about her, Rosalie--" His fingers stroked her hair, and,
bending over her, his face was near her hands.

"No, no, tell me nothing--oh, if you tell me!--"

"She came to hear from me what she ought to have heard from the Notary.
She has had great trouble--the man--her child--and I have helped her,
told her--" His face was so near now that his breath was on her hair.
She suddenly raised her head and clasped his face in her hands.

"I knew--oh, I knew, I knew .  .  .  !" she wept, and her eyes drank
his.

"Rosalie, my life!" he cried, clasping her in his arms.

The love that was in him, new-born and but half understood, poured itself
out in broken words like her own.  For him there was no outside world; no
past, no Kathleen, no Billy; no suspicion, or infidelity, or unfaith; no
fear of disaster; no terrors of the future.  Life was Now to him and to
her: nothing brooded behind, nothing lay before.  The candle spluttered
and burnt low in the socket.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

A left-handed boy is all right in the world
Damnable propinquity
Hugging the chain of denial to his bosom
I have a good memory for forgetting
Importunity with discretion was his motto
It is good to live, isn't it?
Know how bad are you, and doesn't mind
Strike first and heal after--"a kick and a lick"






THE RIGHT OF WAY

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 5.



XLI.      IT WAS MICHAELMAS DAY
XLII.     A TRIAL AND A VERDICT
XLIII.    JO PORTUGAIS TELLS A STORY
XLIV.     "WHO WAS KATHLEEN?"
XLV.      SIX MONTHS GO BY
XLVI.     THE FORGOTTEN MAN
XLVII.    ONE WAS TAKEN AND THE OTHER LEFT
XLVIII.   "WHERE THE TREE OF LIFE IS BLOOMING--"
XLIX.     THE OPEN GATE




CHAPTER XLI

IT WAS MICHAELMAS DAY

Not a cloud in the sky, and, ruling all, a sweet sun, liberal in
warmth and eager in brightness as its distance from the northern world
decreased.  As Mrs. Flynn entered the door of the post-office she sang
out to Maximilian Cour, with a buoyant lilt: "Oh, isn't it the fun o' the
world to be alive!"

The tailor over the way heard it, and lifted his head with a smile;
Rosalie Evanturel, behind the postal wicket, heard it, and her face swam
with colour.  Rosalie busied herself with the letters and papers for a
moment before she answered Mrs. Flynn's greeting, for there were ringing
in her ears the words she herself had said a few days before: "It is good
to live, isn't it?"

To-day it was so good to live that life seemed an endless being and
a tireless happy doing--a gift of labour, an inspiring daytime, and
a rejoicing sleep.  Exaltation, a painful joy, and a wide embarrassing
wonderment possessed her.  She met Mrs. Flynn's face at the wicket with
shining eyes and a timid smile.

"Ah, there y'are, darlin'!" said Mrs. Flynn.  "And how's the dear father
to-day?"

"He seems about the same, thank you."

"Ah, that's foine.  Shure, if we could always be 'about the same,' we'd
do.  True for you, darlin', 'tis as you say.  If ould Mary Flynn could
be always "bout the same,' the clods o' the valley would never cover her
bones.  But there 'tis--we're here to-day, and away tomorrow.  Shure,
though, I am not complainin'.  Not I--not Mary Flynn.  Teddy Flynn used
to say to me, says he: 'Niver born to know distress!  Happy as worms in a
garden av cucumbers.  Seventeen years in this country, Mary,' says he,
'an' nivir in the pinitintiary yet.'  There y'are.  Ah, the birds do be
singin' to-day!  'Tis good!  'Tis good, darlin'!  You'll not mind Mary
Flynn callin' you darlin', though y'are postmistress, an' 'll be more
than that--more than that wan day--or Mary Flynn's a fool.  Aye, more
than that y'll be, darlin', and y're eyes like purty brown topazzes and
y're cheeks like roses-shure, is there anny lether for Mary Flynn,
darlin'?" she hastily added as she saw the Seigneur standing in the
doorway.  He had evidently been listening.

"Ye didn't hear what y're ould fool of a cook was sayin'," she added to
the Seigneur, as Rosalie shook her head and answered: "No letters,
Madame--dear."  Rosalie timidly added the dear, for there was something
so great-hearted in Mrs. Flynn that she longed to clasp her round the
neck, longed as she had never done in her life to lay her head upon some
motherly breast and pour out her heart.  But it was not to be now.
Secrecy was her duty still.

"Can't ye speak to y're ould fool of a cook, sir?" Mrs. Flynn said
again, as the Seigneur made way for her to leave the shop.

"How did you guess?" he said to her in a low voice, his sharp eyes
peering into hers.

"By the looks in y're face these past weeks, and the look in hers," she
whispered, and went on her way rejoicing.

"I'll wind thim both round me finger like a wisp o' straw," she said,
going up the road with a light step, despite her weight, till she was
stopped by the malicious grocer-man of the village, whose tongue had been
wagging for hours upon an unwholesome theme.

Meanwhile, in the post-office, the Seigneur and Rosalie were face to
face.

"It is Michaelmas day," he said.  "May I speak with you, Mademoiselle?"

She looked at the clock.  It was on the stroke of noon.  The shop always
closed from twelve till half-past twelve.

"Will you step into the parlour, Monsieur?" she said, and coming round
the counter, locked the shop-door.  She was trembling and confused, and
entered the little parlour shyly.  Yet her eyes met the Seigneur's
bravely.  "Your father, how is he?" he said, offering her a chair.  The
sunlight streaming in the window made a sort of pathway of light between
them, while they were in the shade.

"He seems no worse, and to-day he is wheeling himself about."

"He is stronger, then--that's good.  Is there any fear that he must go to
the hospital again?"

She inclined her head.  "The doctor says he may have to go any moment.
It may be his one chance.  The Cure is very kind, and says that, with
your permission, his sister will keep the office here, if--if needed."

The Seigneur nodded briskly.  "Of course, of course.  But have you not
thought that we might secure another postmistress?"

Her face clouded a little; her heart beat hard.  She knew what was
coming.  She dreaded it, but it was better to have it over now.

"We could not live without it," she said helplessly.

"What we have saved is not enough.  The little my mother had must pay for
the visits to the hospital.  I have kept it for that.  You see, I need
the place here."

"But you have thought, just the same.  Do you not know the day?" he
asked meaningly.

She was silent.

"I have come to ask you to marry me--this is Michaelmas day, Rosalie."

She did not speak.  He had hopes from her silence.  "If anything happened
to your father, you could not live here alone--but a young girl!  Your
father may be in the hospital for a long time.  You cannot afford that.
If I were to offer you money, you would refuse.  If you marry me, all
that I have is yours to dispose of at your will: to make others happy,
to take you now and then from this narrow place, to see what's going on
in the world."

"I am happy here," she said falteringly.

"Chaudiere is the finest place in the world," he replied proudly, and as
a matter of fact.  "But, for the sake of knowledge, you should see what
the rest of the world is.  It helps you to understand Chaudiere better.
I ask you to be my wife, Rosalie."

She shook her head sorrowfully.

"You said before, it was not because I am old, not because I am rich, not
because I am Seigneur, not because I am I, that you refused me."

She smiled at him now.  "That is true," she said.

"Then what reason can you have?  None, none.  'Pon honour, I believe you
are afraid of marriage because it's marriage.  By my life, there's naught
to dread.  A little giving here and taking there, and it's easy.  And
when a woman is all that's good, to a man, it can be done without fear or
trembling.  Even the Cure would tell you that."

"Ah, I know, I know," she said, in a voice half painful, half joyous.
"I know that it is so.  But, oh, dear Monsieur, I cannot marry you--
never--never."

He hung on bravely.  "I want to make life easy and happy for you.  I want
the right to do so.  When trouble comes upon you--"

"When it does I will turn to you--ah, yes, I would turn to you without
fear, dear Monsieur," she said, and her heart ached within her, for a
premonition of sorrow came upon her and filled her eyes, and made her
heart like lead within her breast.  "I know how true a gentleman you
are," she added.  "I could give you everything but that which is life
to me, which is being, and soul, and the beginning and the end."

The weight of the revealing hour of her life, its wonder, its agony, its
irrevocability, was upon her.  It was giving new meanings to existence-
primitive woman, child of nature as she was.  All morning she had longed
to go out into the woods and bury herself among the ferns and bracken,
and laugh and weep for very excess of feeling, downright joy and vague
woe possessing her at once.  She looked the Seigneur in the eyes with
consuming earnestness.

"Oh, it is not because I am young," she said, in a low voice, "for I am
old--indeed, I am very old.  It is because I cannot love you, and never
can love you in the one great way; and I will not marry without love.  My
heart is fixed on that.  When I marry, it will be when I love a man so
much that I cannot live without him.  If he is so poor that each meal is
a miracle, it will make no difference.  Oh, can't you see, can't you
feel, what I mean, Monsieur--you who are so wise and learned, and know
the world so well?"

"Wise and learned!" he said, a little roughly, for his voice was husky
with emotion.  "'Pon honour, I think I am a fool!  A bewildered fool,
that knows no more of woman than my cook knows Sanscrit.  Faith, a
hundred times less!  For Mary Flynn's got an eye to see, and, without
telling, she knew I had a mind set on you.  But Mary Flynn thought more
than that, for she has an idea that you've a mind set on some one,
Rosalie.  She thought it might be me."

"A woman is not so easily read as a man," she replied, half smiling, but
with her eyes turned to the street.  A few people were gathering in front
of the house--she wondered why.

"There is some one else--that is it, Rosalie.  There is some one else.
You shall tell me who it is.  You shall--"

He stopped short, for there was a loud knocking at the shop-door, and the
voice of M. Evanturel calling: "Rosalie!  Rosalie!  Rosalie!  Ah, come
quickly--ah, my Rosalie!"

Without a look at the Seigneur, Rosalie rushed into the shop and opened
the front door.  Her father was deathly pale, and was trembling
violently.

"Rosalie, my bird," he cried indignantly, "they're saying you stole the
cross from the church door."

He was now wheeled inside the shop, and people gathered round, looking
at him and Rosalie, some covertly, some as friends, some in a half-
frightened way, as though strange things were about to happen.

"Shure, 'tis a lie, or me name's not Mary Flynn--the darlin'!" said the
Seigneur's cook, with blazing face.  "Who makes this charge?" roared an
angry voice.  No one had seen the Seigneur enter from the little room
beside the shop, and at the sound of the sharp voice the people fell
back, for he was as free with his stick as his tongue.

"I do," said the grocer, to whom Paulette Dubois had told her story.

"Ye shall be tarred and feathered before y'are a day older," said Mary
Flynn.

Rosalie was very pale.

The Seigneur was struck by this and by the strangeness of her look.

"Clear the room," he said to Filion Lacasse, who was now a constable of
the parish.

"Not yet!" said a voice at the doorway.  "What is the trouble?"  It was
the Cure, who had already heard rumours of the scandal, and had come at
once to Rosalie.  M. Evanturel tried to speak, and could not.  But Mary
Flynn did, with a face like a piece of scarlet bunting.  Having finished
with a flourish, she could scarce keep her hands off the cowardly grocer.

The Cure turned to Rosalie.  "It is absurd," he said.  "Forgive me," he
added to the Seigneur.  "It is better that Rosalie should answer this
charge.  If she gives her word of honour, I will deny communion to
whoever slanders her hereafter."

"She did it," said the grocer stubbornly.  "She can't deny it."

"Answer, Rosalie," said the Cure firmly.

"Excuse me; I will answer," said a voice at the door.  The tailor of
Chaudiere made his way into the shop, through the fast-gathering crowd.




CHAPTER XLII

A TRIAL AND A VERDICT

"What right have you to answer for mademoiselle?" said the Seigneur,
with a sudden rush of jealousy.  Was not he alone the protector of
Rosalie Evanturel?  Yet here was mystery, and it was clear the tailor had
something important to say.  M. Rossignol offered the Cure a chair,
seated himself on a small bench, and gently drew Rosalie down beside him.

"I will make this a court," said he.  "Advance, grocer."

The grocer came forward smugly.

"On what information do you make this charge against mademoiselle?"

The grocer volubly related all that Paulette Dubois had said.  As he
told his tale the Cure's face was a study, for the night the cross was
restored came back to him, and the events, so far as he knew them, were
in keeping with the grocer's narrative.  He looked at Rosalie anxiously.
Monsieur Evanturel moaned, for he remembered he had heard Rosalie come in
very late that night.  Yet he fixed his eyes on her in dog-like faith.

"Mademoiselle will admit that this is true, I presume," said Charley.

Rosalie looked at him intently, as though to read his very heart.  It was
clear that he wished her to say yes; and what he wished was law.

"It is quite true," answered Rosalie calmly, and all fear passed from
her.

"But she did not steal the cross," continued Charley, in a louder voice,
that all might hear, for people were gathering fast.

"If she didn't steal it, why was she putting it back on the church door
in the dark?" said the grocer.  "Ah, hould y'r head, ould sand-in-the-
sugar!" said Mrs. Flynn, her fingers aching to get into his hair.
"Silence!" said the Seigneur severely, and looked inquiringly at
Rosalie.  Rosalie looked at Charley.

"It is not a question of why mademoiselle put the cross back," he said.
"It is a question of who took the cross away, is it not?  Suppose it was
not a theft.  Suppose that the person who took the relic thought to do a
pious act--for your Church, Monsieur?"

"I do not see," the Cure answered helplessly.  "It was a secret act,
therefore suspicious at least."

"'Let your good gifts be in secret, and your Heavenly Father who seeth in
secret will reward you openly,"' answered Charley.  "That, I believe, is
a principle you teach, Monsieur."

"At one time Monsieur the tailor was thought to have taken the cross,"
said the Seigneur suggestively.  "Perhaps Monsieur was secretly doing
good with it?" he added.  It vexed him that there should be a secret
between Rosalie and this man.

"It had to do with me, not I with it," he answered evenly.  He must
travel wide at first to convince their narrow brains.  "Mademoiselle did
a kind act when she nailed that cross on the church door again--to make
a dead man rest easier in his grave."

A hush fell upon the crowd.

Rosalie looked at Charley in surprise; but she saw his meaning presently
--that what she did for him must seem to have been done for the dead
tailor only.  Her heart beat hot with indignation, for she would, if
she but might, cry her love gladly from the hill-tops of the world.

Alight began to break upon the Cure's mind.  "Will Monsieur speak
plainly?" he said.

"I did not see Louis Trudel take the cross, but I know that he did."

"Louis Trudel!  Louis Trudel!" interposed the Seigneur anxiously.  "What
does this mean?"

"Monsieur speaks the truth," interposed Rosalie.  The Cure recalled the
death-bed of Louis Trudel, and the dying man's strange agitation.  He
also recalled old Margot's death, and her wish to confess some one else's
wrong-doing.  He was convinced that Charley was speaking the truth.

"It is true," added Charley slowly; "but you may think none the worse of
him when you know all.  He took the cross for temporary use, and before
he could replace it he died."

"How do you know what he meant, or did not mean?" said the Seigneur in
perplexity.  "Did he take you into his confidence?"

"The very closest," answered Charley grimly.

"Yet he looked upon you as an infidel, and said hard things of you on his
death-bed," urged the Cure anxiously.  He could not see the end of the
tale, and he was troubled for both the dead man and the living.

"That was why he took me into his confidence.  I will explain.  I have
not the honour to have the fulness of your Christian faith, Monsieur le
Cure.  I had asked him to show me a sign from heaven, and he showed it by
the little iron cross."

"I can't make anything of that," said the Seigneur peevishly.

Rosalie sprang to her feet.  "He will not tell the whole truth,
Messieurs, but I will.  With that little cross Louis Trudel would have
killed Monsieur, had it not been for me."

A gasp of excitement went out from those who stood by.

"But for you, Rosalie?" asked the Cure.

"But for me.  I saw Louis Trudel raise an iron against Monsieur that day
in the shop.  It made me nervous--I thought he was mad.  So I watched.
That night I saw a light in the tailor-shop late.  I thought it strange.
I went over and peeped through the cracks of the shutters.  I saw old
Louis at the fire with the little cross, red-hot.  I knew he meant
trouble.  I ran into the house.  Old Margot was beside herself with fear
--she had seen also.  I ran through the hall and saw old Louis upstairs
with the burning cross.  I followed.  He went into Monsieur's room.  When
I got to the door"--she paused, trembling, for she saw Charley's
reproving eyes upon her--"I saw him with the cross--with the cross raised
over Monsieur."

"He meant to threaten me," interposed Charley quickly.

"We will have the truth!" said the Seigneur, in a husky voice.

"The cross came down on Monsieur's bare breast."  The grocer laughed
vindictively.

"Silence!" growled the Seigneur.

"Silence!" said Filion Lacasse, and dropped his hand on the grocer's
shoulder.  "I'll baste you with a stirrup-strap."

"The rest is well known," quickly interposed Charley.  "The poor man was
mad.  He thought it a pious act to mark an infidel with the cross."

Every eye was fixed upon him.  The Cure remembered Louis Trudel's last
words: "Look--look--I gave--him--the sign--of .  .  .  !"  Old Margot's
words also kept ringing in his ears.  He turned to the Seigneur.
"Monsieur," said he, "we have heard the truth.  That act of Louis Trudel
was cruel and murderous.  May God forgive him!  I will not say that
mademoiselle did well in keeping silent--"

"God bless the darlin'!" cried Mrs. Flynn.

"--but I will say that she meant to do a kind act for a man's mortal
memory--perhaps at the expense of his soul."

"For Monsieur to take his injury in silence, to keep it secret, was
kind," said the Seigneur.  "It is what our Cure here might call bearing
his cross manfully."

"Seigneur," said the Cure reproachfully, "Seigneur, it is no subject for
jest."

"Cure, our tailor here has treated it as a jest."

"Let him show his breast, if it's true," said the grocer, who, beneath
his smirking, was a malignant soul.

The Cure turned on him sharply.  Seldom had any one seen the Cure roused.

"Who are you, Ba'tiste Maxime, that your base curiosity should be
satisfied--you, whose shameless tongue clattered, whose foolish soul
rejoiced over the scandal?  Must we all wear the facts of our lives--our
joys, our sorrows, and our sins--for such eyes as yours to read?  Bethink
you of the evil things that you would hide--aye, every one here!" he
added loudly.  "Know, all of you, what goodness of heart towards a wicked
man lay behind the secret these two have kept, that old Margot carried to
her grave.  When you go to your homes, pray for as much human kindness in
you as a man of no Church or faith can show.  For this child"--he turned
to Rosalie-"honour her!  Go now--go in peace!"

"One moment," said the Seigneur.  "I fine Ba'tiste Maxime twenty dollars
for defamation of character.  The money to go for the poor."

"You hear that, ould sand-in-the-sugar!" said Mrs. Flynn.  "Will you let
me kiss ye, darlin'?" she added to Rosalie, and, waddling over, reached
out her hands.

Rosalie's eyes were wet as she warmly kissed the old Irishwoman, and
thereupon they entered into a friendship which was without end.

The Seigneur drove the crowd from the shop, and shut the door.

The Cure came to Charley.  "Monsieur," said he, "I have no words.
When I remember what agonies you suffered in those hours, how bravely you
endured them--ah, Monsieur!" he added, with moist eyes, "I shall always
feel that--that you are not far from the kingdom of God."

A silence fell upon them, for the Cure, the Seigneur, and Rosalie, as
they looked at Charley, thought of the scar like a red cross on his
breast.

It touched Charley with a kind of awe.  He smiled painfully.  "Shall I
give you proof?" he said, making a motion to undo his waistcoat.

"Monsieur!" said the Seigneur reprovingly, and holding out his hand.
"Monsieur!  We are all gentlemen!"




CHAPTER XLIII

JO PORTUGAIS TELLS A STORY

Walking slowly, head bent, eyes unseeing, Charley was on his way to
Vadrome Mountain, with the knowledge that Jo Portugais had returned.

The hunger for companionship was on him: to touch some mind that could
understand the deep loneliness which had settled on him since that scene
in the postoffice.  It was the loneliness of a new and great separation.
He had wakened to it to-day.

Once before, in the hut on Vadrome Mountain, he had wakened from a grave,
had been born again.  Last night had come still another birth, had come,
as with Rosalie herself, knowledge, revelation, understanding.  To
Rosalie the new vision had come with a vague pain of heart, without
shame, and with a wonderful happiness.  Pain, shame, knowledge, and a
happiness that passed suddenly into a despairing sorrow, had come to him.

In finding love he had found conscience, and in finding conscience he was
on his way to another great discovery.

Looking to where Jo Portugais' house was set among the pines, Charley
remembered the day--he saw the scene in his mind's eye--when Rosalie
entered with the letter addressed "To the sick man at the house of Jo
Portugais, at Vadrome Mountain," and he saw again her clear, unsoiled
soul in the deep inquiring eyes.

"If you but knew"--he turned and looked down at the village below--
"if you but knew!" he said, as though to all the world.  "I have the
sign from heaven--I know it now.  To-day I wake to know what life means,
and I see--Rosalie!  I know now--but how?  In taking all she had to give.
What does she get in return?  Nothing--nothing.  Because I love her,
because the whole world is nothing beside her, nor life, nor twenty
lives, if I had them to give, I must say to her now: 'Rosalie, it was
love that brought you to my arms, it is love that says, Thus far and no
farther.  Never again--never--never--never!' Yesterday I could have left
her--died or vanished, without real hurt to her.  She would have mourned
and broken her heart and mended it again; and I should have been only a
memory--of mystery, of tenderness.  Then, one day she would have married,
and no sting from my going would have remained.  She would have had
happiness, and I neither shame nor despair.  .  .  .  To-day it is all
too late.  We have drunk too deep-alas! too deep.  She cannot marry
another man, for ghosts will not lie for asking, and what is mine may not
be another's.  She cannot marry me, for what once was mine is mine still
by ring and by book, and I should always be haunted by a torturing
shadow.  Kathleen has the right of way, not Rosalie.  Ah, Rosalie,
I dare not wrong you further.  Yet to marry you, even as things are,
if that might be!  To live on here unrecognised?  I am little like my
old self, and year after year I should grow less and less like Charley
Steele.  .  .  .  But, no, it is not possible!"

He stopped short in his thoughts, and his lips tightened in bitterness.

"God in heaven, what an impasse!" he said aloud.

There was a sudden crackling of twigs as a man rose up from a log by the
wayside ahead of him.  It was Jo Portugais, who had seen him coming, and
had waited for him.  He had heard Charley's words.

"Do you call me an impasse, M'sieu'?"  Charley grasped Portugais' hand.

"What has happened, M'sieu'?" Jo asked anxiously.  There was a brief
silence, and then Charley told him of the events of the morning.

"You know of the mark-here?" he asked, touching his breast.

Jo nodded.  "I saw, when you were ill."

"Yet you never asked!"

"I studied it out--I knew old Louis Trudel.  Also, I saw ma'm'selle nail
the cross to the church door.  Two and two together in my mind did it.
I didn't think Paulette Dubois would tell.  I warned her."

"She quarrelled with mademoiselle.  It was revenge.

"She might have been less vindictive.  She had had good luck herself
lately."

"What good luck had she, M'sieu'?"

Charley told Jo the story of the Notary, the woman, and the child.

Jo made no comment.  They relapsed into silence.  Arriving at the house,
they entered.  Jo lighted his pipe, and smoked steadily for a time
without speaking.  Buried in thought, Charley stood in the doorway
looking down at the village.  At last he turned.

"Where have you been these weeks past, Jo?"

"To Quebec first, M'sieu'."

Charley looked curiously at Jo, for there was meaning in his tone.  "And
where last?"

"To Montreal."

Charley's face became paler, his hands suddenly clinched, for he read the
look in Jo's eyes.  He knew that Jo had been looking at people and places
once so familiar; that he had seen--Kathleen.

"Go on.  Tell me all," he said heavily.

Portugais spoke in English.  The foreign language seemed to make the
truth less naked and staring to himself.  He had a hard story to tell.

"It is not to say why I go to Montreal," he began.  "But I go.  I have my
ears open; my eyes, she is not close.  No one knows me--I am no account
of.  Every one is forgot the man, Joseph Nadeau, who was try for his
life.  Perhaps it is every one is forget the lawyer who save his neck--
perhaps?  So I stand by the streetside.  I say to a man as I look up at
sign-boards,' 'Where is that writing "M'sieu' Charles Steele," and all
the res'?' 'He is dead long ago,' say the man to me.  'A good thing too,
for he was the very devil.'  'I not understan',' I say.  'I tink that
M'sieu' Steele is a dam smart man back time.'  'He was the smartes' man
in the country, that Beauty Steele,' the man say. 'He bamboozle the jury
hevery time.  He cut up bad though.'"

Charley raised his hand with a nervous gesture of misery and impatience.

"'Where have you been,' that man say--'where have you been all these
times not to know 'bout Charley Steele, hein?'  'In the backwoods,'
I say.  'What bring you here now?' he ask.  'I have a case,' I say.
'What is it?' he ask.  'It is a case of a man who is punish for another
man,' I say.  'That's the thing for Charley Steele,' he laugh.  'He was
great man to root things out.  Can't fool Charley Steele, we use to say
here.  But he die a bad death.'  'What was the matter with him?' I say.
'He drink too much, he spend too much, he run after a girl at Cote
Dorion, and the river-drivers do for him one night.  They say it was
acciden', but is there any green on my eye?  But he die trump--jus' like
him.  He have no fear of devil or man,' so the man say.  'But fear of
God?' I ask.  'He was hinfidel,' he say.  'That was behin' all.  He was
crooked all roun'. He rob the widow and horphan?'  'I think he too smart
for that,' I speak quick.  'I suppose it was the drink,' he say.  'He
loose his grip.' 'He was a smart man, an' he would make you all sit up,
if he come back,' I hanswer.  'If he come back!' The man laugh queer at
that.  'If he comeback, there would be hell.'  'How is that?' I say.
'Look across the street,' he whisper.  'That was his wife.'"

Charley choked back a cry in his throat.  Jo had no intention of cutting
his story short.  He had an end in view.

"I look across the street.  There she is--' Ah, that is a fine woman
to see!  I have never seen but one more finer to look at--here in
Chaudiere.' The man say: 'She marry first for money, and break her heart;
now she marry for love.  If Beauty Steele come back-eh! sacra!  that
would be a mess.  But he is at the bottom of the St  Lawrence--the courts
say so, and the Church say so--and ghosts don't walk here.' 'But if that
Beauty Steele come back alive, what would happen it?' I speak.  'His wife
is marry, blockhead!' he say.

"'But the woman is his,' I hanswer.  'Do you think she would go back to a
thief she never love from the man she love?' he speak back.  'She is not
marry to the other man,' I say, 'if Beauty Steele is .  .  .'  'He is
dead as a door,' he swear.  'You see that?' he go on, nodding down the
street.  'Well, that is Billy.'  'Who is Billy?' I ask.  'The brother of
her,' he say.  'Charley, he spoil Billy.  Billy, he has not been the same
since Charley's death-he is so ashame of Charley.  When he get drunk he
talk of nothing else.  We all remember that Charley spoil him, and that
make us sorry for him.'  'Excuse me,' I say.  'I think that Billy is a
dam smart man.  He is smart as Charley Steele.'  'Charley was the
smartes' man in the country,' he say again.  'I've got his practice now,
but this town will never be the same without him.  Thief or no thief,
I wish he is alive here.  By the Lord, I'd get drunk with him!'  He was
all right, that man," Jo added finally.

Charley's agitation was hidden.  His eyes were fixed on Jo intently.
"That was Larry Rockwell.  Go on," he said, in a hard metallic voice.

"I see--her, the next night again.  It is in the white stone house on the
hill.  All the windows are open, an' I can hear her to sing.  I not know
that song.  It begin, 'Oft in the stilly night'--like that."

Charley stiffened.  It was the song Kathleen sang for him the night they
became engaged.

"It is a good voice-that.  I see her face, for there is a candle on the
piano.  I come close and closter to the house.  There is big maple-trees
--I am well hid.  A man is beside her.  He lean hover her an' put his
hand on her shoulder.  'Sing it again, Kat'leen,' he say.  'I cannot to
get enough.'"

"Stop!" said Charley, in a strained, harsh voice.  "Not yet, M'sieu',"
said Portugais.  "It is good for you to hear what I say."

"'Come, Kat'leen!' the man say, an' he blow hout the candle.  I hear them
walk away, an' the door shut behin' them.  Then I hear anudder voice--ah,
that is a baby--very young baby!"

Charley quickly got to his feet.  "Not another word!" he said.

"Yes, yes, but there is one word more, M'sieu'," said Jo, standing up and
facing him firmly.  "You must go back.  You are not a thief.  The woman
is yours.  You throw your life away.  What is the man to you--or the
man's brat of a child?  It is all waiting for you.  You mus' go back.
You not steal the money, but that Billy--it is that Billy, I know.  You
can forgive your wife, and take her back, or you can say to both, Go!
You can put heverything right and begin again."

Anger, wild words, seemed about to break from Charley's lips, but he
conquered himself.

The old life had been brought back to him with painful acuteness and
vividness.  The streets of the town, the people in the street, Billy, the
mean scoundrel, who could not leave him alone in the grave of obscurity,
Kathleen--Fairing.  The voice of the child--with her voice--was in his
ears.  A child!  If he had had a child, perhaps----He stopped short in
his thinking, his face all at once flooding with colour.  For a moment he
stood looking out of the window down towards the village.  He could see
the post-office like a toy house among toy houses.  At last he turned to
Jo.

"Never again while I live, speak of this to me: of the past, of going
back, or of--of anything else," he said.  "I cannot go back.  I am dead
and shamed.  Let the dust of forgetfulness come and cover the past.  I've
begun life again here, and here I stay, and see it out.  I shall work out
the problem here."  He dropped a hand on the other's shoulder.  "Jo,"
said he, "we are both shipwrecks.  Let us see how long we can float."

"M'sieu', is it worth it?" said Portugais, remembering his confession to
the Abbe, and seeing the end of it all to himself.

"I don't know, Jo.  Let us wait and see how Fate will play us."

"Or God, M'sieu'?"

"God or Fate--who knows"




CHAPTER XLIV

"WHO WAS KATHLEEN?"

The painful incidents of the morning weighed heavily upon Rosalie, and
she was glad when Madame Dugal came to talk with her father, who was
ailing and irritable, and when Mrs. Flynn drove her away with a kiss on
either cheek, saying: "Don't come back, darlin', till there's roses in
both cheeks, for y'r eyes are 'atin' up yer face!"

She had seen Charley take the path to Vadrome Mountain, and to the
Rest of the Flax-beaters she betook herself, in the blind hope that,
returning, he might pass that way.  Under the influence of the fresh air
and the quiet of the woods her spirits rose, her pulse beat faster,
though a sense of foreboding and sorrow hovered round her.  The two-miles
walk to her beloved retreat seemed a matter of minutes only, so busy were
her thoughts.

Her mind was one luxurious confusion, through which travelled a ghostly
little sprite, who kept tumbling her thoughts about, sneering, smirking,
whispering--"You dare not go to confession--dare not go to confession.
You will never be the same again--never feel the same again--never think
the same again; your dreams are done!  You can only love.  And what will
this love do for you?  What do you expect to happen--you dare not go to
confession!"

Her reply had been the one iteration: "I love him--I love him--I love
him.  We shall be together all our lives, till we are old and grey.
I shall watch him at his work, and listen to his voice.  I shall read
with him and walk with him, and I shall grow to think like him a little
--in everything except religion.  In everything except that.  One day he
will come to think like me--to believe in God."

In the dreamy happiness of these thoughts the colour came to her cheeks,
the roses of light gathered in her eyes.  In her tremulous ardour she
scarcely realised how time passed, and her reverie deepened as the
afternoon shadows grew and the sun made to its covert behind the hills.
She was roused by a man's voice singing, just under the bluff where she
sat.  To her this voice represented the battle-call, the home-call, the
life call of the universe.  The song it sang was known to her.  It was as
old as Rizzio.  It had come from old France with Mary, had been merged
into English words and English music, and had voyaged to New France.
There it had been sung by lovers in fair vales, on wide rivers, and in
deep forests:

                   "What is not mine I may not hold,
                       (Ah, hark the hunter's horn!),
                    And what is thine may not be sold,
                       (My love comes through the corn!);
                          And none shall buy
                          And none shall sell
                          What Love works well?"

In the walk back from Vadrome Mountain, a change--a fleeting change--
had passed over Charley's mind and mood.  The quiet of the woodland,
the song of the birds, the tumbling brook, the smell of the rich earth,
replenishing its strength from the gorgeous falling leaves, had soothed
him.  Thoughts of Rosalie took a new form.  Her image possessed him,
excluding the future, the perils that surrounded them.  He had gone
through so much within the past twenty-four hours that the capacity for
suffering had almost exhausted itself, and in the reaction endearing
thoughts of Rosalie had dominion over him.  It was the reassertion of
primitive man, the demands of the first element.  The great problem was
still in the background.  The picture of Kathleen and the other man was
pushed into the distance; thoughts of Billy and his infamy were thrust
under foot--how futile to think of them!  There was Rosalie to be thought
of, the to-day and to-morrow of the new life.

Rosalie was of to-day.  How strong and womanly she had been this
morning, the girl whose life had been bounded by this Chaudiere, with a
metropolitan convent and hospital as her only glimpses of the busy world.
She would fit in anywhere--in the highest places, with her grace, and her
nobleness of mind, arcadian, passionate and beautiful.  There came upon
him again the feeling of the evening before, when he saw her standing in
his doorway, the night about them, jealous affection, undying love, in
her eyes.  It quickened his steps imperceptibly.  He passed a stream, and
glanced down into a dark pool involuntarily.  It reflected himself
clearly.  He stopped short.  "Is this you, Beauty Steele?" he said, and
he caught his brown beard in his hand.  "Beauty Steele had brains and no
heart.  You have heart, and your wits have gone wool-gathering.  No
matter!

                    What is not mine I may not hold,
                    (Ah, hark the hunter's horn!)'"

he sang, and came quickly along the stream where the flax-beaters worked
in harvest-time, then up the hill, then--Rosalie.

She started to her feet.  "I knew you would come--I knew you would!" she
said.

"You have been waiting here for me?" he asked breathless, taking her
hand.

"I felt you would come.  I made you," she added smiling, and, eagerly
answering the look in his eyes, threw her arms round his neck.  In that
moment's joy a fresh realisation of their fate came upon him with dire
force, and a bitter protest went up from his heart, that he and she
should be sacrificed.

Yet the impasse was there, and what could remove it--what clear the way?

He looked down at the girl whose head was buried in happy peace on his
shoulder.  She clung to him, as though in him was everlasting protection
from the sprite that kept whispering: "You dare not go to confession--
your dreams are done--you can only love."  But she had no fear now.

As he looked down at her a swift change passed over him, and, almost for
the first time since he was a little child, his eyes filled with tears.
He hastily brushed them away, and drew her down on the seat beside him.
He was wondering how he should tell her that they must not meet like
this, that they must be apart.  No matter what had happened, no matter
what love there was, it was better that they should die--that he should
die--than that they should meet like this.  There was only one end to
secret meetings, and discovery was inevitable.  Then, with discovery,
shame to her.  For he must either marry her--how could he marry her?
--or die.  For him to die would but increase her misery.

The time had passed when it could be of any use.  It passed that day in
the hut on Vadrome Mountain when she said that if he died, she would die
with him--"Where you are going you will be alone.  There will be no one
to care for you, no one but me."  Last night it passed for ever.  She had
put her life into his hands; henceforth, there could never be a question
of giving or taking, of withdrawing or advancing, for all was
irrevocable, sealed with the great seal.  Yet she must be saved.
But how?

She suddenly looked up at him.  "I can ask you anything I want now, can't
I?" she said.

"Anything, Rosalie."

"You know that when I ask, it is because I want to know what you know, so
that I may feel as you feel.  You know that, don't you?

"I know it when you tell me, wonderful Rosalie."  What a revelation it
was, this transmuting power, which could change mortal dross into the
coin of immortal wealth!

"I want to ask you," she said, "who was Kathleen?"  His blood seemed to
go cold in his veins, and he sat without answering, shocked and dismayed.
What could she know of Kathleen?

"Can't you tell me?" she asked anxiously yet fearfully.  He looked so
strange that she thought she had offended him.  "Please don't mind
telling me.  I should understand everything--everything.  Was it some one
you loved--once?"  It was hard for her to say it, but she said it
bravely.

"No.  I never loved any one in all the world, Rosalie--not till I loved
you."

She gave a happy sigh.  "Oh, it is wonderful!" she said.  "It is
wonderful and good!  Did you--did you love me from the very first?"

"I think I did, though I didn't know it from the very first," he answered
slowly.  His heart beat hard, for he could not guess how she should know
of Kathleen.  It was absurdly impossible that she should know.  "But many
have loved you!" she said proudly.  "They have not shown it," he
answered grimly; then added quickly, and with aching anxiety: "When did
you hear of--of Kathleen?"

"Oh, you are such a blind huntsman!" she laughed.  "Don't you know where
my little fox was hiding?  Why, in the shop, when you held the note-paper
up to the light, and looked startled, and bought all the paper we had
that was water-marked Kathleen.  Do you think that was clever of me?  I
don't."

"I think it was very clever," he said.

"Then she-Kathleen--doesn't really matter?" she asked eagerly.  "Of
course she can't, if you don't love her.  But does she love you?  Did she
ever love you?"  "Never in her life."

"So of course it doesn't matter," she rejoined.  "Hush!" she added
rapidly.  "I see some one coming in the trees yonder.  It may be some one
for me.  Father knows I come here sometimes.  Go quickly and hide behind
the rocks, please.  I'll stay and see who it is.  Please go--dearest."

He kissed her, and, keeping out of sight, got to a place of safety a few
hundred feet away.

He saw the new-comer run to Rosalie, speak to her, saw Rosalie half turn
in his own direction, then go hastily down the hillside with the
messenger.

"It is her father!" he exclaimed, and followed at a distance.  At the
village he learned that M. Evanturel had had another seizure.




CHAPTER XLV

SIX MONTHS GO BY

Spring again--budding trees and flowing sap; the earth banks removed from
the houses, and outside windows discarded; the ice tumbling and crunching
in the river; the dormant farmer raising his head to the energy and
delight of April.

The winter had been long and hard.  Never had there been severer frost or
deeper snow, and seldom had big game been so plentiful.  In the snug warm
stables the cattle munched and chewed the cud; the idle, long-haired
horses grew as spirited in the keen air as in summer they were sluggish
with hard work; and the farm-hands were abroad in the dark of the early
mornings with lanterns, to feed the stock and take them out to water,
singing cheerfully.  All morning spread the clamour of the flail and the
fanning-mill, the swish of the knife through the turnips and the beets,
and the sound of the saw and the axe, as the youngest man of the family,
muffled to the nose, sawed the wood into lengths or split the knots.

Night brought the cutting and stringing of apples, the shelling of the
Indian corn, the making of rag carpets.  On Saturday came the going to
market with grain, or pork, or beef, or fowls frozen like stones; the
gossip in the market-place.  Then again sounded jingling sleigh-bells as,
on the return road, the habitant made for home, a glass of white whiskey
inside him, and black-eyed children in the doorway, swarming like bees at
the mouth of a hive.

This particular winter in Chaudiere had been full of excitement and
expectation.  At Easter-time there was to be the great Passion Play,
after the manner of that known as The Passion Play of Ober-Ammergau.  Not
one in a hundred habitants had ever heard of Ober-Ammergau, but they had
all shared in picturesque processions of the Stations of the Cross to
some calvaire; and many had taken part in dramatic scenes arranged from
the life of Christ.  Drama of a crude kind was deep in them; it showed in
gesture, speech, and temperament.

In all the preparations Maximilian Cour was a conspicuous and useful
official.  Gifted with the dramatic temperament to a degree rare in so
humble a man, he it was who really educated the people of Chaudiere in
the details of the Passion Play to be produced by the good Catholics of
the parish and the Indians of the reservation.  He had gone to the Cure
every day, and the Cure had talked with him, and then had sent him to the
tailor, who had, during the past six months, withdrawn more and more from
the life about him, practically living with shut door.  No one ventured
in unless on business, or were in need, or wished advice.  These he never
turned empty away.

Besides Portugais, Maximilian Cour was the one man received constantly
by the tailor.  With patience and insight Charley taught the baker, by
drawings and careful explanations, the outlines of the representation,
and the baker grew proud of the association, though Charley's face used
to haunt him in his sleep.  Excitable, eager, there was an elemental
adaptability in the baker, as easily leading to Avernus as to Elysium.
This appealed to Charley, realising, as he did, that Maximilian Cour was
a reputable citizen by mere accident.  The baker's life had run in a
sentimental groove of religious duty; that same sentimentality would,
in other circumstances, have forced him with equal ardour into the broad
primrose path.

In the evening hours and on Sunday Charley had worked at his drawings for
the scenery and costumes of the Play, and completed his translation of
the German text, but there had been days when he could not put pen to
paper.  Life to him now was one aching emptiness--since that day at the
Rest of the Flax-beaters Rosalie had been absent.  On the very morning
after their meeting by the river she had gone away with her father to the
great hospital at Montreal--not Quebec this time, on the advice of the
Seigneur--as the one chance of prolonging his life.  There had come but
one letter from her since that hour when he saw her in the Seigneur's
coach with her father, moving away in the still autumn air, a piteous
appeal in her eyes.  The good-bye look she gave him then was with him day
and night.

She had written him one letter, and he had written one in reply, and no
more.  Though he was wholly reckless for himself, for her he was prudent
now--there was nothing else to do.  To save her--if he could but save her
from himself!  If he might only put back the clock!

In his letter to her he had simply said that it were wiser not to write,
since the acting postmistress, the Cure's sister, would note the exchange
of letters, and this would arouse suspicion.  He could not see what was
best to do, what was right to do.  To wait seemed the only thing, and his
one letter ended with the words: Rosalie, my life is lived only in the
thought of you.  There is no hour but I think of you, no moment but you
are with me.  The greatest proof of love that man can give, I will give
to you, in the hour fate wills--for us.  But now, we must wait--we must
wait, Rosalie.  Do not write to me, but know that if I could go to you I
would go; if I could say to you, Come, I would say it.  If the giving of
my life would save you any pain or sorrow, I would give it.

Sitting on his bench at work, it seemed to Charley that sometimes she was
near him, and more than once he turned quickly round as though she were,
in very truth, standing beside him.  He thought of her continually, and
often with an unbearable pain.  He figured her in his mind as pale and
distressed, and always her eyes had the piteous terror of that last look
as she went away over the hills.

But the weeks had worn on, then the Seigneur, who had been to Montreal,
came back with the news that Rosalie was looking as beautiful as a
picture.  "Grown a woman in beauty and in stature; comely--comely as a
lady in a Watteau picture, my dear messieurs!" he had said to the Cure,
standing in the tailor's shop.

Replying, the Cure had said: "She is in good hands, with good people,
recommended to me by an abbe there; yet I am not wholly happy about her.
When her trouble comes to her"--Charley's needle slipped and pierced his
finger to the bone--"when her father goes, as he must, I fear, there will
be no familiar face; she will hear no familiar voice."

"Faith, there you are wrong, my dear Cure" answered the Seigneur;
"there'll be a face yonder she likes very well indeed, and a voice she's
fond of too."

Charley's back was on them at that moment, of which he was glad, for his
face was haggard with anxiety, and it seemed hours before the Cure said:
"Whom do you mean, Maurice?" and hours before the Seigneur replied:
"Mrs. Flynn, of course.  I'm sending her tomorrow."

Mrs. Flynn had gone, and Charley had, in one sense, been made no happier
by that, for it seemed to him that Rosalie would rather that strangers'
eyes were on her than the inquisitively friendly eye of Mary Flynn.

Weeks had grown into months, and no news came--none save that which the
Cure let fall, or was brought by the irresponsible Notary, who heard all
gossip.  Only the Cure's scant news were authentic, however, and Charley
never saw the good priest but he had a secret hope of hearing him say
that Rosalie was coming back.  Yet when she came back, what would, or
could, he do?  There was always the crime for which he or Billy must be
punished.  Concerning this crime his heart was growing harder--for
Rosalie's sake.  But there was Kathleen--and Rosalie was now in the
city where she lived, and they might meet!  There was one solution--
if Kathleen should die!  It sickened him that he could think of that with
a sense of relief, almost of hope.  If Kathleen should die, then he would
be free to marry Rosalie--into what?  He still could only marry her into
the peril and menace of the law?  Again, even if Kathleen did not stand
in the way, neither the Cure nor any other priest would marry him to her
without his antecedents being certified.  A Protestant minister would,
perhaps, but would Rosalie give up her faith?  Following him without the
blessing of the Church, she would trample under foot every dear tradition
of her life, win the scorn of all of her religion, and destroy her own
peace; for the faith of her fathers was as the breath of her nostrils.
What cruelty to her!

But was it, after all, even true that he had but to call and she would
come?  In truth it well might be that she had learned to despise him;
to feel how dastardly he had been to take her love, given in blind
simplicity, bestowed like the song of the bird upon the listening fields
--to take the plenteous fulness of her life, and give nothing in return
save the empty hand, the hopeless hour, the secret sorrow.

Nothing could quench his misery.  The physical part of him craved without
ceasing for something to allay his distress.  Again and again he fought
his old enemy with desperate resolve.  To fall again, to touch liquor
once more, was to end all for ever.  He fought on tenaciously and
gloomily, with little of the pride of life, with nothing of the old
stubborn self-will, but with a new-awakened sense.  He had found
conscience at last--and more.

The months went by and still M. Evanturel lingered on, and Rosalie did
not come.  The strain became too great at last.  In the week preceding
Easter, when all the parish was busy at Four Mountains, making costumes,
rehearsing, building, putting up seats, cutting down trees, and erecting
crosses and calvaries, Charley disclosed to Jo a new intention.

In the earlier part of the winter Jo and he had met two or three times
a week, but now Jo had come to help him with his work in the shop--two
silent, devoted companions.  They understood each other, and in that
understanding were life and death.  For never did Jo forget that a year
from the day he had confessed his sins he meant to give himself up to
justice.  This caused him no sleepless nights.  He thought more of
Charley than of himself, and every month now he went to confession, and
every day he said his prayers.  He was at his prayers when Charley went
to tell him of his purpose.  Charley had often seen Jo on his knees of
late, and he had wondered, but not with the old pagan mind.  "Jo," he
said, "I am going away--to Montreal."

"To Montreal!" exclaimed Jo huskily.  "You are going back--to stay?"

"Not that.  I am going--to see--Rosalie Evanturel."  Jo was troubled but
not dumfounded.  It had slowly crept into his mind that Charley loved the
girl, though he had no real ground for suspicion.  His will, however, had
been so long the slave of the other man's that he had far-off reflections
of his thoughts.  He made no reply in words, but nodded his head.

"I want you to stay here, Jo.  If I don't come back, and--and she does,
stand by her, Jo.  I can trust you."  "You will come back, M'sieu'--but
you will come back, then?" Jo asked heavily.

"If I can, Jo--if I can," he answered.

Long after he had gone, Jo wandered up and down among the trees on the
river-road, up which Charley had disappeared with Jo's dogs and sled.
He kept shaking his head mournfully.




CHAPTER XLVI

THE FORGOTTEN MAN

It was Easter morning, and the good sunrise of a perfect spring made
radiant the high hill above the town.  Rosy-fingered morn touched with
magic colour the masts and scattered sails of the ships upon the great
river, and spires and towers quivered with rainbow light.  The city was
waking cheerfully, though the only active life was in the pealing bells
and on the deep flowing rivers.  The streets were empty yet, save for an
assiduous priest or the cart of a milkman.  Here and there a window
opened and a drowsy head was thrust into the eager air.  These saw a
bearded countryman with his team of six dogs and his little cart going
slowly up the street.  It was plain the man had come a long distance--
from the mountains in the east or south, no doubt, where horses were few,
and dogs, canoes, and oxen the means of transportation.

As the man moved slowly through the streets, his dogs still gallantly
full of life after their hard journey, he did not stare about him after
the manner of countrymen.  His movements had intelligence and freedom.
He was an unusual figure for a woodsman or river-man--he did not wear
ear-rings or a waist-sash as did the river-men, and he did not turn in
his toes like a woodsman.  Yet he was plainly a man from the far
mountains.

The man with the dogs did not heed the few curious looks turned his way,
but held his head down as though walking in familiar places.  Now and
then he spoke to his dogs, and once he stopped before a newspaper office,
which had a placard bearing these lines:

The Coming Passion Play In the Chaudiere Valley.

He looked at it mechanically, for, though he was concerned in the Passion
Play and the Chaudiere Valley, it was an abstraction to him at this
moment.  His mind was absorbed by other things.

Though he looked neither to right nor to left, he was deeply affected by
all round him.

At last he came to a certain street, where he and his dogs travelled
more quickly.  It opened into a square, where bells were booming in
the steeple of a church.  Shops and offices in the street were shut,
but a saloon-door was open, and over the doorway was the legend: Jean
Jolicoeur, Licensed to sell Wine, Beer, and other Spirituous and
Fermented Liquors.

Nearly opposite was a lawyer's office, with a new-painted sign.  It had
once read, in plain black letters, Charles Steele, Barrister, etc.; now
it read, in gold letters and many flourishes of the sign-painter's art,
Rockwell and Tremblay, Barristers, Attorneys, etc.

Here the man looked up with trouble in his eyes.  He could see dimly the
desk and the window beside which he had sat for so many years, and on the
wall a map of the city glowed with the incoming sun.

He moved on, passing the saloon with the open door.  The landlord, in his
shirt-sleeves, was standing in the doorway.  He nodded, then came out to
the edge of the board-walk.

"Come a long way, M'sieu'?" he asked.

"Four days' journey," answered the man gruffly through his beard, looking
the landlord in the eyes.  If this landlord, who in the past had seen him
so often and so closely, did not recognise him, surely no one else would.
It was, however, a curious recurrence of habit that, as he looked at the
landlord, he instinctively felt for his eye-glass, which he had discarded
when he left Chaudiere.  For an instant there was an involuntary arrest
of Jean Jolicoeur's look, as though memory had been roused, but this
swiftly passed, and he said:

"Fine dogs, them!  We never get that kind hereabouts now, M'sieu'.  Ever
been to the city before?"

"I've never been far from home before," answered the Forgotten Man.

"You'd better keep your eyes open, my friend, though you've got a sharp
pair in your head--sharp as Beauty Steele's almost.  There's rascals in
the river-side drinking-places that don't let the left hand know what the
right does."

"My dogs and I never trust anybody," said the Forgotten Man, as one of
the dogs snarled at the landlord's touch.  "So I can take care of myself,
even if I haven't eyes as sharp as Beauty Steele's, whoever he is."

The landlord laughed.  "Beauty's only skin-deep, they say.  Charley
Steele was a lawyer; his office was over there"--he pointed across the
street.  "He went wrong.  He come here too often--that wasn't my fault.
He had an eye like a hawk, and you couldn't read it.  Now I can read your
eye like a book.  There's a bit of spring in 'em, M'sieu'.  His eyes were
hard winter-ice five feet deep and no fishing under--froze to the bed.
He had a tongue like a cross-cut saw.  He's at the bottom of the St.
Lawrence, leaving a bad job behind him.

"Have a drink--hein?"  He jerked a finger backwards to the saloon door.
"It's Sunday, but stolen waters are sweet, sure!"

The Forgotten Man shook his head.  "I don't drink, thank you."

"It'd do you good.  You're dead beat.  You've been travelling hard--eh?"

"I've come a long way, and travelled all night."

"Going on?"

"I am going back to-morrow."

"On business?"

Charley nodded--he glanced involuntarily at the sign across the street.

Jean Jolicoeur saw the look.  "Lawyer's business, p'r'aps?"

"A lawyer's business--yes."

"Ah, if Charley Steele was here!"

"I have as good a lawyer as--"

The landlord laughed scornfully.  "They're not made.  He'd legislate the
devil out of the Pit.  Where are you going to stay, M'sieu'?"

"Somewhere cheap--along the river," answered the Forgotten Man.

Jolicoeur's good-natured face became serious.  "I'll tell you a place--
it's honest.  It's the next street, a few hundred yards down, on the
left.  There's a wooden fish over the door.  It's called The Black Bass
--that hotel.  Say I sent you.  Good luck to you, countryman!  Ah, la;
la, there's the second bell--I must be getting to Mass!"  With a nod he
turned and went into the house.

The Forgotten Man passed slowly up the street, into the side street,
and followed it till he came to The Black Bass, and turned into the small
stable-yard.  A stable-man was stirring.  He at once put his dogs into
a little pen set apart for them, saw them fed from the kitchen, and,
betaking himself to a little room behind the bar of the hotel, ordered
breakfast.  The place was empty, save for the servant--the household were
at Mass.  He looked round the room abstractedly.  He was thinking of a
crippled man in a hospital, of a girl from a village in the Chaudiere
Valley.  He thought with a shiver of a white house on the hill.  He
thought of himself as he had never done before in his life.  Passing
along the street, he had realised that he had no moral claim upon
anything or anybody within these precincts of his past life.  The place
was a tomb to him.

As he sat in the little back parlour of The Black Bass, eating his frugal
breakfast of eggs and bread and milk, the meaning of it all slowly dawned
upon him.  Through his intellect he had known something of humanity, but
he had never known men.  He had thought of men in the mass, and despised
them because of their multitudinous duplication, and their typical
weaknesses; but he had never known one man or one woman from the subtler,
surer divination of the heart.  His intellect had made servants and lures
of his emotions and his heart, for even his every case in court had been
won by easy and selfish command of all those feelings in mankind which
make possible personal understanding.

In this little back parlour it came to him with sudden force how, long
ago, he had cut himself off from any claim upon his fellows--not only by
his conduct, but by his merciless inhuman intelligence working upon the
merciful human life about him.  He never remembered to have had any real
feeling till on that day with Kathleen--the day he died.  The bitter
complaint of a woman he had wronged cruelly, by having married her, had
wrung from him his own first wail of life, in the one cry "Kathleen!"

As he sat eating his simple meal his pulses were beating painfully.
Every nerve in his body seemed to pluck at the angry flesh.  There
flashed across his mind in sympathetic sensation a picture.  It was the
axe-factory on the river, before which he used to stand as a boy, and
watch the men naked to the waist, with huge hairy arms and streaming
faces, toiling in the red glare, the trip-hammers endlessly pounding upon
the glowing metal.  In old days it had suggested pictures of gods and
demi-gods toiling in the workshops of the primeval world.  So the whole
machinery of being seemed to be toiling in the light of an awakened
conscience, to the making of a man.  It seemed to him that all his life
was being crowded into these hours.  His past was here--its posing, its
folly, its pitiful uselessness, and its shame.  Kathleen and Billy were
here, with all the problems that involved them.  Rosalie was here, with
the great, the last problem.

"Nothing matters but that--but Rosalie," he said to himself as he turned
to look out of the window at the wrangling dogs gnawing bones.  "Here she
is in the midst of all I once knew, and I know that I am no more a part
of it than she is.  She and Kathleen may have met face to face in these
streets--who can tell!  The world is large, but there's a sort of
whipper-in of Fate, who drives the people wearing the same livery into
one corner in the end.  If they met"--he rose and walked hastily up and
down--"what then?  I have a feeling that Rosalie would recognise her as
plainly as though the word Kathleen were stitched on her breast."

There was a clock on the wall.  He looked at it.  "It will not be safe to
go out until evening.  Then I can go to the hospital, and watch her
coming out."  He realised with satisfaction that many people coming from
Mass must pass the inn.  There was a chance of his seeing Rosalie, if she
had gone to early Mass.  This street lay in her way from the hospital.
"One look--ah, one look!"  For this one look he had come.  For this, and
to secure that which would save Rosalie from want always, if anything
should happen to him.  This too had been greatly on his mind.  There was
a way to give her what was his very own, which would rob no one and serve
her well indeed.

Looking at his face in the mirror over the mantel, he said to himself

"I might have had ten thousand friends, yet I have a thousand enemies,
who grin at the memory of the drunken fop down among the eels and the
cat-fish.  Every chance was with me then.  I come back here, and--and
Jolicoeur tells me the brutal truth.  But if I had had ambition"--a wave
of the feeling of the old life passed over him--"if I had had ambition as
I was then, I should have been a monster.  It was all so paltry that, in
sheer disgust, I should have kicked every ladder down that helped me up.
I should have sacrificed everything to myself."

He stopped short and stared, for, in the mirror, he saw a girl passing
through the stable-yard towards the quarrelling dogs in the kennel.  He
clapped his hand to his mouth to stop a cry.  It was Rosalie.

He did not turn round but looked at her in the mirror, as though it were
the last look he might give on earth.

He could hear her voice speaking to the dogs: "Ah, my friends, ah, my
dears!  I know you every one.  Jo Portugais is here.  I know your bark,
you, Harpy, and you, Lazybones, and you, Cloud and London!  I know you
every one.  I heard you as I came from Mass, beauty dears.  Ah, you know
me, sweethearts?  Ah, God bless you for coming!  You have come to bring
us home; you have come to fetch us home--father and me."  The paws of one
of the dogs was on her shoulder, and his nose was in her hair.

Charley heard her words, for the window was open, and he listened and
watched now with an infinite relief in his look.  Her face was half
turned towards him.  It was pale-very pale and sad.  It was Rosalie as of
old--thank God, as of old!--but more beautiful in the touching sadness,
the far-off longing, of her look.

"I must go and see your master," she said to the dogs.  "Down--down,
Lazybones!"

There was no time to lose--he must not meet her ere.  He went into the
outer hall hastily.  The servant was passing through.  "If any one asks
for Jo Portugais," he said, "say that I'll be back to-morrow morning--I'm
going across the river to-day."

"Certainly, M'sieu'," said the girl, and smiled because of the piece of
silver he put in her hand.

As he heard the side door open he stepped through the front doorway into
the street, and disappeared round a corner.




CHAPTER XLVII

ONE WAS TAKEN AND THE OTHER LEFT

Rosalie carried to the hospital that afternoon a lighter heart than she
had known for many a day.  The sight of Jo Portugais' dogs had roused her
out of the apathy which had been growing on her in this patient but
hopeless watching beside her father.  She had always a smile and a
cheerful word for the poor man.  A settled sorrow hung upon her face,
however, taking away its colour, but giving it a sweet gravity which made
her slave more than one young doctor of the hospital, for whom, however,
she showed no more than a friendly frankness, free from self-
consciousness.  For hours she would sit in reverie beside her sleeping
father, her heart "over the water to Charley."  As in a trance, she could
see him sitting at his bench, bent over his work, now and again lifting
up his head to look across to the post-office, where another hand than
hers sorted letters now.

Day by day her father weakened and faded away.  All that was possible to
medical skill had been done.  As the money left by her mother dwindled,
she had no anxiety, for she knew that the life she so tenderly cherished
would not outlast the gold which lengthened out the tenuous chain of
being.  This last illness of her father's had been the salvation of her
mind, the saving of her health.  Maybe it had been the saving of her
soul; for at times a curious contempt of life came upon her--she who had
loved it so eagerly and fully.  There descended on her then the bitter
conviction that never again would she see the man she loved.  Then not
even Mrs. Flynn could call back "the fun o' the world" to her step and
her tongue and her eye.  At first there had been a timid shrinking, but
soon her father and herself were brighter and better for the old
Irishwoman's presence, and she began to take comfort in Mrs. Flynn.

Mrs. Flynn gave hopefulness to whatever life she touched, and Rosalie,
buoyant and hopeful enough by nature, responded to the living warmth and
the religion of life in the Irishwoman's heart.

"'Tis worth the doin', ivery bit of it, darlin', the bither an' the
swate, the hard an' the aisy, the rough an' the smooth, the good an' the
bad," said Mrs. Flynn to her this very Easter morning.  "Even the avil is
worth doin', if so be 'twas not mint, an' the good is in yer heart in the
ind, an' ye do be turnip' to the Almoighty, repentin' an' glad to be
aloive: provin' to Him 'twas worth while makin' the world an' you, to
want, an' worry, an' work, an' play, an' pick the flowers, an' bleed o'
the thorns, an' dhrink the sun, an' ate the dust, an' be lovin' all the
way!  Ah, that's it, darlin'," persisted Mrs. Flynn, "'tis lovin' all the
way makes it aisier.  There's manny kinds o' love.  There's lad an' lass,
there's maid an' man.  An' that last is spring, an' all the birds
singin', an' shtorms now an' thin, an' siparations, an' misthrust, an'
God in hivin bein' that aisy wid ye for bein' fools an' children, an'
bringin' ye thegither in the ind, if so be ye do be lovin' as man an'
maid should love, wid all yer heart.  Thin there's the love o' man an'
wife.  Shure, that's the love that lasts, if it shtarts right.  Shure,
it doesn't always shtart wid the sun shinin.'  'Will ye marry me?' says
Teddy Flynn to me.  'I will,' says I.  'Then I'll come back from Canaday
to futch ye,' says he, wid a tear in his eye.

"'For what's a man in ould Ireland that has a head for annything but
puttaties!  There's land free in Canaday, an' I'm goin' to make a home
for ye, Mary,' says he, wavin' a piece of paper in the air.  'Are ye,
thin?' says I.  He goes away that night, an' the next mornin' I have a
lether from him, sayin' he's shtartin' that day for Canaday.  He hadn't
the heart to tell me to me face.  Fwaht do I do thin?  I begs, borrers,
an' stales, an' I reached that ship wan minnit before she sailed.  There
was no praste aboord, but we was married six weeks afther at Quebec.  And
thegither we lived wid ups an' downs--but no ups an' downs to the love of
us for twenty years, blessed be God for all His mercies!"

Rosalie had listened with eyes that hungrily watched every expression,
ears that weighed eagerly every inflection; for she was hearing the story
of another's love, and it did not seem strange to her that a woman, old,
red-faced, and fat, should be telling it.

Yet there were times when she wept till she was exhausted; when all her
girlhood was drowned in the overflow of her eyes; when there was a sense
of irrevocable loss upon her.  Then it was, in her fear of soul and
pitiful loneliness, that her lover--the man she would have died for--
seemed to have deserted her.  Then it was that a sudden hatred against
him rose up in her--to be swept away as swiftly as it came by the memory
of his broken tale of love, his passionate words: "I have never loved any
one but you in all my life, Rosalie."  And also, there was that letter
from Chaudiere, which said that in the hour when the greatest proof of
his love must be given he would give it.  Reading the letter again,
hatred, doubt, even sorrow, passed from her, and her imagination pictured
the hour when, disguise and secrecy ended, he would step forward before
all the world and say: "I take Rosalie Evanturel to be my wife."  Despite
the gusts of emotion that swayed her at times, in the deepest part of her
being she trusted him completely.

When she reached the hospital this Sunday afternoon her step was quick,
her smile bright--though she had not been to confession as was her duty
on Easter day.  The impulse towards it had been great, but her secret was
not her own, and the passionate desire to give relief to her full heart
was overborne by thought of the man.  Her soul was her own, but this
secret of their love was his as well as hers.  She knew that she was the
only just judge between.

Soon after she entered the ward, the chief surgeon said that all that
could be done for her father had now been done, and that as M. Evanturel
constantly asked to be taken back to Chaudiere (he never said to die,
though they knew what was in his mind), he might now make the journey,
partly by river, partly by land.  It seemed to the delighted and excited
Rosalie that Jo Portugais had been sent to her as a surprise, and that
his team of dogs was to take her father back.

She sat by her father's bed this beautiful, wonderful Sunday afternoon,
and talked cheerfully, and laughed a little, and told M. Evanturel of the
dogs, and together they looked out of the window to the far-off hills, in
their golden purple, beyond which, in the valley of the Chaudiere, was
their little home.  With her father's hand in hers the girl dreamed
dreams again, and it seemed to her that she was the very Rosalie
Evanturel of old, whose thoughts were bounded by a river and a hill,
a post-office and a church, a catechism and a few score of books.  Here
in the crowded city she had come to be a woman who, bitterly shaken in
soul, knew life's sufferings; who had, during the past few months, read
with avidity history, poetry, romance, fiction, and the drama, English
and French; for in every one she found something that said: "You have
felt that."  In these long months she had learned more than she had known
or learned in all her previous life.

As she sat looking out into the eastern sky she became conscious of
voices, and of a group of people who came slowly down the ward, sometimes
speaking to the sick and crippled.  It was not a general visitors' day,
but one reserved for the few to come and say a kindly word to the
suffering, to bring some flowers and distribute books.  Rosalie had
always been absent at this hour before, for she shrank from strangers;
but to-day she had stayed on unthinking.  It mattered nothing to her who
came and went.  Her heart was over the hills, and the only tie she had
here was with this poor cripple whose hand she held.  If she did not
resent the visit of these kindly strangers, she resolutely held herself
apart from the object of their visit with a sense of distance and cold
dignity.  If she had given Charley something of herself, she had in turn
taken something from him, something unlike her old self, delicately non-
intime.  Knowledge of life had rationalised her emotions to a definite
degree, had given her the pride of self-repression.  She had had need of
it in these surroundings, where her beauty drew not a little dangerous
attention, which she had held at arm's-length--her great love for one man
made her invulnerable.

Now, as the visitors came near, she did not turn towards them, but still
sat, her chin on her hand, looking out across the hills, in resolute
abstraction.  She felt her father's fingers press hers, as if to draw her
attention, for he, weak man, was ever ready to open his hand and heart to
any friendly soul.  She took no notice, but held his hand firmly, as
though to say that she had no wish to see.

She was conscious now that they were beside her father's bed.  She hoped
that they would pass.  But no, the feet stopped, there was whispering,
and then she heard a voice say, "Rather rude!" then another, "Not
wanted, that's plain!"--the first a woman's, the second a man's.  Then
another voice, clear and cold, and well modulated, said to her father:
"They tell me you have been here a long time, and have had much pain.
You will be glad to go, I am sure."

Something in the voice startled her.  Some familiar sound or inflection
struck upon her ear with a far-off note, some lost tone she knew.  Of
what, of whom, did this voice remind her?  She turned round quickly and
caught two cold blue eyes looking at her.  The face was older than her
own, handsome and still, and happy in a placid sort of way.  Few gusts of
passion or of pain had passed across that face.  The figure was shapely
to the newest fashion, the bonnet was perfect, the hand which held two
books was prettily gloved.  Polite charity was written in her manner and
consecrated every motion.  On the instant, Rosalie resented this fine
epitome of convention, this dutiful charity-monger, herself the centre of
an admiring quartet.  She saw the whispering, she noted the well-bred
disguise of interest, and she met the visitor's gaze with cold courtesy.
The other read the look in her face, and a slightly pacifying smile
gathered at her lips.

"We are glad to hear that your father is better.  He has been ill a long
time?"

Rosalie started again, for the voice perplexed her--rather, not the
voice, but the inflection, the deliberation.

She bowed, and set her lips, but, chancing to glance at her father, she
saw that he was troubled by her manner.  Flashing a look of love at him,
she adjusted the pillow under his head, and said to her questioner in a
low voice: "He is better now, thank you."

Encouraged, the other rejoined: "May I leave one or two books for him to
read--or for you to read to him?"  Then added hastily, for she saw a
curious look in Rosalie's eyes: "We can have mutual friends in books,
though we cannot be friends with each other.  Books are the go-betweens
of humanity."

Rosalie's heart leapt, she flushed, then grew slightly pale, for
it was not tone or inflection alone that disturbed her now, but words
themselves.  A voice from over the hills seemed to say these things to
her.  A haunting voice from over the hills had said them to her--these
very words.

"Friends need no go-betweens," she said quietly, "and enemies should not
use them."

She heard a voice say, "By Jove!" in a tone of surprise, as though it
were wonderful the girl from Chaudiere should have her wits about her.
So Rosalie interpreted it.

"Have you many friends here?" asked the cold voice, meant to be kindly
and pacific.  It was schooled to composure, because it gave advantage in
life's intercourse, not from any inner urbanity.

"Some need many friends, some but a few.  I come from a country where one
only needs a few."

"Where is your country, I wonder?" said the cold echo of another voice.

Charley had passed out of Kathleen's life--he was dead to her, his memory
scorned and buried.  She loved the man to whom she supposed she was
married; she was only too glad to let the dust of death and time cover
every trace of Charley from her gaze; she would have rooted out every
particle of association: yet his influence on her had been so great that
she had unconsciously absorbed some of his idiosyncrasies--in the tone of
his voice, in his manner of speaking.  To-day she had even repeated
phrases he had used.

"Beyond the hills," said Rosalie, turning away.

"Is it not strange?" said the voice.  "That is the title of one of the
books I have just brought--'Beyond the Hills'.  It is by an English
writer.  This other book is French.  May I leave them?"

Rosalie inclined her head.  It would.  make her own position less
dignified if she refused them.  "Books are always welcome to my father,"
she said.

There was an instant's pause, as though the fashionable lady would offer
her hand; but their eyes met, and they only bowed.  The lady moved on
with a smile, leaving a perfume of heliotrope behind her.

"Where is your country, I wonder?"--the voice of the lady rang in
Rosalie's ears.  As she sat at the window again, long after the visitors
had disappeared, the words, "I wonder--I wonder--I wonder!" kept beating
in her brain.  It was absurd that this woman should remind her of the
tailor of Chaudiere.

Suddenly she was roused by her father's voice.  "This is beautiful--ah,
but beautiful, Rosalie!"

She turned towards him.  He was reading the book in his hand--'Beyond the
Hills'.  "Listen," he said, and he read, in English: "'Compensation is
the other name for God.  How often is it that those whom disease or
accident has robbed of active life find greater inner rejoicing and a
larger spiritual itinerary!  It would seem that withdrawal from the ruder
activities gives a clearer seeing.  Also for these, so often, is granted
a greater love, which comes of the consecration of other lives to theirs.
And these too have their reward, for they are less encompassed by the
vanities of the world, having the joy of self-sacrifice.'"  He looked at
Rosalie with an unnatural brightness in his eyes, and she smiled at him
now and stroked his hand.

"It has been all compensation to me," he said, after a moment.  "You have
been a good daughter to me, Rosalie."

She shook her head and smiled.  "Good fathers think they have good
daughters," she answered, choking back a sob.

He closed the book and let it lie upon the coverlet.  "I will sleep now,"
he said, and turned on his side.  She arranged his pillow, and adjusted
the bedclothes to his comfort.

"Good-night," he said, as, with a faint hand, he drew her head down and
kissed her.  "Good girl!  Goodnight!"

She patted his hand.  "It is not night yet, father."

He was already half asleep.  "Good-night!" he said again, and fell into
a deep sleep.

She sat down by the window, in her hand the book he had laid down.  A
hundred thoughts were busy in her brain--of her father; of the woman who
had just left; of her lover over the hills.  The woman's voice came to
her again--a far-off mockery.  She opened the book mechanically and
turned over the pages.  Presently her eyes were riveted to a page.
On it was written the word Kathleen.

For a moment she sat transfixed.  The word Kathleen and the haunting
voice became one, and her mind ran back to the day when she had said to
Charley: "Who is Kathleen?"

She sprang to her feet.  What should she do?  Follow the woman?  Find out
who and what she was?  Go to the young surgeon who had accompanied them,
ask him who she was, and so learn the clue to the mystery concerning her
lover?

In the midst of her confusion she became sharply conscious of two things:
the approach of Mrs. Flynn, and her father's heavy breathing.  Dropping
the book, she leaned over her father's bed and looked closely at him.
Then she turned to the frightened and anxious Mrs. Flynn.

"Go for the priest," she said.  "He is dying."

"I'll send some one.  I'm stayin' here by you, darlin'," said the old
woman, and hurried to the room of the young surgeon for a messenger.

As the sun went down, the cripple went out upon a long journey alone.




CHAPTER XLVIII

"WHERE THE TREE OF LIFE IS BLOOMING--"

As Charley walked the bank of the great river by the city where his old
life lay dead, he struggled with the new life which--long or short--must
henceforth belong to the village of the woman he loved.  .  .  .  But as
he fought with himself in the long night-watch it was borne in upon him
that though he had been shown the Promised Land, he might never find
there a habitation and a home.  The hymn he had mockingly sung the night
he had been done to death at the Cote Dorion sang in his senses now, an
ever-present mockery:

               "On the other side of Jordan,
               In the sweet fields of Eden,
               Where the tree of life is blooming,
                    There is rest for you.
               There is rest for the weary,
               There is rest for the weary,
               There is rest for the weary,
                    There is rest for you."

In the uttermost corner of his intelligence he felt with sure prescience
that, however befalling, the end of all was not far off.  In the exercise
of new faculties, which had more to do with the soul than with reason, he
now believed what he could not see, and recognised what was not proved.
Labour of the hand, trouble, sorrow, and perplexity, charity and
humanity, had cleared and simplified his life, had sweetened his
intelligence, and taken the place of ambition.  He saw life now through
the lens of personal duty, which required that the thing nearest to one's
hand should be done first.

But as foreboding pressed upon him there came the thought of what should
come after--to Rosalie.  His thoughts took a practical form--her good was
uppermost in his mind.  All Rosalie had to live on was her salary as
postmistress, for it was in every one's knowledge that the little else
she had was being sacrificed to her father's illness.  Suppose, then,
that through illness or accident she lost her position, what could she
do?  He might leave her what he had--but what had he?  Enough to keep her
for a year or two--no more.  All his earnings had gone to the poor and
the suffering of Chaudiere.

There was one way.  It had suggested itself to him so often in Chaudiere,
and had been one of the two reasons for bringing him here.  There were
his dead mother's pearls and one thousand dollars in notes behind a
secret panel in the white house on the hill, in this very city where he
was.  The pearls were worth over ten thousand dollars--in all, there
would be eleven thousand, enough to secure Rosalie from poverty.  What
should Kathleen do with his mother's pearls, even if they were found by
her?  What should she do with his money did she not loathe his memory?
Had not all his debts been paid?  These pearls and this money were all
his own.

But to get them.  To go now to the white house on the hill; to face that
old life even for an hour, a knocking at the door of a haunted house--he
shrank from the thought.  He would have to enter the place like a thief
in the night.

Yet for Rosalie he must take the risk--he must go.




CHAPTER XLIX

THE OPEN GATE

It was a still night, and the moon, delicately bright, gave forth that
radiance which makes spiritual to the eye the coarsest thing.  Inside the
white house on the hill all was dark.  Sleep had settled on it long
before midnight, for, on the morrow, its master and mistress hoped to
make a journey to the valley of the Chaudiere, where the Passion Play was
being performed by habitants and Indians.  The desire to see the play had
become an infatuation in the minds of the two, eager for some interest to
relieve the monotony of a happy life.

But as all slept, a figure in the dress of a habitant moved through the
passages of the house stealthily, yet with an assurance unusual in the
thief or housebreaker.  In the darkest passages his step was sure, and
his hand fastened on latch or door-knob with perfect precision.  He came
at last into a large hallway flooded by the moon, pale, watchful, his
beard frosted by the light.  In the stillness of his tread and the
composed sorrow of his face he seemed like one long dead who "revisits
the glimpses of the moon."

At last he entered a room the door of which stood wide open.  In this
room had been begotten, or had had exercise, whatever of him was worth
approving in the days before he died.  It was a place of books and
statues and tapestry, and the dark oak was nobly smutched of Time.  This
sombre oaken wall had been handed down through four generations from the
man's great-grandfather: the breath of generations had steeped it in
human association.

Entering, he turned for an instant with clinched hands to look at another
door across the hall.  Behind that door were two people who despised his
memory, who conspired to forget his very name.  This house was the
woman's, for he had given it to her the day he died.  But that she could
live there with all the old associations, with memories that, however
bitter, however shaming, had a sort of sacredness, struck into his soul
with a harrowing pain.  There she was whom he had spared--himself; whose
happiness had lain in his hands, and he had given it to her.  Yet her
very existence robbed himself of happiness, and made sorrowful a life
dearer than his own.

Kathleen lay asleep in that room--he fancied he could hear her breathing;
and, by the hospital on the hill, up beyond the point of pines, in a
little cottage which he could see from the great window, lay Rosalie with
sleepless eyes and wan cheeks, longing for morning and the stir of life
to help her to forget.

For Rosalie he had come to this house once more.  For her sake he was
revisiting this torture-chamber, from which he knew he must go again,
blanched and shaken, as a man goes from a tomb where his dead lie
unforgiving.

He shut his teeth, went swiftly across the room, and beside a great
carved oak table touched a hidden spring in the side of it.  The spring
snapped; the panel creaked a little and drew back.  It seemed to him that
the noise he made must be heard in every part of the house, so sensitive
was his ear, so deep was the silence on which the sounds had broken.  He
turned round to the doorway to listen before he put his hand within the
secret place.

There was no sound.  He turned his attention to the table.  Drawing forth
two packets with a gasp of relief, he put them in his pocket, and, with
extreme care, proceeded to close the panel.  By rubbing the edges of the
wood with grease from a candle on the table, he was able to readjust the
panel in silence.  But, as the spring came home, he became suddenly
conscious of a presence in the room.  A shiver passed through him.  He
turned round-softly, quickly.  He was in the shadow and near great
window-curtains, and his fingers instinctively clutched them as he saw a
figure in white at the door of the room.  Slowly, strangely deliberate,
the figure moved further into the room.

Charley's breath stopped.  He felt his face flush, and a strange weakness
came on him.  There before him stood Kathleen.

She was in her night-gown, and she stood still, as though listening; yet,
as Charley looked closer, he realised that it was an unconscious, passive
listening, and that she did not know he was there.

Her mind only was listening.  She was asleep.  Was it possible that his
very presence in the house had touched some old note of memory, which,
automatically responding, had carried her from her bed in this
somnambulistic trance?  That subtle telegraphy between our subconscious
selves which we cannot reduce to a law, yet alarming us at times,
announced to Kathleen's mind, independent of the waking senses, the
presence once familiar to this house for so many years.  In her sleep
she had involuntarily responded to the call of Charley's approach.

Once, in the past, the night her uncle died, she had walked in her sleep,
and the memory of this flashed upon Charley now.  Silently he came closer
to her.  The moonlight shone on her face.  He could see plainly she was
asleep.  His position was painful and perilous.  If she waked, the shock
to herself would be great; if she waked and saw him, what disaster might
not occur!

Yet he had no agitation now, only clearness of mind and a curious sense
of confusion that he should see her en dishabille--the old fastidious
sense mingling with the feeling that she was now a stranger to him, and
that, waking, she would fly embarrassed from his presence, as he was
ready to fly from hers.  He was about to steal to the door and escape
before she waked, but she turned round, moved through the doorway, and
glided down the hall.  He followed silently.

She moved to the staircase, then slowly down it, and through a passage to
a morning-room, where, opening a pair of French windows, she passed out
onto the lawn.  He followed, not more than a dozen paces behind her.
His safety lay in getting outside, where he could easily hide among the
bushes, should someone else appear and an alarm be raised.

She crossed the lawn swiftly, a white, ghostlike figure.  In the middle
of the lawn she stopped short once as if in doubt what to do--as a
thought-reader pauses in his search for the mental scent again, ere he
rushes upon the object of his search with the certainty of instinct.

Presently she moved on, going directly towards a gate that opened out on
the cliff above the river.  In Charley's day this gate had been often
used, for it gave upon four steep wooden steps leading to a narrow shelf
of rock below.  From the edge of this cliff a rope-ladder dropped fifty
feet to the river.  For years he had used this rope-ladder to get down to
his boat, and often, when they were first married, Kathleen used to come
and watch him descend, and sometimes, just at the very first, would
descend also.  As he stole into the grounds this evening he had noticed,
however, that the rope-ladder was gone, and that new steps were being
built.  He had also mechanically observed that the gate was open.

For an instant he watched her slowly moving towards the gate.  At first
he did not realise the situation.  Suddenly her danger flashed upon him.
Passing through the gateway, she must fall over the cliff.

Her life was in his hands.

He could rush forward swiftly and close the gate, then, raising an alarm,
get away before he was seen; or--he could escape now.

What had he to do with her?  A weird, painful suggestion crept into his
brain: he was not responsible for her, and he was responsible for a woman
up there by the hospital, whose home was the valley of the Chaudiere!

If Kathleen were gone, what barrier would there be between him and
Rosalie?  What had he to do with this strange disposition of events?
Kathleen was never absent from her church twice on Sundays; she was
devoted to work of all sorts for the church on week-days--where was her
intervening personal Providence?  If Providence permitted her to die?--
well, she had had two years of happiness with the man she loved, at some
expense to himself--was it not fair that Rosalie should have her share?
Had he the right to call upon Rosalie for constant self-sacrifice, when,
by shutting his eyes now, by being dead to Kathleen and her need, as he
was dead to the world he once knew, the way would be clear to marry
Rosalie?

Dead--he was dead to the world and to Kathleen!  Should his ghost
interpose between her and the death now within two-score feet of her?
Who could know?  It was grim, it was awful, but was it not a wild kind of
justice?  Who could blame?  It was the old Charley Steele, the Charley
Steele of the court-room, who argued back humanity and the inherent
rightness of things.

But it was only a moment's pause.  The thoughts flashed by like the
lightning impressions of a dream, and a voice said in his ear, the voice
of the new Charley with a conscience:

"Save her--save her!"

Even as he was conscious of another presence on the lawn, he rushed
forward noiselessly.  Stealing between Kathleen and the gate-she was
within five feet of it he closed and locked it.  Then, with a quick
glance at her sleeping face-it was engraven on his memory ever after like
a dead face in a coffin--he ran along the fence among the shrubbery.  A
man not fifty feet away called to him.

"Hush--she is asleep!" Charley whispered, and disappeared.

It was Fairing himself who saw this deed which saved Kathleen's life.
Awaking, and not finding her, he had glanced towards the window, and had
seen her on the lawn.  He had rushed down to her, in time to see her
saved by a strange bearded man in habitant dress.  His one glance at the
man's face, as it turned towards him, produced an extraordinary effect
upon his mind, not soon to be dispelled--a haunting, ghostlike
apparition, which kept reminding him of something or somebody, he could
not tell what or whom.  The whispering voice and the breathless words,
"Hush--she is asleep!" repeated themselves over and over again in his
brain, as, taking Kathleen's hand, he led her, unresisting, and still
sleeping, back to her room.  In agitated thankfulness he resolved not to
speak of the event to Kathleen, or to any one else, lest it should come
to her ears and frighten her.

He would, however, keep a sharp lookout for the man who had saved her
life, and would reward him duly.  The face of the bearded habitant came
between him and his sleep.

Meanwhile this disturber of a woman's dreams and a man's sleep was
hurrying to an inn in the town by the waterside, where he met another
habitant with a team of dogs--Jo Portugais.  Jo had not been able to bear
the misery of suspense and anxiety, and had come seeking him.  There was
little speech between them.

"You have not been found out, M'sieu'?" was Jo's anxious question.

"No, no, but I have had a bad night, Jo.  Get the dogs together."

A little later, as Charley made ready to go back to Chaudiere, Jo said:

"You look as if you'd had a black dream, M'sieu'."  With the river
rustling by, and the trees stirring in the first breath of dawn, Charley
told Jo what had happened.

For a moment the murderer did not speak or stir, for a struggle was going
on in his breast also; then he stooped quickly, caught his companion's
hand, and kissed it.

"I could not have done it, M'sieu'," he said hoarsely.  They parted, Jo
to remain behind as they had agreed, to be near Rosalie if needed;
Charley to return to the valley of the Chaudiere.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Good fathers think they have good daughters
Shure, if we could always be 'about the same,' we'd do






THE RIGHT OF WAY

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 6.



L.        THE PASSION PLAY AT CHAUDIERE
LI.       FACE TO FACE
LII.      THE COMING OF BILLY
LIII.     THE SEIGNEUR AND THE CURE HAVE A SUSPICION
LIV.      M. ROSSIGNOL SLIPS THE LEASH
LV.       ROSALIE PLAYS A PART
LVI.      MRS. FLYNN SPEAKS
LVII.     A BURNING FIERY FURNACE
LVIII.    WITH HIS BACK TO THE WALL
LIX.      IN WHICH CHARLEY MEETS A STRANGER
LX.       THE HAND AT THE DOOR
LXI.      THE CURE SPEAKS
EPILOGUE



CHAPTER L

THE PASSION PLAY AT CHAUDIERE

For the first time in its history Chaudiere was becoming notable in the
eyes of the outside world.

"We'll have more girth after this," said Filion Lacasse the saddler to
the wife of the Notary, as, in front of the post-office, they stood
watching a little cavalcade of habitants going up the road towards Four
Mountains to rehearse the Passion Play.

"If Dauphin's advice had been taken long ago, we'd have had a hotel at
Four Mountains, and the city folk would be coming here for the summer,"
said Madame Dauphin, with a superior air.

"Pish!" said a voice behind them.  It was the Seigneur's groom, with a
straw in his mouth.  He had a gloomy mind.

"There isn't a house but has two or three boarders.  I've got three,"
said Filion Lacasse.  "They come tomorrow."

"We'll have ten at the Manor.  But no good will come of it," said the
groom.

"No good!  Look at the infidel tailor!" said Madame Dauphin.  "He
translated all the writing.  He drew all the dresses, and made a hundred
pictures--there they are at the Cure's house."

"He should have played Judas," said the groom malevolently.  "That'd be
right for him."

"Perhaps you don't like the Passion Play," said Madame Dauphin
disdainfully.

"We ain't through with it yet," said the death's-head groom.

"It is a pious and holy mission," said Madame Dauphin.  "Even that Jo
Portugais worked night and day till he went away to Montreal, and he
always goes to Mass now.  He's to take Pontius Pilate when he comes back.
Then look at Virginie Morrissette, that put her brother's eyes out
quarrelling--she's to play Mary Magdalene."

"I could fit the parts better," said the groom.

"Of course.  You'd have played St. John," said the saddler--" or, maybe,
Christus himself!"

"I'd have Paulette Dubois play Mary the sinner."

"Magdalene repented, and knelt at the foot of the cross.  She was sorry
and sinned no more," said the Notary's wife in querulous reprimand.

"Well, Paulette does all that," said the stolid, dark-visaged groom.

Filion Lacasse's ears pricked up.  "How do you know--she hasn't come
back?"

"Hasn't she, though!  And with her child too--last night."

"Her child!"  Madame Dauphin was scandalised and amazed.

The groom nodded.  "And doesn't care who knows it.  Seven years old, and
as fine a child as ever was!"

"Narcisse--Narcisse!" called Madame Dauphin to her husband, who was
coming up the street.  She hastily repeated the groom's news to him.

The Notary stuck his hand between the buttons of his waistcoat.  "Well,
well, my dear Madame," he said consequentially, "it is quite true."

"What do you know about it--whose child is it?" she asked, with curdling
scorn.

"'Sh-'sh!" said the Notary.  Then, with an oratorical wave of his free
hand: "The Church opens her arms to all--even to her who sinned much
because she loved much, who, through woful years, searched the world for
her child and found it not--hidden away, as it was, by the duplicity of
sinful man"--and so on through tangled sentences, setting forth in broken
terms Paulette Dubois's life.

"How do you know all about it?" asked the saddler.  "I've known it for
years," said the Notary grandly--stoutly too, for he would freely risk
his wife's anger that the vain-glory of the moment might be enlarged.

"And you keep it even from madame!" said the saddler, with a smile too
broad to be sarcastic.  "Tiens!  if I did that, my wife'd pick my eyes
out with a bradawl."

"It was a professional secret," said the Notary, with a desperate resolve
to hold his position.

"I'm going home, Dauphin--are you coming?" questioned his wife, with an
air.

"You will remain, and hear what I've got to say.  This Paulette Dubois--
she should play Mary Magdalene, for--"

"Look--look, what's that?" said the saddler.  He pointed to a wagon
coming slowly up the road.  In front of it a team of dogs drew a cart.
It carried some thing covered with black.  "It's a funeral!  There's the
coffin.  It's on Jo Portugais' little cart," added Filion Lacasse.

"Ah, God be merciful, it's Rosalie Evanturel and Mrs. Flynn!  And M'sieu'
Evanturel in the coffin!" said Madame Dauphin, running to the door of
the postoffice to call the Cure's sister.

"There'll be use enough for the baker's Dead March now," remarked M.
Dauphin sadly, buttoning up his coat, taking off his hat, and going
forward to greet Rosalie.  As he did so, Charley appeared in the doorway
of his shop.

"Look, Monsieur," said the Notary.  "This is the way Rosalie Evanturel
comes home with her father."

"I will go for the Cure" Charley answered, turning white.  He leaned
against the doorway for a moment to steady himself, then hurried up the
street.  He did not dare meet Rosalie, or go near her yet.  For her sake
it was better not.

"That tailor infidel has a heart.  His eyes were leaking," said the
Notary to Filion Lacasse, and went on to meet the mournful cavalcade.




CHAPTER LI

FACE TO FACE

"If I could only understand!"--this was Rosalie's constant cry in these
weeks wherein she lay ill and prostrate after her father's burial.  Once
and once only had she met Charley alone, though she knew that he was
keeping watch over her.  She had first seen him the day her father was
buried, standing apart from the people, his face sorrowful, his eyes
heavy, his figure bowed.

The occasion of their meeting alone was the first night of her return,
when the Notary and Charley had kept watch beside her father's body.

She had gone into the little hallway, and had looked into the room of
death.  The Notary was sound asleep in his arm-chair, but Charley sat
silent and moveless, his eyes gazing straight before him.  She murmured
his name, and though it was only to herself, not even a whisper, he got
up quickly and came to the hall, where she stood grief-stricken, yet with
a smile of welcome, of forgiveness, of confidence.  As she put out her
hand to him, and his swallowed it, she could not but say to him--so
contrary is the heart of woman, so does she demand a Yes by asserting a
No, and hunger for the eternal assurance--she could not but say:

"You do not love me--now."

It was but a whisper, so faint and breathless that only the heart of love
could hear it.  There was no answer in words, for some one was stirring
beyond Rosalie in the dark, and a great figure heaved through the kitchen
doorway, but his hand crushed hers in his own; his heart said to her, "My
love is an undying light; it will not change for time or tears"--the
words they had read together in a little snuff-coloured book on the
counter in the shop one summer day a year ago.  The words flashed into
his mind, and they were carried to hers.  Her fingers pressed his, and
then Charley said, over her shoulder, to the approaching Mrs. Flynn: "Do
not let her come again, Madame.  She should get some sleep," and he put
her hand in Mrs. Flynn's.  "Be good to her, as you know how, Mrs. Flynn,"
he added gently.

He had won the heart of Mrs. Flynn that moment, and it may be she had a
conviction or an inspiration, for she said, in a softer voice than she
was wont to use to any one save Rosalie:

"I'll do by her as you'd do by your own, sir," and tenderly drew Rosalie
to her own room.

Such had been their first meeting after her return.  Afterwards she was
taken ill, and the torture of his heart drove him out into the night, to
walk the road and creep round her house like a sentinel, Mrs. Flynn's
words ringing in his ears to reproach him--"I'll do by her as you would
do by your own, sir."  Night after night it was the same, and Rosalie
heard his footsteps and listened and was less sorrowful, because she knew
that she was ever in his thoughts.  But one day Mrs. Flynn came to him in
his shop.

"She's wantin' a word with ye on business," she said, and gestured
towards the little house across the way.  "'Tis few words ye do be
shpakin' to annybody, but if y' have kind words to shpake and good things
to say, y' naidn't be bitin' yer tongue," she added in response to his
nod, and left him.

Charley looked after her with a troubled face.  On the instant it seemed
to him that Mrs. Flynn knew all.  But his second thought told him that it
was only an instinct on her part that there was something between them--
the beginning of love, maybe.

In another half-hour he was beside Rosalie's chair.  "Perhaps you are
angry," she said, as he came towards her where she sat in the great arm-
chair.  She did not give him time to answer, but hurried on.  "I wanted
to tell you that I have heard you every night outside, and that I have
been glad, and sorry too--so sorry for us both."

"Rosalie!  Rosalie" he said hoarsely, and dropped on a knee beside her
chair, and took her hand and kissed it.  He did not dare do more.

"I wanted to say to you," she said, dropping a hand on his shoulder,
"that I do not blame you for anything--not for anything.  Yet I want you
to be sorry too.  I want you to feel as sorry for me as I feel sorry for
you."

"I am the worst man and you the best woman in the world."

She leaned over him with tears in her eyes.  "Hush!" she said.  "I want
to help you--Charles.  You are wise.  You know ten thousand things more
than I; but I know one thing you do not understand."

"You know and do whatever is good," he said brokenly.

"Oh, no, no, no!  But I know one thing, because I have been taught, and
because it was born with me.  Perhaps much was habit with me in the past,
but now I know that one thing is true.  It is God."

She paused.  "I have learned so much since--since then."

He looked up with a groan, and put a finger on her lips.  "You are
feeling bitterly sorry for me," she said.  "But you must let me speak--
that is all I ask.  It is all love asks.  I cannot bear that you should
not share my thoughts.  That is the thing that has hurt--hurt so all
these months, these long hard months, when I could not see you, and did
not know why I could not.  Don't shake so, please!  Hear me to the end,
and we shall both be the better after.  I felt it all so cruelly, because
I did not--and I do not--understand.  I rebelled, but not against you.
I rebelled against myself, against what you called Fate.  Fate is one's
self, what one brings on one's self.  But I had faith in you--always--
always, even when I thought I hated you."

"Ah, hate me!  Hate me!  It is your loving that cuts me to the quick," he
said.  "You have the magnanimity of God."

Her eyes leapt up.  "'Of God'--you believe in God!" she said eagerly.
"God is God to you?  He is the one thing that has come out of all this to
me."  She reached out her hand and took her Bible from a table.  "Read
that to yourself," she said, and, opening the Book, pointed to a passage.
He read it:

     And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in
     the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the
     presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.

     And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art
     thou?

     And he said, I heard Thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
     because I was naked; and I hid myself.

     And He said, Who told thee that thou wart naked?  Hast thou eaten of
     the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?

Closing the Book, Charley said: "I understand--I see."

"Will you say a prayer with me?" she urged.  "It is all I ask.  It is
the only--the only thing I want to hurt you, because it may make you
happier in the end.  What keeps us apart, I do not know.  But if you will
say one prayer with me, I will keep on trusting, I will never complain,
and I will wait--wait."

He kissed both her hands, but the look in his eyes was that of a man
being broken on the wheel.  She slipped to the floor, her rosary in her
fingers.  "Let us pray," she said simply, and in a voice as clear as a
child's, but with the anguish of a woman's struggling heart behind.

He did not move.  She looked at him, caught his hands in both of hers,
and cried: "But you will not deny me this!  Haven't I the right to ask
it?  Haven't I a right to ask of you a thousand times as much?"

"You have the right to ask all that is mine to give life, honour, my body
in pieces inch by inch, the last that I can call my own.  But, Rosalie,
this is not mine to give!  How can I pray, unless I believe!"

"You do--oh, you do believe in God," she cried passionately.

"Rosalie--my life," he urged, hoarse misery in his voice, "the only thing
I have to give you is the bare soul of a truthful man--I am that now at
least.  You have made me so.  If I deceived the whole world, if I was as
the thief upon the cross, I should still be truthful to you.  You open
your heart to me--let me open mine to you, to see it as it is.  Once
my soul was like a watch, cased and carried in the pocket of life,
uncertain, untrue, because it was a soul made, not born.  I must look at
the hands to know the time, and because it varied, because the working
did not answer to the absolute, I said: 'The soul is a lie.'  You--you
have changed all that, Rosalie.  My soul now is like a dial to the sun.
But the clouds are there above, and I do not know what time it is in
life.  When the clouds break--if they ever break--and the sun shines, the
dial will speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth--"

He paused, confused, for he had repeated the words of a witness taking
the oath in court.

"'So help me God!"' she finished the oath for him.  Then, with a sudden
change of manner, she came to her feet with a spring.  She did not quite
understand.  She was, however, dimly conscious of the power she had over
his chivalrous mind: the power of the weak over the strong--the tyranny
of the defended over the defender.  She was a woman tortured beyond
bearing; and she was fighting for her very life, mad with anguish as she
struggled.

"I do not understand you," she cried, with flashing eyes.  "One minute
you say you do not believe in anything, and the next you say, 'So help me
God!'"

"Ah, no, you said that, Rosalie," he interposed gently.

"You said I was as magnanimous as God.  You were laughing at me then,
mocking me, whose only fault is that I loved and trusted you.  In the
wickedness of your heart you robbed me of happiness, you--"

"Don't--don't!  Rosalie!  Rosalie!" he exclaimed in shrinking protest.

That she had spoken to him as her deepest heart abhorred only increased
her agitated denunciation.  "Yes, yes, in your mad selfishness, you did
not care for the poor girl who forgot all, lost all, and now--" She
stopped short at the sight of his white, awe stricken face.  His eye-
glass seemed like a frost of death over an eye that looked upon some
shocking scene of woe.  Yet he appeared not to see, for his fingers
fumbled on his waistcoat for the monocle--fumbled--vaguely, helplessly.
It was the realisation of a soul cast into the outer darkness.  Her
abrupt silence came upon him like the last engulfing wave to a drowning
man--the final assurance of the end, in which there is quiet and the
deadly smother.

"Now--I know-the truth!" he said, in a curious even tone, different from
any she had ever heard from him.  It was the old Charley Steele who
spoke, the Charley Steele in whom the intellect was supreme once more.
The judicial spirit, the inveterate intelligence which put justice before
all, was alive in him, almost rejoicing in its regained governance.  The
new Charley was as dead as the old had been of late, and this clarifying
moment left the grim impression behind that the old law was not obsolete.
He felt that in the abandonment of her indignation she had mercilessly
told the truth; and the irreducible quality of mind in him which in the
old days made for justice, approved.  There was a new element now,
however--that conscience which never possessed him fully until the day he
saw Rosalie go travelling over the hills with her crippled father.  That
picture of the girl against the twilight, her figure silhouetted in the
clear air, had come to him in sleeping and waking dreams, the type and
sign of an everlasting melancholy.  As he looked at her blindly now, he
saw, not herself, but that melancholy figure.  Out of the distance his
own voice said again:

"Now--I know-the truth!"

She had struck with a violence she did not intend, which, she knew, must
rend her own heart in the future, which put in the dice-box the last
hopes she had.  But she could not have helped it--she could not have
stayed the words, though a suspended sword were to fall with the saying.
It was the cry of tradition and religion, and every home-bred, convent-
nurtured habit, the instinct of heredity, the wail of woman, for whom
destiny, or man, or nature, has arranged the disproportionate share of
life's penalties.  It was the impotent rebellion against the first curse,
that man in his punishment should earn his bread by the sweat of his
brow--which he might do with joy--while the woman must work out her
ordained sentence "in sorrow all the days of her life."

In her bitter words was the inherent revolt of the race of woman.  But
now she suddenly felt that she had flung him an infinite distance from
her; that she had struck at the thing she most cherished--his belief that
she loved him; that even if she had told the truth--and she felt she had
not--it was not the truth she wished him most to feel.

For an instant she stood looking at him, shocked and confounded, then her
changeless love rushed back on her, the maternal and protective spirit
welled up, and with a passionate cry she threw herself in the chair again
in very weakness, with outstretched hands, saying:

"Forgive me--oh, forgive me!  I did not mean it--oh, forgive your
Rosalie!"

Stooping over her, he answered:

"It is good for me to know the whole truth.  What hurts you may give me
will pass--for life must end, and my life cannot be long enough to pay
the price of the hurts I have given you.  I could bear a thousand--one
for every hour--if they could bring back the light to your eye, the joy
to your heart.  Could prayer, do you think, make me sorrier than I am?
I have hurt what I would have spared from hurt at the cost of my life--
and all the lives in all the world!" he added fiercely.

"Forgive me--oh, forgive your Rosalie!" she pleaded.  "I did not know
what I was saying--I was mad."

"It was all so sane and true," he said, like one who, on the brink of
death, finds a satisfaction in speaking the perfect truth.  "I am glad to
hear the truth--I have been such a liar."

She looked up startled, her tears blinding her.  "You have not deceived
me?" she asked bitterly.  "Oh, you have not deceived me--you have loved
me, have you not?"  It was that which mattered, that only.  Moveless and
eager, she looked--looked at him, waiting, as it were, for sentence.

"I never lied to you, Rosalie--never!" he answered, and he touched her
hand.

She gave a moan of relief at his words.  "Oh, then, oh, then .  .  .  "
she said, in a low voice, and the tears in her eyes dried away.

"I meant that until I knew you, I kept deceiving myself and others all my
life--"

"But without knowing it?" she said eagerly.

"Perhaps, without quite knowing it."

"Until you knew me?" she asked, in quick, quivering tones.

"Till I knew you," he answered.

"Then I have done you good--not ill?" she asked, with painful
breathlessness.

"The only good there may be in me is you, and you only," he said, and he
choked something rising in his throat, seeing the greatness of her heart,
her dear desire to have entered into his life to his own good.  He would
have said that there was no good in him at all, but that he wished to
comfort her.

A little cry of joy broke from her lips.  "Oh, that--that!" she cried,
with happy tears.  "Won't you kiss me now?" she added softly.

He clasped her in his arms, and though his eyes were dry, his heart wept
tears of blood.




CHAPTER LII

THE COMING OF BILLY

Chaudiere had made--and lost--a reputation.  The Passion Play in the
valley had become known to a whole country--to the Cure's and the
Seigneur's unavailing regret.  They had meant to revive the great story
for their own people and the Indians--a homely, beautiful object-lesson,
in an Eden--like innocence and quiet and repose; but behold the world had
invaded them!  The vanity of the Notary had undone them.  He had written
to the great papers of the province, telling of the advent of the play,
and pilgrimages had been organised, and excursions had been made to the
spot, where a simple people had achieved a crude but noble picture of the
life and death of the Hero of Christendom.  The Cure viewed with
consternation the invasion of their quiet.  It was no longer his own
Chaudiere; and when, on a Sunday, his dear people were jostled from the
church to make room for strangers, his gentle eloquence seemed to forsake
him, he spoke haltingly, and his intoning of the Mass lacked the old
soothing simplicity.

"Ah, my dear Seigneur!" he said, on the Sunday before the playing was to
end, "we have overshot the mark."

The Seigneur nodded and turned his head away.  "There is an English play
which says, 'I have shot mine arrow o'er the house and hurt my brother.'
That's it--that's it!  We began with religion, and we end with greed,
and pride, and notoriety."

"What do we want of fame!  The price is too high, Maurice.  Fame is not
good for the hearts and minds of simple folk."

"It will soon be over."

"I dread a sordid reaction."

The Seigneur stood thinking for a moment.  "I have an idea," he said at
last.  "Let us have these last days to ourselves.  The mission ends next
Saturday at five o'clock.  We will announce that all strangers must leave
the valley by Wednesday night.  Then, during those last three days, while
yet the influence of the play is on them, you can lead your own people
back to the old quiet feelings."

"My dear Maurice--it is worthy of you!  It is the way.  We will announce
it to-day.  And see now.  .  .  .  For those three days we will change
the principals; lest those who have taken the parts so long have lost the
pious awe which should be upon them.  We will put new people in their
places.  I will announce it at vespers presently.  I have in my mind who
should play the Christ, and St. John, and St. Peter--the men are not hard
to find; but for Mary the Mother and Mary Magdalene--"

The eyes of the two men suddenly met, a look of understanding passed
between them.

"Will she do it?" said the Seigneur.

The Cure nodded.  "Paulette Dubois has heard the word, 'Go and sin no
more'; she will obey."

Walking through the village as they talked, the Cure shrank back
painfully several times, for voices of strangers, singing festive songs,
rolled out upon the road.  "Who can they be?" he said distressfully.

Without a word the Seigneur went to the door of the inn whence the sounds
proceeded, and, without knocking, entered.  A moment afterwards the
voices stopped, but broke out again, quieted, then once more broke out,
and presently the Seigneur issued from the door, white with anger, three
strangers behind him.  All were intoxicated.

One was violent.  It was Billy Wantage, whom the years had not improved.
He had arrived that day with two companions--an excursion of curiosity
as an excuse for a "spree."

"What's the matter with you, old stick-in-the-mud?" he shouted.  "Mass
is over, isn't it?  Can't we have a little guzzle between prayers?"

By this time a crowd had gathered, among them Filion Lacasse.  At a
motion from the Seigneur, and a whisper that went round quickly, a dozen
habitants swiftly sprang on the three men, pinioned their arms, and
carrying them bodily to the pump by the tavern, held them under it, one
by one, till each was soaked and sober.  Then their horses and wagon were
brought, and they were given five minutes to leave the village.

With a devilish look in his eye, and drenched and furious, Billy was
disposed to resist the command, but the faces around him were determined,
and, muttering curses, the three drove away towards the next parish.




CHAPTER LIII

THE SEIGNEUR AND THE CURE HAVE A SUSPICION

Presently the Seigneur and the Cure stood before the door of the tailor-
shop.  The Cure was about to knock, when the Seigneur laid a hand upon
his arm.

"There is no use; he has been gone several days," he said.

"Gone--gone!" said the Cure.

"I came to see him yesterday, and not finding him, I asked at the post-
office."  M. Rossignol's voice lowered.  "He told Mrs. Flynn he was going
into the hills, so Rosalie says."

The Cure's face fell.  "He went away also just before the play began.
I almost fear that--that we get no nearer.  His mind prompts him to do
good and not evil, and yet--and yet.  .  .  .  I have dreamed a good
dream, Maurice, but I sometimes fear I have dreamed in vain."

"Wait-wait!"

M. Loisel looked towards the post-office musingly.  "I have thought
sometimes that what man's prayers may not accomplish a woman's love might
do.  If--but, alas, what do we know of his past!  Nothing.  What do we
know of his future?  Nothing.  What do we know of the human heart?
Nothing--nothing!"

The Seigneur was astounded.  The Cure's meaning was plain.  "What do you
mean?" he asked, almost gruffly.

"She--Rosalie--has changed--changed."  In his heart he dwelt sorrowfully
upon the fact that she had not been to confession to him for many, many
months.

"Since her father's death--since her illness?"

"Since she went to Montreal seven months ago.  Even while she was so ill
these past weeks, she never asked for me; and when I came .  .  .  Ah, if
it is that her heart has gone out to the man, and his does not respond!"

"A good thing, too!" said the other gloomily.  "We don't know where he
came from, and we do know that he is a pagan."

"Yet there she sits now, hour after hour, day after day--so changed."

"She has lost her father," urged M. Rossignol anxiously.

"I know the grief of children--this is not such a grief.  There is
something more.  But I cannot ask. If she were a sinner--but she is
without fault.  Have we not watched her grow up here, mirthful, brave,
pure-souled--"

"Fitted for any station," interposed the Seigneur huskily.  Presently he
laid a hand upon the Cure's arm.  "Shall I ask her again?" he said,
breathing hard.  "Do you think she has found out her mistake?"

The Cure was so taken aback that at first he could not speak.  When he
realised, however, he could scarce suppress a smile at the other's simple
vanity.  But he mastered himself, and said: "It is not that, Maurice.  It
is not you."

"How did you know I had asked her?" asked his friend querulously.

"You have just told me."

M. Rossignol felt a kind of reproval in the Cure's tone.  It made him a
little nervous.  "I'm an old fool, but she needed some one," he
protested.  "At least I am a gentleman, and she would not be thrown
away."

"Dear Maurice!" said the Cure, and linked his arm in the other's.  "In
all respects save one, it would have been to her advantage.  But youth is
the only comrade for youth.  All else is evasion of life's laws."

The Seigneur pressed his arm.  "I thought you less worldly-wise than
myself; I find you more," he said.

"Not worldly-wise.  Life is deeper than the world or worldly wisdom.
Come, we will both go and see Rosalie."

M. Rossignol suddenly stopped at the post-office door, and half turned
towards the tailor-shop.  "He is young.  Suppose that he drew her love
his way, but gave her nothing in return, and--"

"If it were so"--the Cure paused, and his face darkened--"if it were so,
he should leave her forever; and so my dream would end."

"And Rosalie?"

"Rosalie would forget.  To remember, youth must see and touch and be
near, else it wears itself out in excess of feeling.  Youth feels more
deeply than age, but it must bear daily witness."

"Upon my honour, Cure, you shall write your little philosophies for the
world," said M. Rossignol, and then knocked at the door.

"I will go in alone, Maurice," the Cure urged.  "Good-you are right,"
answered the other.  "I will go write the proclamation denying strangers
the valley after Wednesday.  I will enforce it, too," he added, with
vigour, and, turning, walked up the street, as Mrs. Flynn admitted the
Cure to the post-office.

A half-hour later M. Loisel again appeared at the post-office door, a
pale, beautiful face at his shoulder.

He had not been brave enough to say what was on his mind.  But as he bade
her good-bye, he plucked up needful courage.

"Forgive me, Rosalie," he said, "but I have sometimes thought that you
have more griefs than one.  I have thought"--he paused, then went on
bravely--"that there might be--there might be unwelcomed love, or love
deceived."

A mist came before her eyes, but she quietly and firmly answered: "I have
never been deceived in love, Monsieur Loisel."

"There, there!" he hurriedly and gently rejoined.  "Do not be hurt, my
child.  I only want to help you."  A moment afterwards he was gone.

As the door closed behind him, she drew herself proudly up.

"I have never been deceived," she said aloud.  "I love him--love him--love
him."




CHAPTER LIV

M. ROSSIGNOL SLIPS THE LEASH

It was the last day of the Passion Play, and the great dramatic mission
was drawing to a close.  The confidence of the Cure and the Seigneur was
restored.  The prohibition against strangers had had its effect, and for
three whole days the valley had been at rest again.  Apparently there was
not a stranger within its borders, save the Seigneur's brother, the Abbe
Rossignol, who had come to see the moving spectacle.

The Abbe, on his arrival, had made inquiries concerning the tailor of
Chaudiere and Jo Portugais, as persistently about the one as the other.
Their secrets had been kept inviolate by him.

It was disconcerting to hear the tales people told of the tailor's
charity and wisdom.  It was all dangerous, for what was, accidentally,
no evil in this particular instance, might be the greatest disaster in
another case.  Principle was at stake.  He heard in stern silence the
Cure's happy statement that Jo Portugais had returned to the bosom of the
Church, and attended Mass regularly.

"So it may be, my dear Abbe," said M. Loisel, "that the friendship
between him and our 'infidel' has been the means of helping Portugais.
I hope their friendship will go on unbroken for years and years."

"I have no idea that it will," said the Abbe grimly.  "That rope of
friendship may snap untimely."

"Upon my soul, you croak like a raven!" testily broke in M. Rossignol,
who was present.  "I didn't know there was so much in common between you
and my surly-jowled groom.  He gets his pleasure out of croaking.  'Wait,
wait, you'll see--you'll see!  Death, death, death--every man must die!
The devil has you by the hair--death--death--death!'  Bah!  I'm heartily
sick of croakers.  I suppose, like my grunting groom, you'll say about
the Passion Play, 'No good will come of it--wait--wait--wait!'  Bah!"

"It may not be an unmixed good," answered the ascetic.

"Well, and is there any such thing on earth as an unmixed good?  The play
yesterday was worth a thousand sermons.  It was meant to serve Holy
Church, and it will serve it.  Was there ever anything more real--and
touching--than Paulette Dubois as Mary Magdalene yesterday?"

"I do not approve of such reality.  For that woman to play the part is to
destroy the impersonality of the scene."

"You would demand that the Christus should be a good man, and the St.
John blameless--why shouldn't the Magdalene be a repentant woman?"

"It might impress the people more, if the best woman in your parish were
to play the part.  The fall of virtue, the ruin of innocence, would be
vividly brought home.  It does good to make the innocent feel the terror
and shame of sin.  That is the price the good pay for the fall of man--
sorrow and shame for those who sin."  The Seigneur, rising quickly from
the table, and kicking his chair back, said angrily: "Damn your
theories!"  Then, seeing the frozen look on his brother's face,
continued, more excitedly: "Yes, damn, damn, damn your theories!  You
always took the crass view.  I beg your pardon, Cure--I beg your pardon."

He then went to the window, threw it open, and called to his groom.

"Hi, there, coffin-face," he said, "bring round the horses--the quietest
one in the stable for my brother--you hear?  He can't ride," he added
maliciously.

This was his fiercest stroke, for the Abbe's secret vanity was the belief
that he looked well on a horse, and rode handsomely.




CHAPTER LV

ROSALIE PLAYS A PART

From a tree upon a little hill rang out a bell--a deep-toned bell, bought
by the parish years before for the missions held at this very spot.
Every day it rang for an instant at the beginning of each of the five
acts.  It also tolled slowly when the curtain rose upon the scene of the
Crucifixion.  In this act no one spoke save the abased Magdalene, who
knelt at the foot of the cross, and on whose hair red drops fell when the
Roman soldier pierced the side of the figure on the cross.  This had been
the Cure's idea.  The Magdalene should speak for mankind, for the
continuing world.  She should speak for the broken and contrite heart in
all ages, should be the first-fruits of the sacrifice, a flower of the
desert earth, bedewed by the blood of the Prince of Peace.

So, in the long nights of the late winter and early spring, the Cure had
thought and thought upon what the woman should say from the foot of the
cross.  At last he put into her mouth that which told the whole story of
redemption and deliverance, so far as his heart could conceive it--the
prayer for all sorts and conditions of men and the general thanksgiving
of humanity.

During the last three days Paulette Dubois had taken the part of Mary
Magdalene.  As Jo Portugais had confessed to the Abbe that notable day in
the woods at Vadrome Mountain, so she had confessed to the Cure after so
many years of agony--and the one confession fitted into the other: Jo had
once loved her, she had treated him vilely, then a man had wronged her,
and Jo had avenged her--this was the tale in brief.  She it was who
laughed in the gallery of the court-room the day that Joseph Nadeau was
acquitted.

It had pained and shocked the Cure more than any he had ever heard, but
he urged for her no penalty as Portugais had set for himself with the
austere approval of the Abbe.  Paulette's presence as the Magdalene had
had a deep effect upon the people, so that she shared with Mary the
Mother the painfully real interest of the vast audience.

Five times had the bell rung out in the perfect spring air, upon which
the balm of the forest and the refreshment of the ardent sun were poured.
The quick anger of M. Rossignol had passed away long before the Cure, the
Abbe, and himself had reached the lake and the great plateau.  Between
the acts the two brothers walked up and down together, at peace once
more, and there was a suspicious moisture in the Seigneur's eyes.  The
demeanour of the people had been so humble and rapt that the place and
the plateau and the valley seemed alone in creation with the lofty drama
of the ages.

The Cure's eyes shone when he saw on a little knoll in the trees, apart
from the worshippers and spectators, Charley and Jo Portugais.  His cup
of content was now full.  He had felt convinced that if the tailor had
but been within these bounds during the past three days, a work were
begun which should end only at the altar of their parish church.  To-day
the play became to him the engine of God for the saving of a man's soul.
Not long before the last great tableau was to appear he went to his own
little tent near the hut where the actors prepared to go upon the stage.
As he entered, some one came quickly forward from the shadow of the trees
and touched him on the arm.

"Rosalie!" he cried in amazement, for she wore the costume of Mary
Magdalene.

"It is I, not Paulette, who will appear," she said, a deep light in her
eyes.

"You, Rosalie?" he asked dumfounded.  "You are distrait.  Trouble and
sorrow have put this in your mind.  You must not do it."

"Yes, I am going there," she said, pointing towards the great stage.
"Paulette has given me these to wear"--she touched the robe--"and I only
ask your blessing now.  Oh, believe, believe me, I can speak for those
who are innocent and those who are guilty; for those who pray and those
who cannot pray; for those who confess and those who dare not!  I can
speak the words out of my heart with gladness and agony, Monsieur," she
urged, in a voice vibrating with feeling.

A luminous look came into the Cure's face.  A thought leapt up in his
heart.  Who could tell!--this pure girl, speaking for the whole sinful,
unbelieving, and believing world, might be the one last conquering
argument to the man.

He could not read the agony of spirit which had driven Rosalie to this
--to confess through the words of Mary Magdalene her own woe, to say it
out to all the world, and to receive, as did Paulette Dubois, every day
after the curtain came down, absolution and blessing.  She longed for the
old remembered peace.

The Cure could not read the struggle between her love for a man and the
ineradicable habit of her soul; but he raised his hand, made the sacred
gesture over leer, and said: "Go, my child, and God be with you."

He could not see her for tears as she hurried away to where Paulette
Dubois awaited her--the two at peace now.  At the hands of the lately
despised and injurious woman Rosalie was made ready to play the part in
the last act, none knowing save the few who appeared in the final
tableau, and they at the last moment only.

The bell began to toll.

A thousand people fell upon their knees, and with fascinated yet abashed
and awe-struck eyes saw the great tableau of Christendom: the three
crosses against the evening sky, the Figure in the centre, the Roman
populace, the trembling Jews, the pathetic groups of disciples.  A cloud
passed across the sky, the illusion grew, and hearts quivered in piteous
sympathy.  There was no music now--not a sound save the sob of some
overwrought woman.  The woe of an oppressed world absorbed them.  Even
the stolid Indians, as Roman soldiers, shrank awe-stricken from the
sacred tragedy.  Now the eyes of all were upon the central Figure, then
they shifted for a moment to John the Beloved, standing with the Mother.

"Pauvre Mere!  Pauvre Christ!" said a weeping woman aloud.

A Roman soldier raised a spear and pierced the side of the Hero of the
World.  Blood flowed, and hundreds gasped.  Then there was silence--a
strange hush as of a prelude to some great event.

"It is finished.  Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit," said the
Figure.

The hush was broken by such a sound as one hears in a forest when a wind
quivers over the earth, flutters the leaves, and then sinks away--neither
having come nor gone, but only lived and died.

Again there was silence, and then all eyes were fixed upon the figure at
the foot of the cross-Mary the Magdalene.

Day after day they had seen this figure rise, come forward a step, and
speak the epilogue to this moving miracle-drama.  For the last three days
Paulette Dubois had turned a sorrowful face upon them, and with one hand
upraised had spoken the prayer, the prophecy, the thanksgiving, the
appeal of humanity and the ages.  They looked to see the same figure now,
and waited.  But as the Magdalene turned, there was a great stir in the
multitude, for the face bent upon them was that of Rosalie Evanturel.
Awe and wonder moved the people.

Apart from the crowd, under a clump of trees, knelt a woodsman from
Vadrome Mountain, and the tailor of Chaudiere stood beside him.

When Charley, touched by the heavy scene, saw the figure of the Magdalene
rise, he felt a curious thrill of fascination.  When she turned, and he
saw the face of Rosalie, the blood rushed to his face; then his heart
seemed to stand still.  Pain and shame travelled to the farthest recesses
of his nature.  Jo Portugais rose to his feet with a startled
exclamation.

Rosalie began to speak.  "This is the day of which the hours shall never
cease--in it there shall be no night.  He whom ye have crucified hath
saved you from the wrath to come.  He hath saved others, Himself He would
not save.  Even for such as I, who have secretly opened, who have
secretly entered, the doors of sin--"

With a gasp of horror and a mad desire to take her away from the sight of
this gaping, fascinated crowd, Charley made to rush forward, but Jo
Portugais held him back.

"Be still.  You will ruin her, M'sieu'!" said Jo.

"--even for such as I am," the beautiful voice went on, "hath He died.
And in the ages to come, women such as I, and all women who sorrow, and
all men who err and are deceived, and all the helpless world, will know
that this was the Friend of the human soul."  Not a gesture, not a
movement, only that slight, pathetic figure, with pale, agonised face,
and eyes that looked--looked--looked beyond them, over their heads to the
darkening east, the clouded light of evening behind her.  Her voice rang
out now valiant and clear, now searching and piteous, yet reaching to
where the farthermost person knelt, and was lost upon the lake and in the
spreading trees.

"What ye have done may never be undone; what He hath said shall never be
unsaid.  His is the Word which shall unite all languages, when ye that
are Romans shall be no more Romans, and ye that are Jews shall still be
Jews, reproached and alone.  No longer shall men faint in the glare--the
shadow of the Cross shall screen them.  No more shall woman bear her
black sorrows, alone; the Light of the World shall cheer her."

As she spoke, the cloud drew back from the sunset, and the saffron glow
behind lighted the cross, and shone upon her hair, casting her face in a
gracious shadow.  Her voice rose higher.  "I, the Magdalene, am the
first-fruits of this sacrifice: from the foot of the cross I come.
I have sinned more than all.  I have shamed all women.  But I have
confessed my sin, and He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."

Her voice now became lower, but clear and even, pathetically exulting:

"O world, forgive, as He hath forgiven you!  Fall, dark curtain, and hide
this pain, and rise again upon forgiven sin and a redeemed people!"

She stood still, with her eyes upraised, and the curtain came slowly
down.

For a long time no one in all the gathered multitude stirred.  Far over
under the trees a man sat upon the ground, his head upon his arms, and
his arms upon his knees, in a misery unmeasurable.  Beside him stood a
woodsman, who knew of no word to say that might comfort him.

A girl, in the garb of the Magdalene, entered the tent of the Cure, and,
speaking no word, knelt and received absolution of her sins.




CHAPTER LVI

MRS. FLYNN SPEAKS

CHARLEY left Jo Portugais behind, and went home alone.  He watched at a
window till he saw Rosalie return.  As she passed quickly down the street
with Mrs. Flynn to her own door, he observed that her face was happier
than he had seen it for many a day.  Her step was lighter, there was a
freedom in her air, a sense of confidence in her carriage.

She bore herself as one who had done a thing which relaxed a painful
tension.  There was a curious glow in her eyes and face, and this became
deeper as, showing himself at the door, she saw him, smiled, and stood
still.  He came across the street and took her hand.

"You have been away," she said softly.  "For a few days," he answered.

"Far?"

"At Vadrome Mountain."

"You have missed these last days of the Passion Play," she said, a shadow
in her eyes.

"I was present to-day," he answered.

She turned away her head quickly, for the look in his eyes told her more
than any words could have done, and Mrs. Flynn said:

"'Tis a day for everlastin' mimory, sir.  For the part she played this
day, the darlin', only such as she could play!  'Tis the innocent takin'
the shame o' the guilty, and the tears do be comin' to me eyes.  'Tis not
ould Widdy Flynn's eyes alone that's wet this day, but hearts do be
weepin' for the love o' God."

Rosalie suddenly opened the door, and, without another look at Charley,
entered the house.

"'Tis one in a million!" said Mrs. Flynn, in a confidential tone, for
she had a fixed idea that Rosalie loved Charley and that he loved her,
and that the only thing that stood in the way of their marriage was
religion.  From the first Charley had conquered Mrs. Flynn.  That he was
a tailor was a pity and a shame, but love was love, and the man had a
head on him and a heart in him; and love was love!  So Mrs. Flynn said:

"'Tis one that a man that's a man should do annything for, was it havin'
the heart cut out uv him, or givin' the last drop uv his blood.  Shure,
for such as her, murder, or false witness, or givin' up the last wish or
thought a man hugged to his boosom, would be as aisy as aisy."

Charley laughed to himself, her purpose was so obvious, but his heart
went out to her, for she was a friend, and, whatever came to him, Rosalie
would not be alone.

"I believe every word of yours," he said, shaking her hand, "and we'll
see, you and I, that no man marries her who isn't ready to do what you
say."

"Would you do it yourself--if it was you?" she asked, flushing for her
boldness.

"I would," he answered.

"Then do it," she said, and fled inside the house and shut the door.

"Mrs. Flynn--good Mrs. Flynn!" he said, and went back sadly to his
house, and shut himself up with his thoughts.  When night drew on he went
to bed, but he could not sleep.  He got up after a time, and taking pen
and paper, wrote for a long time.  Having finished, he took what he had
written, and placing it with the two packets-of money and pearls--which
he had brought from his old home, he addressed it to the Cure, and going
to the safe in the wall of the shop, placed them inside and locked the
door.

Then he went to bed, and slept soundly--the deep sleep of the just.




CHAPTER LVII

A BURNING FIERY FURNACE

Every man within the limits of the parish was in his bed, save one.  He
was a stranger who, once before, had visited Chaudiere for one brief day,
when he had been saved from death at the Red Ravine, and had fled the
village that night because, as he thought, he had heard the voice of his
old friend's ghost in the trees.  Since that time he had travelled in
many parishes, healing where he could, entertaining where he might,
earning money as the charlatan.  He was now on his way back through the
parishes to Montreal, and his route lay through Chaudiere.  He had hoped
to reach Chaudiere before nightfall--he remembered with fear the incident
from which he had fled many months before; but his horse had broken its
leg on a corduroy bridge, a few miles out from the parish in the hills,
and darkness came upon him before he could hide his wagon in the woods
and proceed afoot to Chaudiere.  He had shot his horse, and rolled it
into the swift torrent beneath the bridge.

Travelling the lonely road, he drank freely from the whiskey-horn he
carried, to keep his spirits up, so that by the time he came to the
outskirts of Chaudiere he was in a state of intoxication, and reeled
impudently along with the "Dutch courage" the liquor had given him.
Arrived at the first cluster of houses in the place, he paused uncertain.
Should he knock here or go on to the tavern?  He shivered at thought of
the tavern, for it was near it he had heard Charley Steele's voice
calling to him out of the trees.  If he knocked here, would the people
admit him in his present state?--he had sense enough to know that he was
very drunk.  As he shook his head in owlish gravity, he saw the church on
the hill not far away.  He chuckled to himself.  The carpet in the
chancel and the hassocks at the altar would make a good bed.  No fear of
Charley's ghost coming inside the church--it wouldn't be that kind of a
ghost.  As he travelled the intervening space, shrugging his shoulders,
staggering serenely, he told himself in confidence that he would leave
the church at dawn, go to the tavern, purchase a horse as soon as might
be, and get back to his wagon.

The church door was unlocked, and he entered and made his way to the
chancel, found surplices in the vestry and put a hassock inside one for a
pillow.  Then he sat down and drew the loose rug of the chancel-floor
over him, and took another drink from the whiskey horn.  Lighting his
pipe, he smoked for a while, but grew drowsy, and his pipe fell into his
lap.  With eyes nearly shut he struck another match, made to light his
pipe again, but threw the match away, still burning.  As he did so the
pipe dropped again from his mouth, and he fell back on the hassock-pillow
he had made.

The lighted match fell on a surplice which had dropped from his arms as
he came from the vestry, and set it afire.  In five minutes the whole
chancel was burning, and the sleeping man waked in the midst of smoke and
flame.  He staggered to his feet with a terror-stricken cry, stumbled
down the aisle, through the front door, and out into the night.  Reaching
the road, he turned his face again to the hill where his wagon lay hid.
If he could reach that, he would be safe; nobody would suspect him.  He
clutched the whiskey-horn tight and broke into a run.  As he passed
beyond the village his excited imagination heard Charley Steele's ghost
calling after him.  He ran harder.  The voice kept calling from
Chaudiere.

Not Charley's voice, but the voices of many people in Chaudiere were
calling.  Some wakeful person had seen the glare in the church windows
and had given the alarm, and now there rang through the streets the call-
"Fire! Fire! Fire!"

Charley and Jo were among the last to wake, for both had slept soundly,
but Jo was roused by a handful of gravel thrown at his window and a
warning cry, and a few moments later he and Charley were in the street
with a hurrying crowd.  Over all the village was a red glare, lighting up
the sky, burnishing the trees.  The church was a mass of flames.

Charley was as pale as the rest of the crowd; for he thought of the Cure,
he thought of this people to whom their church meant more than home and
vastly more than friend and fortune.  His heart was with them all: not
because it was their church that was burning, but because it was
something dear to them.

Reaching the hill, he saw the Cure coming from the vestry of the burning
church, bearing some vessels of the altar.  Depositing them in the arms
of his weeping sister, he turned again towards the door.  People clung to
him, and would not let him go.

"See, it is all inflames," they cried.  "Your cassock is singed.  You
shall not go."

At that moment Charley and Portugais came up.  A hurried question to the
Cure from Charley, a key handed over, a nod from Jo, and before the Cure
could prevent them the two men had rushed through the smoke and flame
into the vestry, Portugais holding Charley's hand.

The crowd outside waited in a terrible anxiety.  The timbers of the
chancel portion of the building seemed about to fall, and still the two
men did not appear.  The people called; the Cure clinched his hands at
his side--he was too fearful even to pray.

But now the two men appeared, loaded with the few treasures of the
church.  They were scorched and singed, and the beards of both were
burned, but, stumbling and exhausted, they brought their loads to the
eager arms of the waiting habitants.

Then from the other end of the church came a cry: "The little cross--the
little iron cross!"  Then another cry: "Rosalie Evanturel!  Rosalie
Evanturel!"  Some one came running to the Cure.

"Rosalie Evanturel has gone inside for the little cross on the pillar.
She is in the flames; the door has fallen in.  She can't get out again."

With a hoarse cry, Charley darted back inside the vestry door.  A cry of
horror went up.

It was only a minute and a half, but it seemed like years, and then a man
in flames appeared in the fiery porch--and not alone.  He carried a girl
in his arms.  He wavered even at the threshold with the timbers swaying
overhead, but, with a last effort, he plunged forward through the
furnace, and was caught by eager hands on the margin of endurable heat.
The two were smothered in quilts brought from the Cure's house, and
carried swiftly to the cool safety of the grass and trees beyond.  The
woman had fainted in the flame of the church; the man dropped insensible
as they caught her from his arms.

As they tore away Charley's coat muffling his face, and opened his shirt,
they stared in awe.  The cross which Rosalie had torn from the pillar,
Charley had thrust into his bosom, and there it now lay on the red scar
made by itself in the hands of Louis Trudel.

M. Loisel waved the people back.  He raised Charley's head.  The Abbe
Rossignol, who had just arrived with the Seigneur, lifted the cross from
the insensible man's breast.

He started when he saw the scar.  Then he remembered the tale he had
heard.  He turned away gravely to his brother.  "Was it the cross or the
woman he went for?" he asked.

"Great God--do you ask!" the Seigneur said indignantly.  "And he
deserves her," he muttered under his breath.

Charley opened his eyes.  "Is she safe?" he asked, starting up.

"Unscathed, my son," the Cure said.

Was this tailor-man not his son?  Had he not thirsted for his soul as a
hart for the water-brooks?

"I am very sorry for you, Monsieur," said Charley.

"It is God's will," was the reply, in a choking voice.  "It will be years
before we have another church--many, many years."

The roof gave way with a crash, and the spire shot down into the flaming
debris.

The people groaned.

"It will cost sixty thousand dollars to build it up again," said Filion
Lacasse.

"We have three thousand dollars from the Passion Play," said the Notary.
"That could go towards it."

"We have another two thousand in the bank," said Maximilian Cour.

"But it will take years," said the saddler disconsolately.

Charley looked at the Cure, mournful and broken but calm.  He saw the
Seigneur, gloomy and silent, standing apart.  He saw the people in
scattered groups, looking more homeless than if they had no homes.  Some
groups were silent; others discussed angrily the question, who was the
incendiary--that it had been set on fire seemed certain.

"I said no good would come of the play-acting," said the Seigneur's
groom, and was flung into the ditch by Filion Lacasse.

Presently Charley staggered to his feet, purpose in his face.  These
people, from the Cure and Seigneur to the most ignorant habitant, were
hopeless and inert.  The pride of their lives was gone.

"Gather the people together," he said to the Notary and Filion Lacasse.
Then he turned to the Cure and the Seigneur.

"With your permission, messieurs," he said, "I will do a harder thing
than I have ever done.  I will speak to them all."

Wondering, M. Loisel added his voice to the Notary's, and the word went
round.  Slowly they all made their way to a spot the Cure indicated.

Charley stood on the embankment above the road, the notables of the
parish round him.

Rosalie had been taken to the Cure's house.  In that wild moment in the
church when she had fallen insensible in Charley's arms, a new feeling
had sprung up in her.  She loved him in every fibre, but she had a
strange instinct, a prescience, that she was lying on his breast for the
last time.  She had wound her arms round his neck, and, as his lips
closed on hers, she had cried: "We shall die together--together."

As she lay in the Cure's house, she thought only of that moment.

"What are they cheering for?" she asked, as a great noise came to her
through the window.

"Run and see," said the Cure's sister to Mrs. Flynn, and the fat woman
hurried away.

Rosalie raised herself so that she could look out of the window.  "I can
see him," she cried.

"See whom?" asked the Cure's sister.

"Monsieur," she answered, with a changed voice.  "He is speaking.  They
are cheering him."

Ten minutes later, the Cure and the Notary entered the room.  M. Loisel
came forward to Rosalie, and took her hands in his.

"You should not have done it," he said.

"I wanted to do something," she replied.  "To get the cross for you
seemed the only payment I could make for all your goodness to me."

"It nearly cost you your life--and the life of another," he said, shaking
his head reproachfully.

Cheering came again from the burning church.  "Why do they cheer?" she
asked.

"Why do they cheer?  Because the man we have feared, Monsieur Mallard--"

"I never feared him," said Rosalie, scarcely above her breath.

"Because he has taught them the way to a new church again--and at once,
at once, my child."

"A remarkable man!" said Narcisse Dauphin.  "There never was such a
speech.  Never in any courtroom was there such an appeal."

"What did he do?" asked Mademoiselle Loisel, her hand in Rosalie's.

"Everything," answered the Cure.  "There he stood in his tattered
clothes, the beard burnt to his chin, his hands scorched, his eyes
bloodshot, and he spoke--"

"'With the tongues of men and of angels,'" said M. Dauphin
enthusiastically.

The Cure frowned and continued: "'You look on yonder burning walls,' he
said, 'and wonder when they will rise again on this hill made sacred by
the burial of your beloved, by the christening of your children, the
marriages which have given you happy homes, and the sacraments which are
to you the laws of your lives.  You give one-twentieth of your income
yearly towards your church--then give one-fortieth of all you possess
today, and your church will be begun in a month.  Before a year goes
round you will come again to this venerable spot and enter another church
here.  Your vows, your memories, and your hopes will be purged by fire.
All that you possess will be consecrated by your free-will offerings.'
--Ah, if I could but remember what came afterwards!  It was all
eloquence, and generous and noble thought."

"He spoke of you," said the Notary--"he spoke the truth; and the people
cheered.  He said that the man outside the walls could sometimes tell the
besieged the way relief would come.  Never again shall I hear such a
speech."

"What are they going to do?" asked Rosalie, and withdrew her trembling
hand from that of Madame Dugal.

"This very day, at my office, they will bring their offerings, and we
will begin at once," answered M. Dauphin.  "There is no man in Chaudiere
but will take the stocking from the hole, the bag from the chest, the
credit from the bank, the grain from the barn for the market, or make the
note of hand to contribute one-fortieth of all he is worth for the
rebuilding of the church."

"Notes of hand are not money," said the Cure's sister, the practical
sense ever uppermost.

"They shall all be money--hard cash," said the Notary.  "The Seigneur is
going to open a sort of bank, and take up the notes of hand, and give
bank-bills in return.  To-day I go with his steward to Quebec to get the
money."

"What does the Abbe Rossignol say?" said the Cure's sister.

"Our church and parish are our own," interposed the Cure proudly.  "We do
our duty and fear no abbe."

"Voila!" said M. Dauphin, "he never can keep hands off.  I saw him go to
Jo Portugais a little while ago.  'Remember!' he said--I can't make out
what he was after.  We have enough to remember to-day, for sure."

"Good may come of it, perhaps," said M. Loisel, looking sadly out upon
the ruins of his church.

"See, 'tis the sunrise!" said Mrs. Flynn's voice from the corner, her
face towards the eastern window.




CHAPTER LVIII

WITH HIS BACK TO THE WALL

In four days ten thousand dollars in notes and gold had been brought to
the office of the Notary by the faithful people of Chaudiere.  All day in
turn M. Loisel and M. Rossignol sat in the office and received that which
represented one-fortieth of the value of each man's goods, estate, and
wealth--the fortieth value of a woodsawyer's cottage, or a widow's
garden.  They did it impartially for all, as the Cure and three of the
best-to-do habitants had done for the Seigneur, whose four thousand
dollars had been paid in first of all.

Charley had been confined to his room for three days, because of his
injuries and a feverish cold he had caught, and the habitants did not
disturb his quiet.  But Mrs. Flynn took him broth made by Rosalie's
hands, and Rosalie fought with her desire to go to him and nurse him.
She was not, however, the Rosalie of the old impulse and impetuous
resolve--the arrow had gone too deep; she waited till she could see his
face again and look into his eyes.  Not apathy, but a sense of the
inevitable was upon her, and pale and fragile, but with a calm spirit,
she waited for she knew not what.

She felt that the day of fate was closing down.  She must hold herself
ready for the hour when he would need her most.  At first, when the
conviction had come to her that the end of all was near, she had
revolted.  She had had impulse to go to him at all hazards, to say to
him: "Come away--anywhere, anywhere!"  But that had given place to the
deeper thing in her, and something of Charley's spirit of stoic waiting
had come upon her.

She watched the people going to the Notary's office with their tributes
and free-will offerings, and they seemed like people in a play--these
days she lived no life which was theirs.  It was a dream, unimportant
and temporary.  She was feeling what was behind all life, and permanent.
It could not last, but there it was; and she could not return to the
transitory till this cloud of fate was lifted.  She was much too young to
suffer so, but the young ever suffer most.

On the fourth day she saw Charley.  He came from his shop and went to the
Notary's office.  At first she was startled, for he was clean-shaven--the
fire had burned his beard to the skin.  She saw a different man, far
removed from this life about them both--individual, singular.  He was
pale, and his eye-glass, with the cleanshaven face, gave an impression of
refined separateness.  She did not know that the same look was in both
their faces.  She watched him till he entered the Notary's shop, then she
was called away to her duties.

Charley had come to give his one-fortieth with the rest.  When he entered
the Notary's office, the Seigneur and M. Dauphin stood up to greet him.
They congratulated him on his recovery, while feeling also that the
change in his personal appearance somehow affected their relations.
A crowd gathered round the door of the shop.  When Charley made his
offering, with a statement of his goods and income, the Seigneur and
Notary did not know what to do.  They were disposed to decline it, for
since Monsieur was no Catholic, it was not his duty to help.  At this
moment of delicate anxiety M. Loisel entered.  With a swift bright flush
to his cheek he saw the difficulty, and at once accepted freely.

"God bless you," he said, as he took the money, and Charley left.  "It
shall build the doorway of my church."

Later in the day the Cure sent for Charley.  There were grave matters to
consider, and his counsel was greatly needed.  They had all come to
depend on the soundness of his judgment.  It had never gone astray in
Chaudiere, they said.  They owed to him this extraordinary scheme, which
would be an example to all modern Christianity.  They told him so.  He
said nothing in reply.

In an hour he had planned for them a scheme for the consideration of
contractors; had drawn, with the help of M. Loisel, an architect's rough
plan of the new church, and, his old professional instincts keenly alive,
had lucidly suggested the terms and safeguards of the contracts.

Then came the question of the money contributed.  The day before, M.
Dauphin and the Seigneur's steward had arrived in safety from Quebec with
twenty thousand dollars in bank-bills.  These M. Rossignol had exchanged
for the notes of hand of such of the habitants as had not ready cash to
give.  All of this twenty thousand dollars had been paid over.  They had
now thirty thousand dollars in cash, besides three thousand which the
Cure had at his house, the proceeds of the Passion Play.  It was proposed
to send this large sum to the bank in Quebec in another two days, when
the whole contributions should be complete.

As to the safety of the money, the timid M. Dauphin did not care to take
responsibility.  Strangers were still arriving, ignorant of the fact that
the Passion Play had ceased, and some of them must be aware that this
large sum of money was in the parish--no doubt also knew that it was in
his house.  It was therefore better, he urged, that M. Rossignol or the
Cure should take charge of it.  M. Loisel urged that secrecy as to the
resting-place of the money was important.  It was better that it should
be deposited in the most unlikely place, and with some unofficial person
who might not be supposed to have it in charge.

"I have it!" said the Seigneur.  "The money shall be placed in old Louis
Trudel's safe in the wall of the tailor-shop."

It was so arranged, after Charley's protests of unwillingness, and
counter-appeals from the others.  That evening at sundown thirty-three
thousand dollars was deposited in the safe in the old stone wall of the
tailorshop, and the lock was sealed with the parish seal.

But the Notary's wife had wormed the secret from her husband, and she
found it hard to keep.  She told it to Maximilian Cour, and he kept it.
She told it to her cousin, the wife of Filion Lacasse, and she did not
keep it.  Before twenty-four hours went round, a dozen people knew it.

The evening of the second day, another two thousand dollars was added to
the treasure, and the lock was again sealed--with the utmost secrecy.
Charley and Jo Portugais, the infidel and the murderer, were thus the
sentries to the peace of a parish, the bankers of its gifts, the security
for the future of the church of Chaudiere.  Their weapons of defence were
two old pistols belonging to the Seigneur.

"Money is the master of the unexpected," the Seigneur had said as he
handed them over.  He chuckled for hours afterwards as he thought of his
epigram.  That night, as he turned over in bed for the third time, as was
his custom before going to sleep, another epigram came to him--"Money is
the only fox hunted night and day."  He kept repeating it over and over
again with vain pride.

The truth of M. Rossignol's aphorisms had been demonstrated several days
before.  On his return from Quebec with the twenty thousand dollars of
the Seigneur's money, M. Dauphin had dwelt with great pride on the
discretion and energy he and the steward had shown; had told dramatically
of the skill which had enabled them to make a journey of such importance
so secretly and safely; had covered himself with blushes for his own
coolness and intrepidity.  Fortune had, however, favoured his reputation
and his intrepidity, for he had been pursued from the hour he and his
companion left Quebec.  A taste for the picturesque had impelled him to
arrange for two relays of horses, and this fact saved him and the twenty
thousand dollars he carried.  Two hours after he had left Quebec, four
determined men had got upon his trail, and had only been prevented from
overtaking him by the freshness of the horses which his dramatic
foresight had provided.

The leader of these four pursuers was Billy Wantage, who had come to know
of the curious action of the Seigneur of Chaudiere from an intimate
friend, a clerk in the bank.  Billy's fortunes were now in a bad way,
and, in desperate straits for money, he had planned this bold attempt at
the highwayman's art with two gamblers, to whom he owed money, and a
certain notorious horse-trader of whom he had made a companion of late.
Having escaped punishment for a crime once before, through Charley's
supposed death, the immunity nerved him to this later and more dangerous
enterprise.  The four rode as hard as their horses would permit, but M.
Dauphin and his companion kept always an hour or more ahead, and, from
the high hills overlooking the village, Billy and his friends saw the two
enter it safely in the light of evening.

His three friends urged Billy to turn back, since they were out of
provisions and had no shelter.  It was unwise to go to a tavern or a
farmer's house, where they must certainly be suspected.  Billy, however,
determined to make an effort to find the banking-place of the money, and
refused to turn back without a trial.  He therefore proposed that they
should separate, going different directions, secure accommodation for the
night, rest the following day, and meet the next night at a point
indicated.  This was agreed upon, and they separated.

When the four met again, Billy had nothing to communicate, as he had been
taken ill during the night before, and had been unable to go secretly
into Chaudiere village.  They separated once more.  When they met the
next night Billy was accompanied by an old confederate.  As he was
entering Chaudiere the previous evening, he had met John Brown, with his
painted wagon and a new mottled horse.  John Brown had news of importance
to give; for, in the stable-yard of the village tavern, he had heard one
habitant confide to another that the money for the new church was kept in
the safe of the tailor-shop.  John Brown was as ready to share in Billy's
second enterprise as he had been to incite him to his first crime.

So it was that as the Seigneur made his epigram and gloated over it, the
five men, with horses at a convenient distance, armed to the teeth, broke
stealthily into Charley's house.

They entered silently through the kitchen window, and made their way into
the little hall.  Two stood guard at the foot of the stairs, and three
crept into the shop.

This night Jo Portugais was sleeping up-stairs, while Charley lay upon
the bench in the tailor-shop.  Charley heard the door open, heard
unfamiliar steps, seized his pistol, and, springing up, with his back to
the safe, called out loudly to Jo.  As he dimly saw men rush at him, he
fired.  The bullet reached its mark, and one man fell dead.  At that
moment a dark-lantern was turned full on Charley, and a pistol was fired
pointblank at him.

As he fell, shot through the breast, the man who had fired dropped the
lantern with a shriek of terror.  He had seen the ghost of his brother-
in-law-Charley Steele.

With a quaking cry of warning to the others, Billy bolted from the house,
followed by his companions, two of whom were struggling with Jo Portugais
on the stairway.  These now also broke and ran.

Jo rushed into the shop, and saw, as he thought, Charley lying dead--
saw the robber dead upon the floor.  His master and friend gone, the
conviction seized him that his own time had come.  He would give himself
to justice now--but to God's justice, not to man's.  The robbers were
four to one, and he would avenge his master's death and give his own life
to do it!  It was all the thought of a second.  He rushed out after the
robbers, shouting as he ran, to awake the villagers.  He heard the
marauders ahead of him, and, fleet of foot, rushed on.  Reaching them as
they mounted, he fired, and brought down his man--a shivering quack-
doctor, who, like his leader, had seen a sight in the tailor-shop that
struck terror to his soul.  Two of the others then fired at Jo, who had
caught a horse by the head.  He fell without a sound, and lay upon his
face--he did not hear the hoofs of the escaping horses nor any other
sound.  He had fallen without a pang beside the quackdoctor, whose
medicines would never again quicken a pulse in his own body or any other.

Behind, in the village, frightened people flocked about the tailor-shop.
Within, Mrs. Flynn and the Notary crudely but tenderly bound up the
dreadful wound in Charley's side, while Rosalie pillowed his head on her
bosom.

With a strange quietness Rosalie gave orders to the Notary and Mrs.
Flynn.  There was a light in her eyes--an unnatural light--of strength
and presence of mind.  Her hand was steady, and as gently as a mother
with a child she wiped the moist forehead, and poured a little brandy
between the set teeth.

"Stand back--give him air," she said, in a voice of authority to those
who crowded round.

People fell back in awe, for, amid tears and excitement and fear, this
girl had a strange convincing calm.  By the time Charley's wound was
stopped, messengers were on the way to the Cure and the Seigneur.  By
Rosalie's instructions the dead body of the robber was removed, Charley's
bed up-stairs was prepared for him, a fire was lighted, and twenty hands
were ready to do accurately her will.  Now and again she felt his pulse,
and she watched his face intently.  In her bitter sorrow her heart had a
sort of thankfulness, for his head was on her breast, he was in her arms.
It had been given her once more to come first to his rescue, and with one
wild cry, unheard by any one, to call out his beloved name.

The world of Chaudiere, roused by the shooting, had then burst in upon
them; but that one moment had been hers, no matter what came after.  She
had no illusions--she knew that the end was near: the end of all for him
and for them both.

The Cure entered and hurried forward.  There was the seal of the parish
intact on the door of the safe, but at what cost!

"He has given his life for the church," he said, then commanded all to
leave, save those needed to carry the wounded man up-stairs.

Still it was Rosalie that directed the removal.  She held his hand; she
saw that he was carefully laid down; she raised his head to a proper
height; she moistened his lips and fanned him.  Meanwhile the Cure fell
upon his knees, and the noise of talk and whispering ceased in the house.

But presently there was loud murmuring and shuffling of feet outside
again, and Rosalie left the room hurriedly and went below to stop it.
She met the men who were bringing the body of Jo Portugais into the shop.

Up-stairs the Cure's voice prayed: "Of Thy mercy, O Lord, hear our
prayer.  Grant that he be brought into Thy Church ere his last hour come.
Forgive, O Lord--"

Charley stirred and opened his eyes.  He saw the Cure bowed in prayer; he
heard the trembling voice.  He touched the white head with his hand.




CHAPTER LIX

IN WHICH CHARLEY MEETS A STRANGER

The Cure came to his feet with a joyful cry.  "Monsieur--my son," he
said, bending over him.

"Is it all over?" Charley asked calmly, almost cheerfully.  Death now
was the only solution of life's problems, and he welcomed it from the
void.

The Cure went to the door and locked it.  The deepest desire of his life
must here be uttered, his great aspiration be realised.

"My son," he said, as he came softly to the bedside again, "you have
given to us all you had--your charity, your wisdom, your skill.  You have
"--it was hard, but the man's wound was mortal, and it must be said "you
have consecrated our new church with your blood.  You have given all to
us; we will give all to you--"

There was a soft knocking at the door.  He went and opened it a very
little.  "He is conscious, Rosalie," he whispered.  "Wait--wait--one
moment."

Then came the Seigneur's voice saying that Jo was gone, and that all the
robbers had escaped, save the two disposed of by Charley and Jo.

The Cure turned to the bed once more.  "What did he say about Jo?"
Charley asked.

"He is dead, my son, and the quack-doctor also.  The others have
escaped."

Charley turned his face away.  "Au revoir, Jo," he said into the great
distance.

Then there was silence for a moment, while outside the door a girl
prayed, with an old woman's arm around her.

The Cure leaned over Charley again.  "Shall not the sacraments of the
Church comfort you in your last hours?" he said.  "It is the way, the
truth, and the life.  It is the Voice that says: 'Peace' to the vexed
mind.  Human intellect is vanity; only the soul survives.  Will you not
hear the Voice?  Will you not give us who love and honour you the right
to make you ours for ever?  Will you not come to the bosom of that Church
for which you have given all?"

"Tell them so," Charley said, and he motioned towards the window, under
which the people were gathered.

With a glad exclamation the Cure hastened to the window, and, in a voice
of sorrowful exultation, spoke to the people below.

Charley reckoned swiftly with his fate.  What was there now to do?  If
his wound was not mortal, what tragedy might now come!  For Billy's hand
--the hand of Kathleen's brother--had brought him low.  If the robbers
and murderers were captured, he must be dragged into the old life, and to
what an issue--all the old problems carried into more terrible
conditions.  And Rosalie--in his half-consciousness he had felt her near
him; he felt her near him now.  Rosalie--in any case, what could there be
for her?  Nothing.  He had heard the Cure whisper her name at the door.
She was outside-praying for him.  He stretched out a hand as though he
saw her, and his lips framed her name.  In his weakness and fading life
he had no anguish in the thought of her.  Life and Love were growing
distant though he loved her as few love and live.  She would be removed
from want by him--there were the pearls and the money in the safe with
the money of the Church; there was the letter to the Cure, his last
testament, leaving all to her.  He, sleeping, would fear no foe; she,
awake in the living world, would hold him in dear remembrance.  Death
were the better thing for all.  Then Kathleen in her happiness would be
at peace; and even Billy might go unmolested, for, who was there to
recognise Billy, now that Portugais was dead?

He heard the Cure's voice at the window--"Oh, my dear people, God has
given him to us at last.  I go now to prepare him for his long journey,
to--"

Charley realised and shuddered.  Receive the sacraments of the Church?
Be made ready by the priest for his going hence--end all the soul's
interrogations, with the solving of his own mortal problems?  Say "I
believe," confess his sins, and, receiving absolution, lie down in peace.

He suddenly raised himself on his elbow, flinging his body over.  The
bandage of his wound was displaced, and blood gushed out upon the white
clothes of the bed.  "Rosalie!" he gasped.  "Rosalie, my love!  God keep
.  .  .  "

As he sank back he heard the priest's anguished voice above him, calling
for help.  He smiled.

"Rosalie--" he whispered.  The priest ran and unlocked the door, and
Rosalie entered, followed by the Seigneur and Mrs. Flynn.

"Quick!  Quick!" said the priest.  "The bandage slipped."

The bandage slipped--or was it slipped?  Who knows!

Blind with agony, and as in a direful dream, Rosalie made her way to the
bed.  The sight of his ensanguined body roused her, and, murmuring his
name--continually murmuring his name--she assisted Mrs. Flynn to bind up
the wound again.  Standing where she stood when she had stayed Louis
Trudel's arm long ago, with an infinite tenderness she touched the scar-
the scar of the cross--on his breast.  Terrible as was her grief, her
heart had its comfort in the thought--who could rob her of that for
ever?--that he would die a martyr.  It did not matter now who knew the
story of her love.  It could not do him harm.  She was ready to proclaim
it to all the world.  And those who watched knew that they were in the
presence of a great human love.

The priest made ready to receive the unconscious man into the Church.
Had Charley not said, "Tell them so?"  Was it not now his duty to say the
sacred offices over a son of the Church in his last bitter hour?  So it
was done while he lay unconscious.

For hours he lay still, and then the fevered blood, poisoned by the
bullet which had brought him down, made him delirious, gave him
hallucinations--open-eyed illusions.  All the time Rosalie knelt at the
foot of the bed, her piteous tearless eyes for ever fixed on his face.

Towards evening, with an unnatural strength, he sat up in bed.

"See," he whispered, "that woman in the corner there.  She has come to
take me, but I will not go."  Fantasy after fantasy possessed him-
fantasy, strangely mixed with facts of his own past.  Now it was
Kathleen, now Billy, now Jo Portugais, now John Brown, now Suzon
Charlemagne at the Cote Dorion, again Jo Portugais.  In strange, touching
sentences he spoke to them, as though they were present before him.  At
length he stopped abruptly, and gazed straight before him--over the head
of Rosalie into the distance.

"See," he said, pointing, "who is that?  Who?  I can't see his face--it
is covered.  So tall-so white!  He is opening his arms to me.  He is
coming--closer--closer.  Who is it?"

"It is Death, my son," said the priest in his ear, with a pitying
gentleness.

The Cure's voice seemed to calm the agitated sense, to bring it back to
the outer precincts of understanding.  There was an awe-struck silence as
the dying man fumbled, fumbled, over his breast, found his eye-glass,
and, with a last feeble effort, raised it to his eye, shining now with an
unearthly fire.  The old interrogation of the soul, the elemental habit
outlived all else in him.  The idiosyncrasy of the mind automatically
expressed itself.

"I beg--your--pardon," he whispered to the imagined figure, and the light
died out of his eyes, "have I--ever--been--introduced--to you?"

"At the hour of your birth, my son," said the priest, as a sobbing cry
came from the foot of the bed.

But Charley did not hear.  His ears were for ever closed to the voices of
life and time.




CHAPTER LX

THE HAND AT THE DOOR

The eve of the day of the memorable funeral two belated visitors to the
Passion Play arrived in the village, unknowing that it had ended, and of
the tragedy which had set a whole valley mourning; unconscious that they
shared in the bitter fortunes of the tailor-man, of whom men and women
spoke with tears.  Affected by the gloom of the place, the two visitors
at once prepared for their return journey, but the manner of the
tailorman's death arrested their sympathies, touched the humanity in
them.  The woman was much impressed.

They asked to see the body of the man.  They were taken to the door of
the tailor-shop, while their horses were being brought round.  Within the
house itself they were met by an old Irishwoman, who, in response to
their wish "to see the brave man's body," showed them into a room where a
man lay dead with a bullet through his heart.  It was the body of Jo
Portugais, whose master and friend lay in another room across the
hallway.  The lady turned back in disappointment--the dead man was little
like a hero.

The Irishwoman had meant to deceive her, for at this moment a girl who
loved the tailor was kneeling beside his body, and, if possible, Mrs.
Flynn would have no curious eyes look upon that scene.

When the visitors came into the hall again, the man said: "There was
another; Kathleen--a woodsman."  But standing by the nearly closed door,
behind which lay the dead tailor of Chaudiere--they could see the holy
candles flickering within--Kathleen whispered "We've seen the tailor--
that's enough.  It's only the woodsman there.  I prefer not, Tom."

With his fingers at the latch, the man hesitated, even as Mrs. Flynn
stepped apprehensively forward; then, shrugging a shoulder, he responded
to Kathleen's hand on his arm.  They went down the stairs together, and
out to their carriage.

As they drove away, Kathleen said: "It's strange that men who do such
fine things should look so commonplace."

"The other one might have been more uncommon," he replied.

"I wonder!" she said, with a sigh of relief, as they passed the bounds
of the village.  Then she caught herself flushing, for she suddenly
realised that the exclamation was one so often on the lips of a dead,
disgraced man whose name she once had borne.

If the door of the little room upstairs had opened to the fingers of the
man beside her, the tailor of Chaudiere, though dead, would have been
dearly avenged.




CHAPTER LXI

THE CURE SPEAKS

The Cure stood with his back to the ruins of the church, at his feet two
newly made graves, and all round, with wistful faces, crowds of reverent
habitants.  A benignant sorrow made his voice in perfect temper with the
pensive striving of this latest day of spring.  At the close of his
address he said:

"I owe you much, my people.  I owe him more, for it was given him, who
knew not God, to teach us how to know Him better.  For his past, it is
not given you to know.  It is hidden in the bosom of the Church.  Sinner
he once was, criminal never, as one can testify who knows all"--he turned
to the Abbe Rossignol, who stood beside him, grave and compassionate--
"and his sins were forgiven him.  He is the one sheaf which you and I may
carry home rejoicing from the pagan world of unbelief.  What he had in
life he gave to us, and in death he leaves to our church all that he has
not left to a woman he loved--to Rosalie Evanturel."

There was a gasping murmur among the people, but they stilled again, and
strained to hear.

"He leaves her a little fortune, and to us all else he had.  Let us pray
for his soul, and let us comfort her who, loving deeply, reaped no
harvest of love.

"The law may never reach his ruthless murderers, for there is none to
recognise their faces; and were they ten times punished, how should it
avail us now!  Let us always remember that, in his grave, our friend
bears on his breast the little iron cross we held so dear.  That is all
we could give--our dearest treasure.  I pray God that, scarring his
breast in life, it may heal all his woes in death, and be a saving image
on his bosom in the Presence at the last."

He raised his hands in benediction.




EPILOGUE

Never again was there a Passion Play in the Chaudiere Valley.  Spring-
times and harvests and long winters came and went, and a blessing seemed
to be upon the valley, for men prospered, and no untoward things befel
the people.  So it was for twenty years, wherein there had been going and
coming in quiet.  Some had gone upon short mortal journeys and had come
back, some upon long immortal voyages, and had never returned.  Of the
last were the Seigneur and a woman once a Magdalene; but in a house
beside a beautiful church, with a noble doorway, lived the Cure, M.
Loisel, aged and serene.  There never was a day, come rain or shine, in
which he was not visited by a beautiful woman, whose life was one with
the people of the valley.

There was no sorrow in the parish which the lady did not share, with the
help of an old Irishwoman called Mrs. Flynn.  Was there sickness in the
parish, her hand smoothed the pillow and soothed the pain.  Was there
trouble anywhere, her face brought light to the door way.  Did any suffer
ill-repute, her word helped to restore the ruined name.  They did not
know that she forgave so much in all the world, because she thought she
had so much in herself to forgive.

She was ever called "Madame Rosalie," and she cherished the name, and
gave commands that when her grave came to be made near to a certain other
grave, Madame Rosalie should be carved upon the stone.  Cheerfulness and
serenity were ever with her, undisturbed by wish to probe the mystery of
the life which had once absorbed her own.  She never sought to know
whence the man came; it was sufficient to know whither he had gone, and
that he had been hers for a brief dream of life.  It was better to have
lived the one short thrilling hour with all its pain, than never to have
known what she knew or felt what she had felt.  The mystery deepened her
romance, and she was even glad that the ruffians who slew him were never
brought to justice.  To her mind they were but part of the mystic
machinery of fate.

For her the years had given many compensations, and so she told the Cure,
one midsummer day, when she brought to visit him the orphaned son of
Paulette Dubois, graduated from his college in France and making ready to
go to the far East.

"I have had more than I deserve--a thousand times," she said.

The Cure smiled, and laid a gentle hand upon her own.  "It is right for
you to think so," he said, "but after a long life, I am ready to say
that, one way or another, we earn all the real happiness we have.  I mean
the real happiness--the moments, my child.  I once had a moment full of
happiness."

"May I ask?" she said.

"When my heart first went out to him"--he turned his face towards the
churchyard.

"He was a great man," she said proudly.

The Cure looked at her benignly: she was a woman, and she had loved the
man.  He had, however, come to a stage of life where greatness alone
seemed of little moment.  He forbore to answer her, but he pressed her
hand.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Youth is the only comrade for youth






ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR THE ENTIRE "RIGHT OF WAY":

A left-handed boy is all right in the world
Always hoping the best from the worst of us
Damnable propinquity
Good fathers think they have good daughters
Have not we all something to hide--with or without shame?
He has wheeled his nuptial bed into the street
He left his fellow-citizens very much alone
He had had acquaintances, but never friendships, and never loves
Hugging the chain of denial to his bosom
I have a good memory for forgetting
I am only myself when I am drunk
I should remember to forget it
Importunity with discretion was his motto
In all secrets there is a kind of guilt
Is the habit of good living mere habit and mere acting
It is good to live, isn't it?
Know how bad are you, and doesn't mind
Liquor makes me human
Nervous legs at a gallop
Pathetically  in earnest
Shure, if we could always be 'about the same,' we'd do
So say your prayers, believe all you can, don't ask questions
Strike first and heal after--"a kick and a lick"
Suspicion, the bane of sick old age
Things that once charmed charm less
Was not civilisation a mistake
Who knows!
Youth is the only comrade for youth






MICHEL AND ANGELE, Complete

[A Ladder of Swords]

By Gilbert Parker




INTRODUCTION

If it does not seem too childish a candour to say so, 'Michel and Angele'
always seems to me like some old letter lifted out of an ancient cabinet
with the faint perfume of bygone days upon it.  Perhaps that is because
the story itself had its origin in a true but brief record of some good
Huguenots who fled from France and took refuge in England, to be found,
as the book declares, at the Walloon Church, in Southampton.

The record in the first paragraphs of the first chapter of the book
fascinated my imagination, and I wove round Michel de la Foret and Angele
Aubert a soft, bright cloud of romance which would not leave my vision
until I sat down and wrote out what, in the writing, seemed to me a true
history.  It was as though some telepathy between the days of Elizabeth
and our own controlled me--self-hypnotism, I suppose; but still, there it
was.  The story, in its original form, was first published in 'Harper's
Weekly' under the name of Michel and Angele, but the fear, I think, that
many people would mispronounce the first word of the title, induced me to
change it when, double in length, it became a volume called 'A Ladder of
Swords'.

As it originally appeared, I wrote it in the Island of Jersey, out at the
little Bay of Rozel in a house called La Chaire, a few yards away from
the bay itself, and having a pretty garden with a seat at its highest
point, from which, beyond the little bay, the English Channel ran away to
the Atlantic.  It was written in complete seclusion.  I had no visitors;
there was no one near, indeed, except the landlord of the little hotel in
the bay, and his wife.  All through the Island, however, were people whom
I knew, like the Malet de Carterets, the Lemprieres, and old General
Pipon, for whom the Jersey of three hundred years ago was as near as the
Jersey of to-day, so do the Jersiais prize, cultivate, and conserve every
hour of its recorded history.

As the sea opens out to a vessel making between the promontories to the
main, so, while writing this tale which originally was short, the larger
scheme of 'The Battle of the Strong' spread out before me, luring me, as
though in the distance were the Fortunate Isles.  Eight years after
'Michel and Angele' was written and first published in 'Harper's Weekly',
I decided to give it the dignity of a full-grown romance.  For years I
had felt that it had the essentials for a larger canvas, and at the
earnest solicitation of Messrs. Harper & Brothers I settled to do what
had long been in my mind.  The narrative grew as naturally from what it
was to larger stature as anything that had been devised upon a greater
scale at the beginning; and in London town I had the same joy in the
company of Michel and Angele--and a vastly increased joy in the company
of Lempriere, the hulking, joyous giant--as I had years before in Jersey
itself when the story first stirred in my mind and reached my pen.

While adverse reviews of the book were few if any, it cannot be said that
this romance is a companion in popularity with, for instance, 'The Right
of Way'.  It had its friends, but it has apparently appealed to smaller
audiences--to those who watch the world go by; who are not searching for
the exposure of life's grim realities; who do not seek the clinic of the
soul's tragedies.  There was tragedy here, but there was comedy too;
there was also joy and faith, patience and courage.  The book, taken by
itself, could not make a permanent reputation for any man, but it has its
place in the scheme of my work, and I would not have it otherwise than it
is.




A NOTE

There will be found a few anachronisms in this tale, but none so
important as to give a wrong impression of the events of Queen
Elizabeth's reign.




MICHEL AND ANGELE

CHAPTER I

If you go to Southampton and search the register of the Walloon Church
there, you will find that in the summer of 157_,

     "Madame Vefue de Montgomery with all her family and servants were
     admitted to the Communion"--"Tous ceux cj furent Recus la a Cene du
     157_, comme passans, sans avoir Rendu Raison de la foj, mes sur la
     tesmognage de Mons. Forest, Ministre de Madame, quj certifia quj ne
     cognoisoit Rien en tout ceux la po' quoy Il ne leur deust administre
     la Cene s'il estoit en lieu po' a ferre."

There is another striking record, which says that in August of the same
year Demoiselle Angele Claude Aubert, daughter of Monsieur de la Haie
Aubert, Councillor of the Parliament of Rouen, was married to Michel de
la Foret, of the most noble Flemish family of that name.

When I first saw these records, now grown dim with time, I fell to
wondering what was the real life-history of these two people.  Forthwith,
in imagination, I began to make their story piece by piece; and I had
reached a romantic 'denoument' satisfactory to myself and in sympathy
with fact, when the Angel of Accident stepped forward with some "human
documents."  Then I found that my tale, woven back from the two obscure
records I have given, was the true story of two most unhappy yet most
happy people.  From the note struck in my mind, when my finger touched
that sorrowful page in the register of the Church of the Refugees at
Southampton, had spread out the whole melody and the very book of the
song.

One of the later-discovered records was a letter, tear-stained, faded,
beautifully written in old French, from Demoiselle Angele Claude Aubert
to Michel de la Foret at Anvers in March of the year 157_.  The letter
lies beside me as I write, and I can scarcely believe that three and a
quarter centuries have passed since it was written, and that she who
wrote it was but eighteen years old at the time.  I translate it into
English, though it is impossible adequately to carry over either the
flavour or the idiom of the language:

     Written on this May Day of the year 157_, at the place hight Rozel
     in the Manor called of the same of Jersey Isle, to Michel de la
     Foret, at Anvers in Flanders.

     MICHEL, Thy good letter by safe carriage cometh to my hand, bringing
     to my heart a lightness it hath not known since that day when I was
     hastily carried to the port of St. Malo, and thou towards the King
     his prison.  In what great fear have I lived, having no news of thee
     and fearing all manner of mischance!  But our God hath benignly
     saved thee from death, and me He hath set safely here in this isle
     of the sea.

     Thou hast ever been a brave soldier, enduring and not fearing; thou
     shalt find enow to keep thy blood stirring in these days of trial
     and peril to us who are so opprobriously called Les Huguenots.  If
     thou wouldst know more of my mind thereupon, come hither.  Safety is
     here, and work for thee--smugglers and pirates do abound on these
     coasts, and Popish wolves do harry the flock even in this island
     province of England.  Michel, I plead for the cause which thou hast
     nobly espoused, but--alas! my selfish heart, where thou art lie work
     and fighting, and the same high cause, and sadly, I confess, it is
     for mine own happiness that I ask thee to come.  I wot well that
     escape from France hath peril, that the way hither from that point
     upon yonder coast called Carteret is hazardous, but yet-but yet all
     ways to happiness are set with hazard.

     If thou dost come to Carteret thou wilt see two lights turning this-
     wards: one upon a headland called Tour de Rozel, and one upon the
     great rock called of the Ecrehos.  These will be in line with thy
     sight by the sands of Hatainville.  Near by the Tour de Rozel shall
     I be watching and awaiting thee.  By day and night doth my prayer
     ascend for thee.

     The messenger who bears this to thee (a piratical knave with a most
     kind heart, having, I am told, a wife in every port of France and of
     England the south, a most heinous sin!) will wait for thy answer, or
     will bring thee hither, which is still better.  He is worthy of
     trust if thou makest him swear by the little finger of St. Peter.
     By all other swearings he doth deceive freely.

     The Lord make thee true, Michel.  If thou art faithful to me, I
     shall know how faithful thou art in all; for thy vows to me were
     most frequent and pronounced, with a full savour that might warrant
     short seasoning.  Yet, because thou mayst still be given to such
     dear fantasies of truth as were on thy lips in those dark days
     wherein thy sword saved my life 'twixt Paris and Rouen, I tell thee
     now that I do love thee, and shall so love when, as my heart
     inspires me, the cloud shall fall that will hide us from each other
     forever.

                                             ANGELE.

     An Afterword:

     I doubt not we shall come to the heights where there is peace,
     though we climb thereto by a ladder of swords.  A.


Some years before Angele's letter was written, Michel de la Foret had
become an officer in the army of Comte Gabriel de Montgomery, and fought
with him until what time the great chief was besieged in the Castle of
Domfront in Normandy.  When the siege grew desperate, Montgomery besought
the intrepid young Huguenot soldier to escort Madame de Montgomery to
England, to be safe from the oppression and misery sure to follow any
mishap to this noble leader of the Camisards.

At the very moment of departure of the refugees from Domfront with the
Comtesse, Angele's messenger--the "piratical knave with the most kind
heart "presented himself, delivered her letter to De la Foret, and
proceeded with the party to the coast of Normandy by St. Brieuc.
Embarking there in a lugger which Buonespoir the pirate secured for them,
they made for England.

Having come but half-way of the Channel, the lugger was stopped by an
English frigate.  After much persuasion the captain of the frigate agreed
to land Madame de Montgomery upon the island of Jersey, but forced De la
Foret to return to the coast of France; and Buonespoir elected to return
with him.




CHAPTER II

Meanwhile Angele had gone through many phases of alternate hope and
despair.  She knew that Montgomery the Camisard was dead, and a rumour,
carried by refugees, reached her that De la Foret had been with him to
the end.  To this was presently added the word that De la Foret had been
beheaded.  But one day she learned that the Comtesse de Montgomery was
sheltered by the Governor, Sir Hugh Pawlett, her kinsman, at Mont Orgueil
Castle.  Thither she went in fear from her refuge at Rozel, and was
admitted to the Comtesse.  There she learned the joyful truth that De la
Foret had not been slain, and was in hiding on the coast of Normandy.

The long waiting was a sore trial, yet laughter was often upon her lips
henceforth.  The peasants, the farmers and fishermen of Jersey, at first
--as they have ever been--little inclined towards strangers, learned at
last to look for her in the fields and upon the shore, and laughed in
response, they knew not why, to the quick smiling of her eyes.  She even
learned to speak their unmusical but friendly Norman-Jersey French.
There were at least a half-dozen fishermen who, for her, would have gone
at night straight to the Witches' Rock in St. Clement's Bay--and this was
bravery unmatched.

It came to be known along the coast that "Ma'm'selle" was waiting for a
lover fleeing from the French coast.  This gave her fresh interest in the
eyes of the serfs and sailors and their women folk, who at first were not
inclined towards the Huguenot maiden, partly because she was French, and
partly because she was not a Catholic.  But even these, when they saw
that she never talked religiously, that she was fast learning to speak
their own homely patois, and that in the sickness of their children she
was untiring in her kindness, forgave the austerity of the gloomy-browed
old man her father, who spoke to them distantly, or never spoke at all;
and her position was secure.  Then, upon the other hand, the gentry of
the manors, seeing the friendship grow between her and the Comtesse de
Montgomery at Mont Orgueil Castle, made courteous advances towards her
father, and towards herself through him.

She could scarce have counted the number of times she climbed the great
hill like a fortress at the lift of the little bay of Rozel, and from the
Nez du Guet scanned the sea for a sail and the sky for fair weather.
When her eyes were not thus busy, they were searching the lee of the
hillside round for yellow lilies, and the valley below for the campion,
the daffodil, and the thousand pretty ferns growing in profusion there.
Every night she looked out to see that her signal fire was lit upon the
Nez du Guet, and she never went to bed without taking one last look over
the sea, in the restless inveterate hope which at once sustained her and
devoured her.

But the longest waiting must end.  It came on the evening of the very day
that the Seigneur of Rozel went to Angele's father and bluntly told him
he was ready to forego all Norman-Jersey prejudice against the French and
the Huguenot religion, and take Angele to wife without penny or estate.

In reply to the Seigneur, Monsieur Aubert said that he was conscious of
an honour, and referred Monsieur to his daughter, who must answer for
herself; but he must tell Monsieur of Rozel that Monsieur's religion
would, in his own sight, be a high bar to the union.  To that the
Seigneur said that no religion that he had could be a bar to anything at
all; and so long as the young lady could manage her household, drive a
good bargain with the craftsmen and hucksters, and have the handsomest
face and manners in the Channel Islands, he'd ask no more; and she might
pray for him and his salvation without let or hindrance.

The Seigneur found the young lady in a little retreat among the rocks,
called by the natives La Chaire.  Here she sat sewing upon some coarse
linen for a poor fisherwoman's babe when the Seigneur came near.  She
heard the scrunch of his heels upon the gravel, the clank of his sword
upon the rocks, and looked up with a flush, her needle poised; for none
should know of her presence in this place save her father.  When she saw
who was her visitor, she rose.  After greeting and compliment, none too
finely put, but more generous than fitted with Jersey parsimony, the
gentleman of Rozel came at once to the point.

"My name is none too bad," said he--"Raoul Lempriere, of the Lemprieres
that have been here since Rollo ruled in Normandy.  My estate is none
worse than any in the whole islands; I have more horses and dogs than any
gentleman of my acres; and I am more in favour at court than De Carteret
of St. Ouen's.  I am the Queen's butler, and I am the first that royal
favour granted to set up three dove-cotes, one by St. Aubin's, one by St.
Helier's, and one at Rozel: and--and," he added, with a lumbering attempt
at humour--"and, on my oath, I'll set up another dove-cote with out my
sovereign's favour, with your leave alone.  By our Lady, I do love that
colour in yon cheek!  Just such a colour had my mother when she snatched
from the head of my cousin of Carteret's milk-maid wife the bonnet of a
lady of quality and bade her get to her heifers.  God's beauty!  but 'tis
a colour of red primroses in thy cheeks and blue campions in thine eyes.
Come, I warrant I can deepen that colour"--he bowed low--"Madame of
Rozel, if it be not too soon!"

The girl listened to this cheerful and loquacious proposal and courtship
all in one, ending with the premature bestowal of a title, in mingled
anger, amusement, disdain, and apprehension.  Her heart fluttered, then
stood still, then flew up in her throat, then grew terribly hot and hurt
her, so that she pressed her hand to her bosom as though that might ease
it.  By the time he had finished, drawn himself up, and struck his foot
upon the ground in burly emphasis of his devoted statements, the girl had
sufficiently recovered to answer him composedly, and with a little glint
of demure humour in her eyes.  She loved another man; she did not care so
much as a spark for this happy, swearing, swashbuckling gentleman; yet
she saw he had meant to do her honour.  He had treated her as courteously
as was in him to do; he chose her out from all the ladies of his
acquaintance to make her an honest offer of his hand--he had said nothing
about his heart; he would, should she marry him, throw her scraps of
good-humour, bearish tenderness, drink to her health among his fellows,
and respect and admire her--even exalt her almost to the rank of a man
in his own eyes; and he had the tolerance of the open-hearted and open-
handed man.  All these things were as much a compliment to her as though
she were not a despised Huguenot, an exiled lady of no fortune.  She
looked at him a moment with an almost solemn intensity, so that he
shifted his ground uneasily, but at once smiled encouragingly, to relieve
her embarrassment at the unexpected honour done her.  She had remained
standing; now, as he made a step towards her, she sank down upon the
seat, and waved him back courteously.

"A moment, Monsieur of Rozel," she ventured.  "Did my father send you to
me?"

He inclined his head and smiled again.

"Did you say to him what you have said to me?" she asked, not quite
without a touch of malice.

"I left out about the colour in the cheek," he answered, with a smirk at
what he took to be the quickness of his wit.

"You kept your paint-pot for me," she replied softly.

"And the dove-cote, too," he rejoined, bowing finely, and almost carried
off his feet by his own brilliance.  She became serious at once--so
quickly that he was ill prepared for it, and could do little but stare
and pluck at the tassel of his sword; for he was embarrassed before this
maiden, who changed as quickly as the currents change under the brow of
the Couperon Cliff, behind which lay his manor-house of Rozel.

"I have visited at your manor, Monsieur of Rozel.  I have seen the state
in which you live, your retainers, your men-at-arms, your farming-folk,
and your sailormen.  I know how your Queen receives you; how your honour
is as stable as your fief."

He drew himself up again proudly.  He could understand this speech.

"Your horses and your hounds I have seen," she added, "your men-servants
and your maid-servants, your fields of corn, your orchards, and your
larder.  I have sometimes broken the Commandment and coveted them and
envied you."

"Break the Commandment again, for the last time," he cried, delighted and
boisterous.  "Let us not waste words, lady.  Let's kiss and have it
over."

Her eyes flashed.  "I coveted them and envied you; but then, I am but a
vain girl at times, and vanity is easier to me than humbleness."

"Blood of man, but I cannot understand so various a creature!" he broke
in, again puzzled.

"There is a little chapel in the dell beside your manor, Monsieur.  If
you will go there, and get upon your knees, and pray till the candles no
more burn, and the Popish images crumble in their places, you will yet
never understand myself or any woman."

"There's no question of Popish images between us," he answered, vainly
trying for foothold.  "Pray as you please, and I'll see no harm comes to
the Mistress of Rozel."

He was out of his bearings and impatient.  Religion to him was a dull
recreation invented chiefly for women.  She became plain enough now.
"'Tis no images nor religion that stands between us," she answered,
"though they might well do so.  It is that I do not love you, Monsieur of
Rozel."

His face, which had slowly clouded, suddenly cleared.  "Love! Love!"  He
laughed good-humouredly.  "Love comes, I'm told, with marriage.  But we
can do well enough without fugling on that pipe.  Come, come, dost think
I'm not a proper man and a gentleman?  Dost think I'll not use thee well
and 'fend thee, Huguenot though thou art, 'gainst trouble or fret or any
man's persecutions--be he my Lord Bishop, my Lord Chancellor, or King of
France, or any other?"

She came a step closer to him, even as though she would lay a hand upon
his arm.  "I believe that you would do all that in you lay," she answered
steadily.  "Yours is a rough wooing, but it is honest--"

"Rough! Rough!" he protested, for he thought he had behaved like some
Adonis.  Was it not ten years only since he had been at Court!

"Be assured, Monsieur, that I know how to prize the man who speaks after
the light given him.  I know that you are a brave and valorous gentleman.
I must thank you most truly and heartily, but, Monsieur, you and yours
are not for me.  Seek elsewhere, among your own people, in your own
religion and language and position, the Mistress of Rozel."

He was dumfounded.  Now he comprehended the plain fact that he had been
declined.

"You send me packing!" he blurted out, getting red in the face.

"Ah, no!  Say it is my misfortune that I cannot give myself the great
honour," she said; in her tone a little disdainful dryness, a little
pity, a little feeling that here was a good friend lost.

"It's not because of the French soldier that was with Montgomery at
Domfront?--I've heard that story.  But he's gone to heaven, and 'tis vain
crying for last year's breath," he added, with proud philosophy.

"He is not dead.  And if he were," she added, "do you think, Monsieur,
that we should find it easier to cross the gulf between us?"

"Tut, tut, that bugbear Love!" he said shortly.  "And so you'd lose a
good friend for a dead lover?  I' faith, I'd befriend thee well if thou
wert my wife, Ma'm'selle."

"It is hard for those who need friends to lose them," she answered sadly.

The sorrow of her position crept in upon her and filled her eyes with
tears.  She turned them to the sea-instinctively towards that point on
the shore where she thought it likely Michel might be; as though by
looking she might find comfort and support in this hard hour.

Even as she gazed into the soft afternoon light she could see, far over,
a little sail standing out towards the Ecrehos.  Not once in six months
might the coast of France be seen so clearly.  One might almost have
noted people walking on the beach.  This was no good token, for when that
coast may be seen with great distinctness a storm follows hard after.
The girl knew this; and though she could not know that this was Michel de
la Foret's boat, the possibility fixed itself in her mind.  She quickly
scanned the horizon.  Yes, there in the north-west was gathering a dark-
blue haze, hanging like small filmy curtains in the sky.

The Seigneur of Rozel presently broke the silence so awkward for him.
He had seen the tears in her eyes, and though he could not guess the
cause, he vaguely thought it might be due to his announcement that she
had lost a friend.  He was magnanimous at once, and he meant what he said
and would stand by it through thick and thin.

"Well, well, I'll be thy everlasting friend if not thy husband," he said
with ornate generosity.  "Cheer thy heart, lady."

With a sudden impulse she seized his hand and kissed it, and, turning,
ran swiftly down the rocks towards her home.

He stood and looked after her, then, dumfounded, at the hand she had
kissed.

"Blood of my heart!" he said, and shook his head in utter amazement.

Then he turned and looked out upon the Channel.  He saw the little boat
Angele had descried making from France.  Glancing at the sky, "What fools
come there!" he said anxiously.

They were Michel de la Foret and Buonespoir the pirate, in a black-
bellied cutter with red sails.




CHAPTER III

For weeks De la Foret and Buonespoir had lain in hiding at St. Brieuc.
At last Buonespoir declared all was ready once again.  He had secured for
the Camisard the passport and clothes of a priest who had but just died
at Granville.  Once again they made the attempt to reach English soil.

Standing out from Carteret on the Belle Suzanne, they steered for the
light upon the Marmotier Rocks of the Ecrehos, which Angele had paid a
fisherman to keep going every night.  This light had caused the French
and English frigates some uneasiness, and they had patrolled the Channel
from Cap de la Hague to the Bay of St. Brieuc with a vigilance worthy of
a larger cause.  One fine day an English frigate anchored off the
Ecrehos, and the fisherman was seized.  He, poor man, swore that he kept
the light burning to guide his brother fishermen to and fro between
Boulay Bay and the Ecrehos.  The captain of the frigate tried severities;
but the fisherman stuck to his tale, and the light burned on as before--
a lantern stuck upon a pole.  One day, with a telescope, Buonespoir had
seen the exact position of the staff supporting the light, and had mapped
out his course accordingly.  He would head straight for the beacon and
pass between the Marmotier and the Maitre Ile, where is a narrow channel
for a boat drawing only a few feet of water.  Unless he made this, he
must run south and skirt the Ecriviere Rock and bank, where the streams
setting over the sandy ridges make a confusing perilous sea to mariners
in bad weather.  Else, he must sail north between the Ecrehos and the
Dirouilles, in the channel called Etoc, a tortuous and dangerous passage
save in good weather, and then safe only to the mariner who knows the
floor of that strait like his own hand.  De la Foret was wholly in the
hands of Buonespoir, for he knew nothing of these waters and coasts; also
he was a soldier and no sailor.

They cleared Cape Carteret with a fair wind from the north-east, which
should carry them safely as the bird flies to the haven of Rozel.  The
high, pinkish sands of Hatainville were behind them; the treacherous
Taillepied Rocks lay to the north, and a sweet sea before.  Nothing could
have seemed fairer and more hopeful.  But a few old fishermen on shore at
Carteret shook their heads dubiously, and at Port Bail, some miles below,
a disabled naval officer, watching through a glass, rasped out,
"Criminals or fools!"  But he shrugged his shoulders, for if they were
criminals he was sure they would expiate their crimes this night, and if
they were fools--he had no pity for fools.

But Buonespoir knew his danger.  Truth is, he had chosen this night
because they would be safest from pursuit, because no sensible seafaring
man, were he King's officer or another, would venture forth upon the
impish Channel, save to court disaster.  Pirate, and soldier in priest's
garb, had frankly taken the chances.

With a fair wind they might, with all canvas set--mainsail, foresail,
jib, and fore-topsail--make Rozel Bay within two hours and a quarter.
All seemed well for a brief half-hour.  Then, even as the passage between
the Marmotier and the Ecrehos opened out, the wind suddenly shifted from
the north-east to the southwest and a squall came hurrying on them--a few
moments too soon; for, had they been clear of the Ecrehos, clear of the
Taillepieds, Felee Bank, and the Ecriviere, they could have stood out
towards the north in a more open sea.

Yet there was one thing in their favour: the tide was now running hard
from the north-west, so fighting for them while the wind was against
them.  Their only safety lay in getting beyond the Ecrehos.  If they
attempted to run in to the Marmotier for safety, they would presently be
at the mercy of the French.  To trust their doubtful fortunes and bear on
was the only way.  The tide was running fast.  They gave the mainsail to
the wind still more, and bore on towards the passage.  At last, as they
were opening on it, the wind suddenly veered full north-east.  The sails
flapped, the boat seemed to hover for a moment, and then a wave swept her
towards the rocks.  Buonespoir put the helm hard over, she went about,
and they close-hauled her as she trembled towards the rocky opening.

This was the critical instant.  A heavy sea was running, the gale was
blowing hard from the north-east, and under the close-hauled sail the
Belle Suzanne was lying over dangerously.  But the tide, too, was running
hard from the south, fighting the wind; and, at the moment when all
seemed terribly uncertain, swept them past the opening and into the
swift-running channel, where the indraught sucked them through to the
more open water beyond.

Although the Belle Suzanne was in more open water now, the danger was not
over.  Ahead lay a treacherous sea, around them roaring winds, and the
perilous coast of Jersey beyond all.

"Do you think we shall land?" quietly asked De la Foret, nodding towards
the Jersey coast.

"As many chances 'gainst it as for it, M'sieu'," said Buonespoir, turning
his face to the north, for the wind had veered again to north-east, and
he feared its passing to the north-west, giving them a head-wind and a
swooping sea.

Night came down, but with a clear sky and a bright moon; the wind,
however, not abating.  The next three hours were spent in tacking, in
beating towards the Jersey coast under seas which almost swamped them.
They were standing off about a mile from the island, and could see
lighted fires and groups of people upon the shore, when suddenly a gale
came out from the southwest, the wind having again shifted.  With an
oath, Buonespoir put the helm hard over, the Belle Suzanne came about
quickly, but as the gale struck her, the mast snapped like a pencil, she
heeled over, and the two adventurers were engulfed in the waves.

A cry of dismay went up from the watchers on the shore.  They turned with
a half-conscious sympathy towards Angele, for her story was known by all,
and in her face they read her mortal fear, though she made no cry, but
only clasped her hands in agony.  Her heart told her that yonder Michel
de la Foret was fighting for his life.  For an instant only she stood,
the terror of death in her eyes, then she turned to the excited fishermen
near.

"Men, oh men," she cried, "will you not save them?  Will no one come with
me?"

Some shook their heads sullenly, others appeared uncertain, but their
wives and children clung to them, and none stirred.  Looking round
helplessly, Angele saw the tall figure of the Seigneur of Rozel.  He had
been watching the scene for some time.  Now he came quickly to her.

"Is it the very man?" he asked her, jerking a finger towards the
struggling figures in the sea.

"Yes, oh yes," she replied, nodding her head piteously.  "God tells my
heart it is."

Her father drew near and interposed.

"Let us kneel and pray for two dying men," said he, and straightway knelt
upon the sand.

"By St. Martin, we've better medicine than that, apothecary!" said
Lempriere of Rozel loudly, and, turning round, summoned two serving-men.
"Launch my strong boat," he added.  "We will pick these gentlemen from
the brine, or know the end of it all."

The men hurried gloomily to the long-boat, ran her down to the shore and
into the surf.

"You are going--you are going to save him, dear Seigneur?" asked the
girl tremulously.

"To save him--that's to be seen, mistress," answered Lempriere, and
advanced to the fishermen.  By dint of hard words, and as hearty
encouragement and promises, he got a half-dozen strong sailors to man the
boat.

A moment after, they were all in.  At a motion from the Seigneur, the
boat was shot out into the surf, and a cheer from the shore gave heart to
De la Foret and Buonespoir, who were being driven upon the rocks.

The Jerseymen rowed gallantly; and the Seigneur, to give them heart,
promised a shilling, a capon, and a gallon of beer to each, if the rescue
was made.  Again and again the two men seemed to sink beneath the sea,
and again and again they came to the surface and battled further, torn,
battered, and bloody, but not beaten.  Cries of "We're coming, gentles,
we're coming!" from the Seigneur of Rozel, came ringing through the surf
to the dulled ears of the drowning men, and they struggled on.

There never was a more gallant rescue.  Almost at their last gasp the two
were rescued.

"Mistress Aubert sends you welcome, sir, if you be Michel de la Foret,"
said Lempriere of Rozel, and offered the fugitive his horn of liquor as
he lay blown and beaten in the boat.

"I am he," De la Foret answered.  "I owe you my life, Monsieur," he
added.

Lempriere laughed.  "You owe it to the lady; and I doubt you can properly
pay the debt," he answered, with a toss of the head; for had not the lady
refused him, the Seigneur of Rozel, six feet six in height, and all else
in proportion, while this gentleman was scarce six feet.

"We can have no quarrel upon the point," answered De la Foret, reaching
out his hand; "you have at least done tough work for her, and if I cannot
pay in gold, I can in kind.  It was a generous deed, and it has made a
friend for ever of Michel de la Foret."

"Raoul Lempriere of Rozel they call me, Michel de la Foret, and by Rollo
the Duke, but I'll take your word in the way of friendship, as the lady
yonder takes it for riper fruit!  Though, faith, 'tis fruit of a short
summer, to my thinking."

All this while Buonespoir the pirate, his face covered with blood, had
been swearing by the little finger of St. Peter that each Jerseyman there
should have the half of a keg of rum.  He went so far in gratitude as to
offer the price of ten sheep which he had once secretly raided from the
Seigneur of Rozel and sold in France; for which he had been seized on his
later return to the island, and had escaped without punishment.

Hearing, Lempriere of Rozel roared at him in anger: "Durst speak to me!
For every fleece you thieved I'll have you flayed with bow-strings if
ever I sight your face within my boundaries."

"Then I'll fetch and carry no more for M'sieu' of Rozel," said
Buonespoir, in an offended tone, but grinning under his reddish beard.

"When didst fetch and carry for me, varlet?" Lempriere roared again.

"When the Seigneur of Rozel fell from his horse, overslung with sack, the
night of the royal Duke's visit, and the footpads were on him, I carried
him on my back to the lodge of Rozel Manor.  The footpads had scores to
settle with the great Rozel."

For a moment the Seigneur stared, then roared again, but this time with
laughter.

"By the devil and Rollo, I have sworn to this hour that there was no man
in the isle could have carried me on his shoulders.  And I was right, for
Jersiais you're none, neither by adoption nor grace, but a citizen of the
sea."

He laughed again as a wave swept over them, drenching them, and a sudden
squall of wind came out of the north.  "There's no better head in the
isle than mine for measurement and thinking, and I swore no man under
eighteen stone could carry me, and I am twenty-five--I take you to be
nineteen stone, eh?"

"Nineteen, less two ounces," grinned Buonespoir.

"I'll laugh De Carteret of St. Ouen's out of his stockings over this,"
answered Lempriere.  "Trust me for knowing weights and measures!  Look
you, varlet, thy sins be forgiven thee.  I care not about the fleeces, if
there be no more stealing.  St. Ouen's has no head--I said no one man in
Jersey could have done it--I'm heavier by three stone than any man in the
island."  Thereafter there was little speaking among them, for the danger
was greater as they neared the shore.  The wind and the sea were against
them; the tide, however, was in their favour.  Others besides M. Aubert
offered up prayers for the safe-landing of the rescued and rescuers.
Presently an ancient fisherman broke out into a rude sailor's chanty, and
every voice, even those of the two Huguenots, took it up:

          "When the Four Winds, the Wrestlers, strive with the Sun,
          When the Sun is slain in the dark;
          When the stars burn out, and the night cries
          To the blind sea-reapers, and they rise,
          And the water-ways are stark--
               God save us when the reapers reap!
          When the ships sweep in with the tide to the shore,
          And the little white boats return no more;
          When the reapers reap, Lord give Thy sailors sleep,
          If Thou cast us not upon the shore,
          To bless Thee evermore:
          To walk in Thy sight as heretofore
          Though the way of the Lord be steep!
          By Thy grace,
          Show Thy face,
               Lord of the land and the deep!"

The song stilled at last.  It died away in the roar of the surf,
in the happy cries of foolish women, and the laughter of men back from
a dangerous adventure.  As the Seigneur's boat was drawn up the shore,
Angele threw herself into the arms of Michel de la Foret, the soldier
dressed as a priest.

Lempriere of Rozel stood abashed before this rich display of feeling.
In his hottest youth he could not have made such passionate motions of
affection.  His feelings ran neither high nor broad, but neither did they
run low and muddy.  His nature was a straight level of sensibility--a
rough stream between high banks of prejudice, topped with the foam of
vanity, now brawling in season, and now going steady and strong to the
sea.  Angele had come to feel what he was beneath the surface.  She felt
how unimaginative he was, and how his humour, which was but the horse-
play of vanity, helped him little to understand the world or himself.
His vanity was ridiculous, his self-importance was against knowledge or
wisdom; and Heaven had given him a small brain, a big and noble heart, a
pedigree back to Rollo, and the absurd pride of a little lord in a little
land.  Angele knew all this; but realised also that he had offered her
all he was able to offer to any woman.

She went now and put out both hands to him.  "I shall ever pray God's
blessing on the lord of Rozel," she said, in a low voice.

"'Twould fit me no better than St. Ouen's sword fits his fingers.  I'll
take thine own benison, lady--but on my cheek, not on my hand as this day
before at four of the clock."  His big voice lowered.  "Come, come, the
hand thou kissed, it hath been the hand of a friend to thee, as Raoul
Lempriere of Rozel said he'd be.  Thy lips upon his cheek, though it be
but a rough fellow's fancy, and I warrant, come good, come ill, Rozel's
face will never be turned from thee.  Pooh, pooh! let yon soldier-priest
shut his eyes a minute; this is 'tween me and thee; and what's done
before the world's without shame."

He stopped short, his black eyes blazing with honest mirth and kindness,
his breath short, having spoken in such haste.

Her eyes could scarce see him, so full of tears were they; and, standing
on tiptoe, she kissed him upon each cheek.

"'Tis much to get for so little given," she said, with a quiver in her
voice; "yet this price for friendship would be too high to pay to any
save the Seigneur of Rozel."

She hastily turned to the men who had rescued Michel and Buonespoir.
"If I had riches, riches ye should have, brave men of Jersey," she said;
"but I have naught save love and thanks, and my prayers too, if ye will
have them."

"'Tis a man's duty to save his fellow an' he can," cried a gaunt
fisherman, whose daughter was holding to his lips a bowl of conger-eel
soup.

"'Twas a good deed to send us forth to save a priest of Holy Church,"
cried a weazened boat-builder with a giant's arm, as he buried his face
in a cup of sack, and plunged his hand into a fishwife's basket of
limpets.

"Aye, but what means she by kissing and arm-getting with a priest?"
cried a snarling vraic-gatherer.  "'Tis some jest upon Holy Church, or
yon priest is no better than common men but an idle shame."

By this time Michel was among them.  "Priest I am none, but a soldier,"
he said in a loud voice, and told them bluntly the reasons for his
disguise; then, taking a purse from his pocket, thrust into the hands of
his rescuers and their families pieces of silver and gave them brave
words of thanks.

But the Seigneur was not to be outdone in generosity.  His vanity ran
high; he was fain to show Angele what a gorgeous gentleman she had failed
to make her own; and he was in ripe good-humour all round.

"Come, ye shall come, all of ye, to the Manor of Rozel, every man and
woman here.  Ye shall be fed, and fuddled too ye shall be an' ye will;
for honest drink which sends to honest sleep hurts no man.  To my kitchen
with ye all; and you, messieurs"--turning to M. Aubert and De la Fore-
"and you, Mademoiselle, come, know how open is the door and full the
table at my Manor of Rozel--St. Ouen's keeps a beggarly board."




CHAPTER IV

Thus began the friendship of the bragging Seigneur of Rozel for the
three Huguenots, all because he had seen tears in a girl's eyes and
misunderstood them, and because the same girl had kissed him.  His pride
was flattered that they should receive protection from him, and the
flattery became almost a canonising when De Carteret of St. Ouen's
brought him to task for harbouring and comforting the despised Huguenots;
for when De Carteret railed he was envious.  So henceforth Lempriere
played Lord Protector with still more boisterous unction.  His pride knew
no bounds when, three days after the rescue, Sir Hugh Pawlett, the
Governor, answering De la Foret's letter requesting permission to visit
the Comtesse de Montgomery, sent him word to fetch De la Foret to Mont
Orgueil Castle.  Clanking and blowing, he was shown into the great hall
with De la Foret, where waited Sir Hugh and the widow of the renowned
Camisard.  Clanking and purring like an enormous cat, he turned his head
away to the window when De la Foret dropped on his knees and kissed the
hand of the Comtesse, whose eyes were full of tears.  Clanking and
gurgling, he sat to a mighty meal of turbot, eels, lobsters, ormers,
capons, boar's head, brawn, and mustard, swan, curlew, and spiced meats.
This he washed down with bastard, malmsey, and good ale, topped with
almonds, comfits, perfumed cherries with "ipocras," then sprinkled
himself with rose-water and dabbled his face and hands in it.  Filled to
the turret, he lurched to his feet, and drinking to Sir Hugh's toast, 27

"Her sacred Majesty!" he clanked and roared.  "Elizabeth!" as though
upon the field of battle.  He felt the star of De Carteret declining and
Rozel's glory ascending like a comet.  Once set in a course, nothing
could change him.  Other men might err, but once right, the Seigneur of
Rozel was everlasting.

Of late he had made the cause of Michel de la Foret and Angele Aubert
his own.  For this he had been raked upon the coals by De Carteret of St.
Ouen's and his following, who taunted him with the saying: "Save a thief
from hanging and he'll cut your throat."  Not that there was ill feeling
against De la Foret in person.  He had won most hearts by a frank yet
still manner, and his story and love for Angele had touched the women
folk where their hearts were softest.  But the island was not true to
itself or its history if it did not divide itself into factions, headed
by the Seigneurs, and there had been no ground for good division for five
years till De la Foret came.

Short of actual battle, this new strife was the keenest ever known,
for Sir Hugh Pawlett was ranged on the side of the Seigneur of Rozel.
Kinsman of the Comtesse de Montgomery, of Queen Elizabeth's own
Protestant religion, and admiring De la Foret, he had given every
countenance to the Camisard refugee.  He had even besought the Royal
Court of Jersey to grant a pardon to Buonespoir the pirate, on condition
that he should never commit a depredation upon an inhabitant of the
island--this he was to swear to by the little finger of St. Peter.
Should he break his word, he was to be banished the island for ten years,
under penalty of death if he returned.  When the hour had come for
Buonespoir to take the oath, he failed to appear; and the next morning
the Seigneur of St. Ouen's discovered that during the night his cellar
had been raided of two kegs of canary, many flagons of muscadella, pots
of anchovies and boxes of candied "eringo," kept solely for the visit
which the Queen had promised the island.  There was no doubt of the
misdemeanant, for Buonespoir returned to De Carteret from St. Brieuc the
gabardine of one of his retainers, in which he had carried off the stolen
delicacies.

This aggravated the feud between the partisans of St. Ouen's and Rozel,
for Lempriere of Rozel had laughed loudly when he heard of the robbery,
and said "'Tis like St. Ouen's to hoard for a Queen and glut a pirate.
We feed as we get at Rozel, and will feed the Court well too when it
comes, or I'm no butler to Elizabeth."

But trouble was at hand for Michel and for his protector.  The spies of
Catherine de Medici, mother of the King of France, were everywhere.
These had sent word that De la Foret was now attached to the meagre suite
of the widow of the great Camisard Montgomery, near the Castle of Mont
Orgueil.  The Medici, having treacherously slain the chief, became mad
with desire to slay the lieutenant.  She was set to have the man, either
through diplomacy with England, or to end him by assassination through
her spies.  Having determined upon his death, with relentless soul she
pursued the cause as closely as though this exiled soldier were a
powerful enemy at the head of an army in France.

Thus it was that she wrote to Queen Elizabeth, asking that "this arrant
foe of France, this churl, conspirator, and reviler of the Sacraments,
be rendered unto our hands for well-deserved punishment as warning to all
such evil-doers."  She told Elizabeth of De la Foret's arrival in Jersey,
disguised as a priest of the Church of France, and set forth his doings
since landing with the Seigneur of Rozel.  Further she went on to say to
"our sister of England" that "these dark figures of murder and revolt be
a peril to the soft peace of this good realm."

To this, Elizabeth, who had no knowledge of Michel, who desired peace
with France at this time, who had favours to ask of Catherine, and who
in her own realm had fresh reason to fear conspiracy through the Queen of
the Scots and others, replied forthwith that "If this De la Foret falleth
into our hands, and if it were found he had in truth conspired against
France its throne, had he a million lives, not one should remain."
Having despatched this letter, she straightway sent a messenger to Sir
Hugh Pawlett in Jersey, making quest of De la Foret, and commanding that
he should be sent to her in England at once.

When the Queen's messenger arrived at Orgueil Castle, Lempriere chanced
to be with Sir Hugh Pawlett, and the contents of Elizabeth's letter were
made known to him.

At the moment Monsieur of Rozel was munching macaroons and washing them
down with canary.  The Governor's announcement was such a shock that he
choked and coughed, the crumbs flying in all directions; and another pint
of canary must be taken to flush his throat.  Thus cleared for action, he
struck out.

"'Tis St. Ouen's work," he growled.

"'Tis the work of the Medici," said Sir Hugh.  "Read," he added, holding
out the paper.

Now Lempriere of Rozel had a poor eye for reading.  He had wit enough to
wind about the difficulty.

"If I see not the Queen's commands, I've no warrant but Sir Hugh
Pawlett's words, and I'll to London and ask 'fore her Majesty's face if
she wrote them, and why.  I'll tell my tale and speak my mind, I pledge
you, sir."

"You'll offend her Majesty.  Her commands are here."  Pawlett tapped the
letter with his finger.

"I'm butler to the Queen, and she will list to me.  I'll not smirk and
caper like St. Ouen's; I'll bear me like a man not speaking for himself.
I'll speak as Harry her father spoke--straight to the purpose.  .  .  .
No, no, no, I'm not to be wheedled, even by a Pawlett, and you shall not
ask me.  If you want Michel de la Foret, come and take him.  He is in my
house.  But ye must take him, for come he shall not!"

"You will not oppose the Queen's officers?"

"De la Foret is under my roof.  He must be taken.  I will give him up
to no one; and I'll tell my sovereign these things when I see her in her
palace."

"I misdoubt you'll play the bear," said Pawlett, with a dry smile.

"The Queen's tongue is none so tame.  I'll travel by my star, get sweet
or sour."

"Well, well, 'give a man luck, and throw him into the sea,' is the old
proverb.  I'm coming for your friend to-night."

"I'll be waiting with my fingers on the door, sir," said Rozel, with a
grim vanity and an outrageous pride in himself.




CHAPTER V

The Seigneur of Rozel found De la Foret at the house of M. Aubert.  His
face was flushed with hard riding, and perhaps the loving attitude of
Michel and Angele deepened it, for at the garden gate the lovers were
saying adieu.

"You have come for Monsieur de la Foret?" asked Angele anxiously.  Her
quick look at the Seigneur's face had told her there were things amiss.

"There's commands from the Queen.  They're for the ears of De la Foret,"
said the Seigneur.

"I will hear them too," said Angele, her colour going, her bearing
determined.

The Seigneur looked down at her with boyish appreciation, then said to
De la Foret: "Two Queens make claim for you.  The wolfish Catherine
writes to England for her lost Camisard, with much fool's talk about
'dark figures,' and 'conspirators,' 'churls,' and foes of 'soft peace';
and England takes the bait and sends to Sir Hugh Pawlett yonder.  And, in
brief, Monsieur, the Governor is to have you under arrest and send you to
England.  God knows why two Queens make such a pother over a fellow with
naught but a sword and a lass to love him--though, come to think,
'a man's a man if he have but a hose on his head,' as the proverb runs."

De la Foret smiled, then looked grave, as he caught sight of Angele's
face.  "'Tis arrest, then?" he asked.

"'Tis come willy nilly," answered the Seigneur.  "And once they've forced
you from my doors, I'm for England to speak my mind to the Queen.  I can
make interest for her presence--I hold court office," he added with
puffing confidence.

Angele looked up at him with quick tears, yet with a smile on her lips.

"You are going to England for Michel's sake?" she said in a low voice.

"For Michel, or for you, or for mine honour, what matter, so that I go!"
he answered, then added: "there must be haste to Rozel, friend, lest the
Governor take Lempriere's guest like a potato-digger in the fields."

Putting spurs to his horse, he cantered heavily away, not forgetting to
wave a pompous farewell to Angele.  De la Foret was smiling as he turned
to Angele.  She looked wonderingly at him, for she had felt that she must
comfort him, and she looked not for this sudden change in his manner.

"Is prison-going so blithe, then?" she asked, with a little uneasy laugh
which was half a sob.

"It will bring things to a head," he answered.  "After danger and busy
days, to be merely safe, it is scarce the life for Michel de la Foret.
I have my duty to the Comtesse; I have my love for you; but I seem of
little use by contrast with my past.  And yet, and yet," he added, half
sadly, "how futile has been all our fighting, so far as human eye can
see."

"Nothing is futile that is right, Michel," the girl replied.  "Thou hast
done as thy soul answered to God's messages: thou hast fought when thou
couldst, and thou hast sheathed thy blade when there was naught else to
do.  Are not both right?"

He clasped her to his breast; then, holding her from him a little, looked
into her eyes steadily a moment.  "God hath given thee a true heart, and
the true heart hath wisdom," he answered.

"You will not seek escape?  Nor resist the Governor?" she asked eagerly.

"Whither should I go?  My place is here by you, by the Comtesse de
Montgomery.  One day it may be I shall return to France, and to our
cause--"

"If it be God's will."

"If it be God's will."

"Whatever comes, you will love me, Michel?"

"I will love you, whatever comes."

"Listen."  She drew his head down.  "I am no dragweight to thy life?
Thou wouldst not do otherwise if there were no foolish Angele?"

He did not hesitate.  "What is best is.  I might do otherwise if there
were no Angele in my life to pilot my heart, but that were worse for me."

"Thou art the best lover in all the world."

"I hope to make a better husband.  To-morrow is carmine-lettered in my
calendar, if thou sayst thou wilt still have me under the sword of the
Medici."

Her hand pressed her heart suddenly.  "Under the sword, if it be God's
will," she answered.  Then, with a faint smile: "But no, I will not
believe the Queen of England will send thee, one of her own Protestant
faith, to the Medici."

"And thou wilt marry me?"

"When the Queen of England approves thee," she answered, and buried her
face in the hollow of his arm.

An hour later Sir Hugh Pawlett came to the manor-house of Rozel with
two-score men-at-arms.  The Seigneur himself answered the Governor's
knocking, and showed himself in the doorway, with a dozen halberdiers
behind him.

"I have come seeking Michel de la Foret," said the Governor.

"He is my guest."

"I have the Queen's command to take him."

"He is my cherished guest."

"Must I force my way?"

"Is it the Queen's will that blood be shed?"

"The Queen's commands must be obeyed."

"The Queen is a miracle of the world, God save her!  What is the charge
against him?"

"Summon Michel de la Foret, 'gainst whom it lies."

"He is my guest; ye shall have him only by force."  The Governor turned
to his men.  "Force the passage and search the house," he commanded.

The company advanced with levelled pikes, but at a motion from the
Seigneur his men fell back before them, and, making a lane, disclosed
Michel de la Foret at the end of it.  Michel had not approved of
Lempriere's mummery of defence, but he understood from what good spirit
it sprung, and how it flattered the Seigneur's vanity to make show of
resistance.

The Governor greeted De la Foret with a sour smile, read to him the
Queen's writ, and politely begged his company towards Mont Orgueil
Castle.

"I'll fetch other commands from her Majesty, or write me down a pedlar of
St. Ouen's follies," the Seigneur said from his doorway, as the Governor
and De la Foret bade him good-bye and took the road to the Castle.




CHAPTER VI

Michel de la Foret was gone, a prisoner.  From the dusk of the trees by
the little chapel of Rozel, Angele had watched his exit in charge of the
Governor's men.  She had not sought to show her presence: she had seen
him--that was comfort to her heart; and she would not mar the memory of
that last night's farewell by another before these strangers.  She saw
with what quiet Michel bore his arrest, and she said to herself, as the
last halberdier vanished:

"If the Queen do but speak with him, if she but look upon his face and
hear his voice, she must needs deal kindly by him.  My Michel--ah, it is
a face for all men to trust and all women--"

But she sighed and averted her head as though before prying eyes.

The bell of Rozel Chapel broke gently on the evening air; the sound,
softened by the leaves and mellowed by the wood of the great elm-trees,
billowed away till it was lost in faint reverberation in the sea beneath
the cliffs of the Couperon, where a little craft was coming to anchor in
the dead water.

At first the sound of the bell soothed her, softening the thought of the
danger to Michel.  She moved with it towards the sea, the tones of her
grief chiming with it.  Presently, as she went, a priest in cassock and
robes and stole crossed the path in front of her, an acolyte before him
swinging a censer, his voice chanting Latin verses from the service for
the sick, in his hands the sacred elements of the sacrament for the
dying.  The priest was fat and heavy, his voice was lazy, his eyes
expressionless, and his robes were dirty.  The plaintive, peaceful
sense which the sound of the vesper bell had thrown over Angele's sad
reflections passed away, and the thought smote her that, were it not for
such as this black-toothed priest, Michel would not now be on his way to
England, a prisoner.  To her this vesper bell was the symbol of tyranny
and hate.  It was fighting, it was martyrdom, it was exile, it was the
Medici.  All that she had borne, all that her father had borne, the
thought of the home lost, the mother dead before her time, the name
ruined, the heritage dispossessed, the red war of the Camisards, the
rivulets of blood in the streets of Paris and of her loved Rouen, smote
upon her mind, and drove her to her knees in the forest glade, her hands
upon her ears to shut out the sound of the bell.  It came upon her that
the bell had said "Peace!  Peace!" to her mind when there should be no
peace; that it had said "Be patient!" when she should be up and doing;
that it had whispered "Stay!" when she should tread the path her lover
trod, her feet following in his footsteps as his feet had trod in hers.

She pressed her hands tight upon her ears and prayed with a passion and
a fervour she had never known before.  A revelation seemed to come upon
her, and, for the first time, she was a Huguenot to the core.  Hitherto
she had suffered for her religion because it was her mother's broken
life, her father's faith, and because they had suffered, and her lover
had suffered.  Her mind had been convinced, her loyalty had been
unwavering, her words for the great cause had measured well with her
deeds.  But new senses were suddenly born in her, new eyes were given
to her mind, new powers for endurance to her soul.  She saw now as the
martyrs of Meaux had seen; a passionate faith descended on her as it had
descended on them; no longer only patient, she was fain for action.
Tears rained from her eyes.  Her heart burst itself in entreaty and
confession.

"Thy light shall be my light, and Thy will my will, O Lord," she cried at
the last.  "Teach me Thy way, create a right spirit within me.  Give me
boldness without rashness, and hope without vain thinking.  Bear up my
arms, O Lord, and save me when falling.  A poor Samaritan am I.  Give me
the water that shall be a well of water springing up to everlasting life,
that I thirst not in the fever of doing.  Give me the manna of life to
eat that I faint not nor cry out in plague, pestilence, or famine.  Give
me Thy grace, O God, as Thou hast given it to Michel de la Foret, and
guide my feet as I follow him in life and in death, for Christ's sake.
Amen."

As she rose from her knees she heard the evening gun from the castle of
Mont Orgueil, whither Michel was being borne by the Queen's men.  The
vesper bell had stopped.  Through the wood came the salt savour of the
sea on the cool sunset air.  She threw back her head and walked swiftly
towards it, her heart beating hard, her eyes shining with the light of
purpose, her step elastic with the vigour of youth and health.  A
quarter-hour's walking brought her to the cliff of the Couperon.

As she gazed out over the sea, however, a voice in the bay below caught
her ear.  She looked down.  On the deck of the little craft which had
entered the harbour when the vesper bell was ringing stood a man who
waved a hand up towards her, then gave a peculiar call.  She stared with
amazement: it was Buonespoir the pirate.  What did this mean?  Had God
sent this man to her, by his presence to suggest what she should do in
this crisis in her life?  For even as she ran down the shore towards him,
it came to her mind that Buonespoir should take her in his craft to
England.

What to do in England?  Who could tell?  She only knew that a voice
called her to England, to follow the footsteps of Michel de la Foret, who
even this night would be setting forth in the Governor's brigantine for
London.

Buonespoir met her upon the shore, grinning like a boy.

"God save you, lady!" he said.

"What brings you hither, friend?" she asked.

If he had said that a voice had called him hither as one called her to
England, it had not sounded strange; for she was not thinking that this
was one who superstitiously swore by the little finger of St. Peter, but
only that he was the man who had brought her Michel from France, who had
been a faithful friend to her and to her father.

"What brings me hither?" Buonespoir laughed low in his chest.  "Even to
fetch to the Seigneur of Rozel, a friend of mine by every token of
remembrance, a dozen flagons of golden muscadella."

To Angele no suggestion flashed that these flagons of muscadella had
come from the cellar of the Seigneur of St. Ouen's, where they had been
reserved for a certain royal visit.  Nothing was in her mind save the one
thought-that she must follow Michel.

"Will you take me to England?" she asked, putting a hand quickly on his
arm.

He had been laughing hard, picturing to himself what Lempriere of Rozel
would say when he sniffed the flagon of St. Ouen's best wine, and for an
instant he did not take in the question; but he stared at her now as the
laugh slowly subsided through notes of abstraction and her words worked
their way into his brain.

"Will you take me, Buonespoir?" she urged.  "Take you--?" he questioned.

"To England."

"And myself to Tyburn?"

"Nay, to the Queen."

"'Tis the same thing.  Head of Abel!  Elizabeth hath heard of me.  The
Seigneur of St. Ouen's and others have writ me down a pirate to her.  She
would not pardon the muscadella," he added, with another laugh, looking
down where the flagons lay.

"She must pardon more than that," exclaimed Angele, and hastily she told
him of what had happened to Michel de la Foret, and why she would go.

"Thy father, then?" he asked, scowling hard in his attempt to think it
out.

"He must go with me--I will seek him now."

"It must be at once, i' faith, for how long, think you, can I stay here
unharmed?  I was sighted off St. Ouen's shore a few hours agone."

"To-night?" she asked.

"By twelve, when we shall have the moon and the tide," he answered.
"But hold!" he hastily added.  "What, think you, could you and your
father do alone in England?  And with me it were worse than alone.  These
be dark times, when strangers have spies at their heels, and all
travellers are suspect."

"We will trust in God," she answered.

"Have you money?" he questioned--"for London, not for me," he added
hastily.

"Enough," she replied.

"The trust with the money is a weighty matter," he added; "but they
suffice not.  You must have 'fending."

"There is no one," she answered sadly, "no one save--"

"Save the Seigneur of Rozel!" Buonespoir finished the sentence.  "Good.
You to your father, and I to the Seigneur.  If you can fetch your father
by your pot-of-honey tongue, I'll fetch the great Lempriere with
muscadella.  Is't a bargain?"

"In which I gain all," she answered, and again touched his arm with her
finger-tips.

"You shall be aboard here at ten, and I will join you on the stroke of
twelve," he said, and gave a low whistle.

At the signal three men sprang up like magic out of the bowels of the
boat beneath them, and scurried over the side; three as ripe knaves as
ever cheated stocks and gallows, but simple knaves, unlike their master.
Two of them had served with Francis Drake in that good ship of his lying
even now not far from Elizabeth's palace at Greenwich.  The third was a
rogue who had been banished from Jersey for a habitual drunkenness which
only attacked him on land--at sea he was sacredly sober.  His name was
Jean Nicolle.  The names of the other two were Herve Robin and Rouge le
Riche, but their master called them by other names.

"Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego," said Buonespoir in ceremony, and waved
a hand of homage between them and Angele.  "Kiss dirt, and know where
duty lies.  The lady's word on my ship is law till we anchor at the
Queen's Stairs at Greenwich.  So, Heaven help you, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego!" said Buonespoir.

A wave of humour passed over Angele's grave face, for a stranger quartet
never sailed high seas together: one blind of an eye, one game of a leg,
one bald as a bottle and bereft of two front teeth; but Buonespoir was
sound of wind and limb, his small face with the big eyes lost in the
masses of his red hair, and a body like Hercules.  It flashed through
Angele's mind even as she answered the gurgling salutations of the
triumvirate that they had been got together for no gentle summer sailing
in the Channel.  Her conscience smote her that she should use such
churls; but she gave it comfort by the thought that while serving her
they could do naught worse; and her cause was good.  Yet they presented
so bizarre an aspect, their ugliness was so varied and particular, that
she almost laughed.  Buonespoir understood her thoughts, for with a look
of mocking innocence in his great blue eyes he waved a hand again towards
the graceless trio, and said, "For deep-sea fishing."  Then he solemnly
winked at the three.

A moment later Angele was speeding along the shore towards her home on
the farther hillside up the little glen; and within an hour Buonespoir
rolled from the dusk of the trees by the manor-house of Rozel and knocked
at the door.  He carried on his head, as a fishwife carries a tray of
ormers, a basket full of flagons of muscadella; and he did not lower the
basket when he was shown into the room where the Seigneur of Rozel was
sitting before a trencher of spiced veal and a great pot of ale.
Lempriere roared a hearty greeting to the pirate, for he was in a sour
humour because of the taking off of Michel de la Foret; and of all men
this pirate-fellow, who had quips and cranks, and had played tricks on
his cousin of St. Ouen's, was most welcome.

"What's that on your teacup of a head?" he roared again as Buonespoir
grinned pleasure at the greeting.  "Muscadella," said Buonespoir, and
lowered the basket to the table.

Lempriere seized a flagon, drew it forth, looked closely at it, then
burst into laughter, and spluttered: "St. Ouen's muscadella, by the hand
of Rufus!"

Seizing Buonespoir by the shoulders, he forced him down upon a bench at
the table, and pushed the trencher of spiced meat against his chest.
"Eat, my noble lord of the sea and master of the cellar," he gurgled out,
and, tipping the flagon of muscadella, took a long draught.  "God-a-
mercy--but it has saved my life," he gasped in satisfaction as he lay
back in his great chair, and put his feet on the bench whereon Buonespoir
sat.

They raised their flagons and toasted each other, and Lempriere burst
forth into song, in the refrain of which Buonespoir joined boisterously:

              "King Rufus he did hunt the deer,
                 With a hey ho, come and kiss me, Dolly!
               It was the spring-time of the year,
                 Hey ho, Dolly shut her eyes!
               King Rufus was a bully boy,
               He hunted all the day for joy,
               Sweet Dolly she was ever coy:
                 And who would e'er be wise
                 That looked in Dolly's eyes?

               "King Rufus he did have his day,
                 With a hey ho, come and kiss me, Dolly!
               So get ye forth where dun deer play--
                 Hey ho, Dolly comes again!
               The greenwood is the place for me,
               For that is where the dun deer be,
               'Tis where my Dolly comes to me:
                 And who would stay at home,
                 That might with Dolly roam?
               Sing hey ho, come and kiss me, Dolly!"

Lempriere, perspiring with the exertion, mopped his forehead, then lapsed
into a plaintive mood.

"I've had naught but trouble of late," he wheezed.  "Trouble, trouble,
trouble, like gnats on a filly's flank!" and in spluttering words, twice
bracketed in muscadella, he told of Michel de la Foret's arrest, and of
his purpose to go to England if he could get a boat to take him.

"'Tis that same business brings me here," said Buonespoir, and forthwith
told of his meeting with Angele and what was then agreed upon.

"You to go to England!" cried Lempriere amazed.  "They want you for
Tyburn there."

"They want me for the gallows here," said Buonespoir.  Rolling a piece of
spiced meat in his hand, he stuffed it into his mouth and chewed till the
grease came out of his eyes, and took eagerly from a servant a flagon of
malmsey and a dish of ormers.

"Hush, chew thy tongue a minute!" said the Seigneur, suddenly starting
and laying a finger beside his nose.  "Hush!" he said again, and looked
into the flicker of the candle by him with half-shut eyes.

"May I have no rushes for a bed, and die like a rat in a moat, if I don't
get thy pardon too of the Queen, and bring thee back to Jersey, a thorn
in the side of De Carteret for ever!  He'll look upon thee assoilzied by
the Queen, spitting fire in his rage, and no canary or muscadella in his
cellar."

It came not to the mind of either that this expedition would be made at
cost to themselves.  They had not heard of Don Quixote, and their gifts
were not imitative.  They were of a day when men held their lives as
lightly as many men hold their honour now; when championship was as the
breath of life to men's nostrils, and to adventure for what was worth
having or doing in life the only road of reputation.

Buonespoir was as much a champion in his way as Lempriere of Rozel.
They were of like kidney, though so far apart in rank.  Had Lempriere
been born as low and as poor as Buonespoir, he would have been a pirate
too, no doubt; and had Buonespoir been born as high as the Seigneur, he
would have carried himself with the same rough sense of honour, with as
ripe a vanity; have been as naive, as sincere, as true to the real heart
of man untaught in the dissimulation of modesty or reserve.  When they
shook hands across the trencher of spiced veal, it was as man shakes hand
with man, not man with master.

They were about to start upon their journey when there came a knocking at
the door.  On its being opened the bald and toothless Abednego stumbled
in with the word that immediately after Angele and her father came aboard
the Honeyflower some fifty halberdiers suddenly appeared upon the
Couperon.  They had at once set sail, and got away even before the
sailors had reached the shore.  As they had rounded the point, where they
were hid from view, Abednego dropped overboard and swam ashore on the
rising tide, making his way to the manor to warn Buonespoir.  On his way
hither, stealing through the trees, he had passed a half-score of
halberdiers making for the manor, and he had seen others going towards
the shore.

Buonespoir looked to the priming of his pistols, and buckling his belt
tightly about him, turned to the Seigneur and said: "I will take my
chances with Abednego.  Where does she lie--the Honeyflower, Abednego?"

"Off the point called Verclut," answered the little man, who had
travelled with Francis Drake.

"Good; we will make a run for it, flying dot-and-carry-one as we go."

While they had been speaking the Seigneur had been thinking; and now,
even as several figures appeared at a little distance in the trees,
making towards the manor, he said, with a loud laugh:

"No.  'Tis the way of a fool to put his head between the door and the
jamb.  'Tis but a hundred yards to safety.  Follow me--to the sea--
Abednego last.  This way, bullies!"

Without a word all three left the house and walked on in the order
indicated, as De Carteret's halberdiers ran forward threatening.

"Stand!" shouted the sergeant of the halberdiers.  "Stand, or we fire!"

But the three walked straight on unheeding.  When the sergeant of the
men-at-arms recognised the Seigneur, he ordered down the blunderbusses.

"We come for Buonespoir the pirate," said the sergeant.

"Whose warrant?" said the Seigneur, fronting the halberdiers, Buonespoir
and Abednego behind him.  "The Seigneur of St. Ouen's," was the reply.

"My compliments to the Seigneur of St. Ouen's, and tell him that
Buonespoir is my guest," he bellowed, and strode on, the halberdiers
following.  Suddenly the Seigneur swerved towards the chapel and
quickened his footsteps, the others but a step behind.  The sergeant of
the halberdiers was in a quandary.  He longed to shoot, but dared not,
and while he was making up his mind what to do, the Seigneur had reached
the chapel door.  Opening it, he quickly pushed Buonespoir and Abednego
inside, whispering to them, then slammed the door and put his back
against it.

There was another moment's hesitation on the sergeant's part, then a door
at the other end of the chapel was heard to open and shut, and the
Seigneur laughed loudly.  The halberdiers ran round the chapel.  There
stood Buonespoir and Abednego in a narrow roadway, motionless and
unconcerned.  The halberdiers rushed forward.

"Perquage!  Perquage!  Perquage!" shouted Buonespoir, and the bright
moonlight showed him grinning.  For an instant there was deadly
stillness, in which the approaching footsteps of the Seigneur sounded
loud.

"Perquage!" Buonespoir repeated.

"Perquage!  Fall back!" said the Seigneur, and waved off the pikes of
the halberdiers.  "He has sanctuary to the sea."

This narrow road in which the pirates stood was the last of three in the
Isle of Jersey running from churches to the sea, in which a criminal was
safe from arrest by virtue of an old statute.  The other perquages had
been taken away; but this one of Rozel remained, a concession made by
Henry VIII to the father of this Raoul Lempriere.  The privilege had been
used but once in the present Seigneur's day, because the criminal must be
put upon the road from the chapel by the Seigneur himself, and he had
used his privilege modestly.

No man in Jersey but knew the sacredness of this perquage, though it was
ten years since it had been used; and no man, not even the Governor
himself, dare lift his hand to one upon that road.

So it was that Buonespoir and Abednego, two fugitives from justice,
walked quietly to the sea down the perquage, halberdiers, balked of their
prey, prowling on their steps and cursing the Seigneur of Rozel for his
gift of sanctuary: for the Seigneur of St. Ouen's and the Royal Court had
promised each halberdier three shillings and all the ale he could drink
at a sitting, if Buonespoir was brought in alive or dead.

In peace and safety the three boarded the Honeyflower off the point
called Verclut, and set sail for England, just seven hours after Michel
de la Foret had gone his way upon the Channel, a prisoner.




CHAPTER VII

A fortnight later, of a Sunday morning, the Lord Chamberlain of England
was disturbed out of his usual equanimity.  As he was treading the rushes
in the presence-chamber of the Royal Palace at Greenwich, his eye busy in
inspection--for the Queen would soon pass on her way to chapel--his head
nodding right and left to archbishop, bishop, councillors of state,
courtiers, and officers of the crown, he heard a rude noise at the door
leading into the ante-chapel, where the Queen received petitions from the
people.  Hurrying thither in shocked anxiety, he found a curled gentleman
of the guard, resplendent in red velvet and gold chains, in peevish
argument with a boisterous Seigneur of a bronzed good-humoured face, who
urged his entrance to the presence-chamber.

The Lord Chamberlain swept down upon the pair like a flamingo with wings
outspread.  "God's death, what means this turmoil?  Her Majesty comes
hither!" he cried, and scowled upon the intruder, who now stepped back a
little, treading on the toes of a huge sailor with a small head and bushy
red hair and beard.

"Because her Majesty comes I come also," the Seigneur interposed grandly.

"What is your name and quality?"

"Yours first, and I shall know how to answer."

"I am the Lord Chamberlain of England."

"And I, my lord, am Lempriere, Seigneur of Rozel--and butler to the
Queen."

"Where is Rozel?" asked my Lord Chamberlain.

The face of the Seigneur suddenly flushed, his mouth swelled, and then
burst.

"Where is Rozel!" he cried in a voice of rage.  "Where is Rozel!  Have
you heard of Hugh Pawlett," he asked, with a huge contempt--" of Governor
Hugh Pawlett?"  The Lord Chamberlain nodded.  "Then ask his Excellency
when next you see him, Where is Rozel?  But take good counsel and keep
your ignorance from the Queen," he added.  "She has no love for stupids."
"You say you are butler to the Queen?  Whence came your commission?"
said the Lord Chamberlain, smiling now; for Lempriere's words and ways
were of some simple world where odd folk lived, and his boyish vanity
disarmed anger.

"By royal warrant and heritage.  And of all of the Jersey Isle, I only
may have dove-totes, which is the everlasting thorn in the side of De
Carteret of St. Ouen's.  Now will you let me in, my lord?" he said, all
in a breath.

At a stir behind him the Lord Chamberlain turned, and with a horrified
exclamation hurried away, for the procession from the Queen's apartments
had already entered the presence-chamber: gentlemen, barons, earls,
knights of the garter, in brave attire, with bare heads and sumptuous
calves.  The Lord Chamberlain had scarce got to his place when the
Chancellor, bearing the seals in a red silk purse, entered, flanked by
two gorgeous folk with the royal sceptre and the sword of state in a red
scabbard, all flourished with fleur-de-lis.  Moving in and out among them
all was the Queen's fool, who jested and shook his bells under the noses
of the highest.

It was an event of which the Seigneur of Rozel told to his dying day:
that he entered the presence-chamber of the Royal Palace of Greenwich at
the same instant as the Queen--"Rozel at one end, Elizabeth at the other,
and all the world at gaze," he was wont to say with loud guffaws.  But
what he spoke of afterwards with preposterous ease and pride was neither
pride nor ease at the moment; for the Queen's eyes fell on him as he
shoved past the gentlemen who kept the door.  For an instant she stood
still, regarding him intently, then turned quickly to the Lord
Chamberlain in inquiry, and with sharp reproof too in her look.  The Lord
Chamberlain fell on his knee and with low uncertain voice explained the
incident.

Elizabeth again cast her eyes towards Lempriere, and the Court, following
her example, scrutinised the Seigneur in varied styles of insolence or
curiosity.  Lempriere drew himself up with a slashing attempt at
composure, but ended by flaming from head to foot, his face shining like
a cock's comb, the perspiration standing out like beads upon his
forehead, his eyes gone blind with confusion.  That was but for a moment,
however, and then, Elizabeth's look being slowly withdrawn from him, a
curious smile came to her lips, and she said to the Lord Chamberlain:
"Let the gentleman remain."

The Queen's fool tripped forward and tapped the Lord Chamberlain on the
shoulder.  "Let the gentleman remain, gossip, and see you that remaining
he goeth not like a fly with his feet in the porridge."  With a flippant
step before the Seigneur, he shook his bells at him.  "Thou shalt stay,
Nuncio, and staying speak the truth.  So doing you shall be as noted as a
comet with three tails.  You shall prove that man was made in God's
image.  So lift thy head and sneeze--sneezing is the fashion here; but
see that thou sneeze not thy head off as they do in Tartary.  'Tis worth
remembrance."

Rozel's self-importance and pride had returned.  The blood came back
to his heart, and he threw out his chest grandly; he even turned to
Buonespoir, whose great figure might be seen beyond the door, and winked
at him.  For a moment he had time to note the doings of the Queen and her
courtiers with wide-eyed curiosity.  He saw the Earl of Leicester,
exquisite, haughty, gallant, fall upon his knee, and Elizabeth slowly
pull off her glove and with a none too gracious look give him her hand
to kiss, the only favour of the kind granted that day.  He saw Cecil, her
Minister, introduce a foreign noble, who presented his letters.  He heard
the Queen speak in a half-dozen different languages, to people of various
lands, and he was smitten with amazement.

But as Elizabeth came slowly down the hall, her white silk gown fronted
with great pearls flashing back the light, a marchioness bearing the
train, the crown on her head glittering as she turned from right to left,
her wonderful collar of jewels sparkling on her uncovered bosom, suddenly
the mantle of black, silver-shotted silk upon her shoulders became to
Lempriere's heated senses a judge's robe, and Elizabeth the august judge
of the world.  His eyes blinded again, for it was as if she was bearing
down upon him.  Certainly she was looking at him now, scarce heeding the
courtiers who fell to their knees on either side as she came on.  The red
doublets of the fifty Gentlemen Pensioners--all men of noble families
proud to do this humble yet distinguished service--with battle-axes, on
either side of her, seemed to Lempriere on the instant like an army with
banners threatening him.  From the ante-chapel behind him came the cry of
the faithful subjects who, as the gentleman-at-arms fell back from the
doorway, had but just caught a glimpse of her Majesty--"Long live
Elizabeth!"

It seemed to Lempriere that the Gentlemen Pensioners must beat him down
as they passed, yet he stood riveted to the spot; and indeed it was true
that he was almost in the path of her Majesty.  He was aware that two
gentlemen touched him on the shoulder and bade him retire; but the Queen
motioned to them to desist.  So, with the eyes of the whole court on him
again, and Elizabeth's calm curious gaze fixed, as it were, on his
forehead, he stood still till the flaming Gentlemen Pensioners were
within a few feet of him, and the battle-axes were almost over his head.

The great braggart was no better now than a wisp of grass in the wind,
and it was more than homage that bent him to his knees as the Queen
looked him full in the eyes.  There was a moment's absolute silence, and
then she said, with cold condescension:

"By what privilege do you seek our presence?"

"I am Raoul Lempriere, Seigneur of Rozel, your high Majesty," said the
choking voice of the Jerseyman.  The Queen raised her eyebrows.  "The man
seems French.  You come from France?"

Lempriere flushed to his hair--the Queen did not know him, then!  "From
Jersey Isle, your sacred Majesty."

"Jersey Isle is dear to us.  And what is your warrant here?"

"I am butler to your Majesty, by your gracious Majesty's patent, and I
alone may have dove-cotes in the isle; and I only may have the perquage-
on your Majesty's patent.  It is not even held by De Carteret of St.
Ouen's."

The Queen smiled as she had not smiled since she entered the presence-
chamber.  "God preserve us," she said--"that I should not have recognised
you!  It is, of course, our faithful Lempriere of Rozel."

The blood came back to the Seigneur's heart, but he did not dare look up
yet, and he did not see that Elizabeth was in rare mirth at his words;
and though she had no ken or memory of him, she read his nature and was
mindful to humour him.  Beckoning Leicester to her side, she said a few
words in an undertone, to which he replied with a smile more sour than
sweet.

"Rise, Monsieur of Rozel," she said.

The Seigneur stood up, and met her gaze faintly.  "And so, proud
Seigneur, you must needs flout e'en our Lord Chamberlain, in the name of
our butler with three dove-cotes and the perquage.  In sooth thy office
must not be set at naught lightly--not when it is flanked by the
perquage.  By my father's doublet, but that frieze jerkin is well cut;
it suits thy figure well--I would that my Lord Leicester here had such a
tailor.  But this perquage--I doubt not there are those here at Court who
are most ignorant of its force and moment.  My Lord Chamberlain, my Lord
Leicester, Cecil here--confusion sits in their faces.  The perquage,
which my father's patent approved, has served us well, I doubt not, is a
comfort to our realm and a dignity befitting the wearer of that frieze
jerkin.  Speak to their better understanding, Monsieur of Rozel."

"Speak, Nuncio, and you shall have comforts, and be given in marriage,
multiple or singular, even as I," said the fool, and touched him on the
breast with his bells.

Lempriere had recovered his heart, and now was set full sail in the
course he had charted for himself in Jersey.  In large words and larger
manner he explained most innocently the sacred privilege of perquage.
"And how often have you used the right, friend?" asked Elizabeth.

"But once in ten years, your noble Majesty."  "When last?"

"But yesterday a week, your universal Majesty."  Elizabeth raised her
eyebrows.  "Who was the criminal, what the occasion?"

"The criminal was one Buonespoir, the occasion our coming hither to wait
upon the Queen of England and our Lady of Normandy, for such is your
well-born Majesty to your loyal Jersiais."  And thereupon he plunged into
an impeachment of De Carteret of St. Ouen's, and stumbled through a blunt
broken story of the wrongs and the sorrows of Michel and Angele and the
doings of Buonespoir in their behalf.

Elizabeth frowned and interrupted him.  "I have heard of this Buonespoir,
Monsieur, through others than the Seigneur of St. Ouen's.  He is an
unlikely squire of dames.  There's a hill in my kingdom has long bided
his coming.  Where waits the rascal now?"

"In the ante-chapel, your Majesty."

"By the rood!" said Elizabeth in sudden amazement.  "In my ante-chapel,
forsooth!"

She looked beyond the doorway and saw the great red-topped figure of
Buonespoir, his good-natured, fearless fare, his shock of hair, his clear
blue eye--he was not thirty feet away.

"He comes to crave pardon for his rank offences, your benignant Majesty,"
said Lempriere.

The humour of the thing rushed upon the Queen.  Never before were two
such naive folk at court.  There was not a hair of duplicity in the heads
of the two, and she judged them well in her mind.

"I will see you stand together--you and your henchman," she said to
Rozel, and moved on to the antechapel, the Court following.  Standing
still just inside the doorway, she motioned Buonespoir to come near.  The
pirate, unconfused, undismayed, with his wide blue asking eyes, came
forward and dropped upon his knees.  Elizabeth motioned Lempriere to
stand a little apart.

Thereupon she set a few questions to Buonespoir, whose replies,
truthfully given, showed that he had no real estimate of his crimes, and
was indifferent to what might be their penalties.  He had no moral sense
on the one hand, on the other, no fear.

Suddenly she turned to Lempriere again.  "You came, then, to speak for
this Michel de la Foret, the exile--?"

"And for the demoiselle Angele Aubert, who loves him, your Majesty."

"I sent for this gentleman exile a fortnight ago--" She turned towards
Leicester inquiringly.

"I have the papers here, your Majesty," said Leicester, and gave a packet
over.

"And where have you De la Foret?" said Elizabeth.  "In durance, your
Majesty."

"When came he hither?"

"Three days gone," answered Leicester, a little gloomily, for there was
acerbity in Elizabeth's voice.  Elizabeth seemed about to speak, then
dropped her eyes upon the papers, and glanced hastily at their contents.

"You will have this Michel de la Foret brought to my presence as fast as
horse can bring him, my Lord," she said to Leicester.  "This rascal of
the sea--Buonespoir--you will have safe bestowed till I recall his
existence again," she said to a captain of men-at-arms; "and you,
Monsieur of Rozel, since you are my butler, will get you to my dining-
room, and do your duty--the office is not all perquisites," she added
smoothly.  She was about to move on, when a thought seemed to strike her,
and she added, "This Mademoiselle and her father whom you brought hither-
where are they?"

"They are even within the palace grounds, your imperial Majesty,"
answered Lempriere.

"You will summon them when I bid you," she said to the Seigneur; "and you
shall see that they have comforts and housing as befits their station,"
she added to the Lord Chamberlain.

So did Elizabeth, out of a whimsical humour, set the highest in the land
to attend upon unknown, unconsidered exiles.





ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Boldness without rashness, and hope without vain thinking
Nothing is futile that is right
Religion to him was a dull recreation invented chiefly for women






MICHEL AND ANGELE

[A Ladder of Swords]

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 2.



CHAPTER VIII

Five minutes later, Lempriere of Rozel, as butler to the Queen, saw a
sight of which he told to his dying day.  When, after varied troubles
hereafter set down, he went back to Jersey, he made a speech before the
Royal Court, in which he told what chanced while Elizabeth was at chapel.

"There stood I, butler to the Queen," he said, with a large gesture,
"but what knew I of butler's duties at Greenwich Palace!  Her Majesty had
given me an office where all the work was done for me.  Odds life, but
when I saw the Gentleman of the Rod and his fellow get down on their
knees to lay the cloth upon the table, as though it was an altar at
Jerusalem, I thought it time to say my prayers.  There was naught but
kneeling and retiring.  Now it was the salt-cellar, the plate, and the
bread; then it was a Duke's Daughter--a noble soul as ever lived--with a
tasting-knife, as beautiful as a rose; then another lady enters who
glares at me, and gets to her knees as does the other.  Three times up
and down, and then one rubs the plate with bread and salt, as solemn as
St. Ouen's when he says prayers in the Royal Court.  Gentles, that was a
day for Jersey.  For there stood I as master of all, the Queen's butler,
and the greatest ladies of the land doing my will--though it was all
Persian mystery to me, save when the kettle-drums began to beat and the
trumpet to blow, and in walk bareheaded the Yeomen of the Guard, all
scarlet, with a golden rose on their backs, bringing in a course of
twenty-four gold dishes; and I, as Queen's butler, receiving them.

"Then it was I opened my mouth amazed at the endless dishes filled with
niceties of earth, and the Duke's Daughter pops onto my tongue a mouthful
of the first dish brought, and then does the same to every Yeoman of the
Guard that carried a dish--that her notorious Majesty be safe against the
hand of poisoners.  There was I, fed by a Duke's Daughter; and thus was
Jersey honoured; and the Duke's Daughter whispers to me, as a dozen other
unmarried ladies enter, 'The Queen liked not the cut of your frieze
jerkin better than do I, Seigneur.'  With that she joins the others, and
they all kneel down and rise up again, and lifting the meat from the
table, bear it into the Queen's private chamber.

"When they return, and the Yeomen of the Guard go forth, I am left alone
with these ladies, and there stand with twelve pair of eyes upon me,
little knowing what to do.  There was laughter in the faces of some, and
looks less taking in the eyes of others; for my Lord Leicester was to
have done the duty I was set to do that day, and he the greatest gallant
of the kingdom, as all the world knows.  What they said among themselves
I know not, but I heard Leicester's name, and I guessed that they were
mostly in the pay of his soft words.  But the Duke's Daughter was on my
side, as was proved betimes when Leicester made trouble for us who went
from Jersey to plead the cause of injured folk.  Of the Earl's enmity to
me--a foolish spite of a great nobleman against a Norman-Jersey
gentleman--and of how it injured others for the moment, you all know; but
we had him by the heels before the end of it, great earl and favourite as
he was."

In the same speech Lempriere told of his audience with the Queen, even as
she sat at dinner, and of what she said to him; but since his words give
but a partial picture of events, the relation must not be his.

When the Queen returned from chapel to her apartments, Lempriere was
called by an attendant, and he stood behind the Queen's chair until she
summoned him to face her.  Then, having finished her meal, and dipped her
fingers in a bowl of rose-water, she took up the papers Leicester had
given her--the Duke's Daughter had read them aloud as she ate--and said:

"Now, my good Seigneur of Rozel, answer me these few questions: First,
what concern is it of yours whether this Michel de la Foret be sent back
to France, or die here in England?"

"I helped to save his life at sea--one good turn deserves another, your
high-born Majesty."

The Queen looked sharply at him, then burst out laughing.

"God's life, but here's a bull making epigrams!" she said.  Then her
humour changed.  "See you, my butler of Rozel, you shall speak the truth,
or I'll have you where that jerkin will fit you not so well a month
hence.  Plain answers I will have to plain questions, or De Carteret of
St. Ouen's shall have his will of you and your precious pirate.  So bear
yourself as you would save your head and your honours."

Lempriere of Rozel never had a better moment than when he met the Queen
of England's threats with faultless intrepidity.  "I am concerned about
my head, but more about my honours, and most about my honour," he
replied.  "My head is my own, my honours are my family's, for which I
would give my head when needed; and my honour defends both until both are
naught--and all are in the service of my Queen."

Smiling, Elizabeth suddenly leaned forward, and, with a glance of
satisfaction towards the Duke's Daughter, who was present, said:

"I had not thought to find so much logic behind your rampant skull," she
said.  "You've spoken well, Rozel, and you shall speak by the book to the
end, if you will save your friends.  What concern is it of yours whether
Michel de la Foret live or die?"

"It is a concern of one whom I've sworn to befriend, and that is my
concern, your ineffable Majesty."  "Who is the friend?"

"Mademoiselle Aubert."

"The betrothed of this Michel de la Foret?"

"Even so, your exalted Majesty.  But I made sure De la Foret was dead
when I asked her to be my wife."

"Lord, Lord, Lord, hear this vast infant, this hulking baby of a
Seigneur, this primeval innocence!  Listen to him, cousin," said the
Queen, turning again to the Duke's Daughter.  "Was ever the like of it in
any kingdom of this earth?  He chooses a penniless exile--he, a butler to
the Queen, with three dove-cotes and the perquage--and a Huguenot withal.
He is refused; then comes the absent lover over sea, to shipwreck; and
our Seigneur rescues him, 'fends him; and when yon master exile is in
peril, defies his Queen's commands"--she tapped the papers lying beside
her on the table--"then comes to England with the lady to plead the case
before his outraged sovereign, with an outlawed buccaneer for comrade and
lieutenant.  There is the case, is't not?"

"I swore to be her friend," answered Lempriere stubbornly, "and I have
done according to my word."

"There's not another nobleman in my kingdom who would not have thought
twice about the matter, with the lady aboard his ship on the high seas-
'tis a miraculous chivalry, cousin," she added to the Duke's Daughter,
who bowed, settled herself again on her velvet cushion, and looked out of
the corner of her eyes at Lempriere.

"You opposed Sir Hugh Pawlett's officers who went to arrest this De la
Foret," continued Elizabeth.  "Call you that serving your Queen?  Pawlett
had our commands."

"I opposed them but in form, that the matter might the more surely be
brought to your Majesty's knowledge."

"It might easily have brought you to the Tower, man."

"I had faith that your Majesty would do right in this, as in all else.
So I came hither to tell the whole story to your judicial Majesty."

"Our thanks for your certificate of character," said the Queen, with
amused irony.  "What is your wish?  Make your words few and plain."

"I desire before all that Michel de la Foret shall not be returned to the
Medici, most radiant Majesty."

"That's plain.  But there are weighty matters 'twixt France and England,
and De la Foret may turn the scale one way or another.  What follows,
beggar of Rozel?"

"That Mademoiselle Aubert and her father may live without let or
hindrance in Jersey."

"That you may eat sour grapes ad eternam?  Next?"

"That Buonespoir be pardoned all offences and let live in Jersey on
pledge that he sin no more, not even to raid St. Ouen's cellars of the
muscadella reserved for your generous Majesty."

There was such humour in Lempriere's look as he spoke of the muscadella
that the Queen questioned him closely upon Buonespoir's raid; and so
infectious was his mirth, as he told the tale, that Elizabeth, though she
stamped her foot in assumed impatience, smiled also.

"You shall have your Buonespoir, Seigneur," she said; "but for his future
you shall answer as well as he."

"For what he does in Jersey Isle, your commiserate Majesty?"

"For crime elsewhere, if he be caught, he shall march to Tyburn, friend,"
she answered.  Then she hurriedly added: "Straightway go and bring
Mademoiselle and her father hither.  Orders are given for their disposal.
And to-morrow at this hour you shall wait upon me in their company.  I
thank you for your services as butler this day, Monsieur of Rozel.  You
do your office rarely."

As the Seigneur left Elizabeth's apartments, he met the Earl of Leicester
hurrying thither, preceded by the Queen's messenger.  Leicester stopped
and said, with a slow malicious smile: "Farming is good, then--you have
fine crops this year on your holding?"

The point escaped Lempriere at first, for the favourite's look was all
innocence, and he replied: "You are mistook, my lord.  You will remember
I was in the presence-chamber an hour ago, my lord.  I am Lempriere,
Seigneur of Rozel, butler to her Majesty."

"But are you, then?  I thought you were a farmer and raised cabbages."
Smiling, Leicester passed on.

For a moment the Seigneur stood pondering the Earl's words and angrily
wondering at his obtuseness.  Then suddenly he knew he had been mocked,
and he turned and ran after his enemy; but Leicester had vanished into
the Queen's apartments.

The Queen's fool was standing near, seemingly engaged in the light
occupation of catching imaginary flies, buzzing with his motions.  As
Leicester disappeared he looked from under his arm at Lempriere.  "If a
bird will not stop for the salt to its tail, then the salt is damned,
Nuncio; and you must cry David!  and get thee to the quarry."

Lempriere stared at him swelling with rage; but the quaint smiling of the
fool conquered him, and instead of turning on his heel, he spread himself
like a Colossus and looked down in grandeur.  "And wherefore cry David!
and get quarrying?" he asked.  "Come, what sense is there in thy words,
when I am wroth with yonder nobleman?"

"Oh, Nuncio, Nuncio, thou art a child of innocence and without history.
The salt held not the bird for the net of thy anger, Nuncio; so it is
meet that other ways be found.  David the ancient put a stone in a sling
and Goliath laid him down like an egg in a nest--therefore, Nuncio, get
thee to the quarry.  Obligato, which is to say Leicester yonder, hath no
tail--the devil cut it off and wears it himself.  So let salt be damned,
and go sling thy stone!"

Lempriere was good-humoured again.  He fumbled in his purse and brought
forth a gold-piece.  "Fool, thou hast spoken like a man born sensible and
infinite.  I understand thee like a book.  Thou hast not folly and thou
shalt not be answered as if thou wast a fool.  But in terms of gold shalt
thou have reply."  He put the gold-piece in the fool's hand and slapped
him on the shoulder.

"Why now, Nuncio," answered the other, "it is clear that there is a fool
at Court, for is it not written that a fool and his money are soon
parted?  And this gold-piece is still hot with running 'tween thee and
me."

Lempriere roared.  "Why, then, for thy hit thou shalt have another gold-
piece, gossip.  But see"--his voice lowered--"know you where is my
friend, Buonespoir, the pirate?  Know you where he is in durance?"

"As I know marrow in a bone I know where he hides, Nuncio, so come with
me," answered the fool.

"If De Carteret had but thy sense, we could live at peace in Jersey,"
rejoined Lempriere, and strode ponderously after the light-footed fool
who capered forth singing:

              "Come hither, O come hither,
                 There's a bride upon her bed;
               They have strewn her o'er with roses,
                 There are roses 'neath her head:
               Life is love and tears and laughter,
                 But the laughter it is dead
               Sing the way to the Valley, to the Valley!
                 Hey, but the roses they are red!"




CHAPTER IX

The next day at noon, as her Majesty had advised the Seigneur, De la
Foret was ushered into the presence.  The Queen's eye quickened as she
saw him, and she remarked with secret pleasure the figure and bearing of
this young captain of the Huguenots.  She loved physical grace and
prowess with a full heart.  The day had almost passed when she would
measure all men against Leicester in his favour; and he, knowing this
clearly now, saw with haughty anxiety the gradual passing of his power,
and clutched futilely at the vanishing substance.  Thus it was that he
now spent his strength in getting his way with the Queen in little
things.  She had been so long used to take his counsel--in some part wise
and skilful--that when she at length did without it, or followed her own
mind, it became a fever with him to let no chance pass for serving his
own will by persuading her out of hers.  This was why he had spent an
hour the day before in sadly yet vaguely reproaching her for the slight
she put upon him in the presence-chamber by her frown; and another in
urging her to come to terms with Catherine de Medici in this small
affair--since the Frenchwoman had set her revengeful heart upon it--that
larger matters might be settled to the gain of England.  It was not so
much that he had reason to destroy De la Foret, as that he saw that the
Queen was disposed to deal friendly by him and protect him.  He did not
see the danger of rousing in the Queen the same unreasoning tenaciousness
of will upon just such lesser things as might well be left to her
advisers.  In spite of which he almost succeeded, this very day, in
regaining, for a time at least, the ground he had lost with her.  He had
never been so adroit, so brilliant, so witty, so insinuating; and he left
her with the feeling that if he had his way concerning De la Foret--a
mere stubborn whim, with no fair reason behind it--his influence would
be again securely set.  The sense of crisis was on him.

On Michel de la Foret entering the presence the Queen's attention had
become riveted.  She felt in him a spirit of mastery, yet of unselfish
purpose.  Here was one, she thought, who might well be in her household,
or leading a regiment of her troops.  The clear fresh face, curling hair,
direct look, quiet energy, and air of nobility--this sort of man could
only be begotten of a great cause; he were not possible in idle or
prosperous times.

Elizabeth looked him up and down, then affected surprise.  "Monsieur de
la Foret," she said, "I do not recognise you in this attire"--glancing
towards his dress.

De la Foret bowed, and Elizabeth continued, looking at a paper in her
hand: "You landed on our shores of Jersey in the robes of a priest of
France.  The passport for a priest of France was found upon your person
when our officers in Jersey made search of you.  Which is yourself--
Michel de la Foret, soldier, or a priest of France?"

De la Foret replied gravely that he was a soldier, and that the priestly
dress had been but a disguise.

"In which papist attire, methinks, Michel de la Foret, soldier and
Huguenot, must have been ill at ease--the eagle with the vulture's wing.
What say you, Monsieur?"

"That vulture's wing hath carried me to a safe dove-cote, your gracious
Majesty," he answered, with a low obeisance.

"I'm none so sure of that, Monsieur," was Elizabeth's answer, and
she glanced quizzically at Leicester, who made a gesture of annoyance.
"Our cousin France makes you to us a dark intriguer and conspirator, a
dangerous weed in our good garden of England, a 'troublous, treacherous
violence'--such are you called, Monsieur."

"I am in your high Majesty's power," he answered, "to do with me as it
seemeth best.  If your Majesty wills it that I be returned to France,
I pray you set me upon its coast as I came from it, a fugitive.  Thence
will I try to find my way to the army and the poor stricken people of
whom I was.  I pray for that only, and not to be given to the red hand of
the Medici."

"Red hand--by my faith, but you are bold, Monsieur!"

Leicester tapped his foot upon the floor impatiently, then caught the
Queen's eye, and gave her a meaning look.

De la Foret saw the look and knew his enemy, but he did not quail.  "Bold
only by your high Majesty's faith, indeed," he answered the Queen, with
harmless guile.

Elizabeth smiled.  She loved such flattering speech from a strong man.
It touched a chord in her deeper than that under Leicester's finger.
Leicester's impatience only made her more self-willed on the instant.

"You speak with the trumpet note, Monsieur," she said to De la Foret.
"We will prove you.  You shall have a company in my Lord Leicester's army
here, and we will send you upon some service worthy of your fame."

"I crave your Majesty's pardon, but I cannot do it," was De la Foret's
instant reply.  "I have sworn that I will lift my sword in one cause
only, and to that I must stand.  And more--the widow of my dead chief,
Gabriel de Montgomery, is set down in this land unsheltered and alone.
I have sworn to one who loves her, and for my dead chief's sake, that I
will serve her and be near her until better days be come and she may
return in quietness to France.  In exile we few stricken folk must stand
together, your august Majesty."

Elizabeth's eye flashed up.  She was impatient of refusal of her favour.
She was also a woman, and that De la Foret should flaunt his devotion to
another woman was little to her liking.  The woman in her, which had
never been blessed with a noble love, was roused.  The sourness of a
childless, uncompanionable life was stronger for the moment than her
strong mind and sense.

"Monsieur has sworn this, and Monsieur has sworn that," she said
petulantly--" and to one who loveth a lady, and for a cause--tut, tut,
tut!--"

Suddenly a kind of intriguing laugh leaped into her eye, and she turned
to Leicester and whispered in his ear.  Leicester frowned, then smiled,
and glanced up and down De la Foret's figure impertinently.

"See, Monsieur de la Foret," she added; "since you will not fight, you
shall preach.  A priest you came into my kingdom, and a priest you shall
remain; but you shall preach good English doctrine and no Popish folly."

De la Foret started, then composed himself, and before he had time to
reply, Elizabeth continued: "Partly for your own sake am I thus gracious;
for as a preacher of the Word I have not need to give you up, according
to agreement with our brother of France.  As a rebel and conspirator I
were bound to do so, unless you were an officer of my army.  The Seigneur
of Rozel has spoken for you, and the Comtesse de Montgomery has written a
pleading letter.  Also I have from another source a tearful prayer--the
ink is scarce dry upon it--which has been of service to you.  But I
myself have chosen this way of escape for you.  Prove yourself worthy,
and all may be well--but prove yourself you shall.  You have prepared
your own brine, Monsieur; in it you shall pickle."

She smiled a sour smile, for she was piqued, and added: "Do you think I
will have you here squiring of distressed dames, save as a priest?  You
shall hence to Madame of Montgomery as her faithful chaplain, once I have
heard you preach and know your doctrine."

Leicester almost laughed outright in the young man's face now, for he had
no thought that De la Foret would accept, and refusal meant the exile's
doom.

It seemed fantastic that this noble gentleman, this very type of the
perfect soldier, with the brown face of a picaroon and an athletic valour
of body, should become a preacher even in necessity.

Elizabeth, seeing De la Foret's dumb amazement and anxiety, spoke up
sharply: "Do this, or get you hence to the Medici, and Madame of
Montgomery shall mourn her protector, and Mademoiselle your mistress
of the vermilion cheek, shall have one lover the less; which, methinks,
our Seigneur of Rozel would thank me for."

De la Foret started, his lips pressed firmly together in effort of
restraint.  There seemed little the Queen did not know concerning him;
and reference to Angele roused him to sharp solicitude.

"Well, well?" asked Elizabeth impatiently, then made a motion to
Leicester, and he, going to the door, bade some one to enter.

There stepped inside the Seigneur of Rozel, who made a lumbering
obeisance, then got to his knees before the Queen.

"You have brought the lady safely--with her father?" she asked.

Lempriere, puzzled, looked inquiringly at the Queen, then replied: "Both
are safe without, your infinite Majesty."

De la Foret's face grew pale.  He knew now for the first time that Angele
and her father were in England, and he looked Lempriere suspiciously in
the eyes; but the swaggering Seigneur met his look frankly, and bowed
with ponderous and genial gravity.

Now De la Foret spoke.  "Your high Majesty," said he, "if I may ask
Mademoiselle Aubert one question in your presence--"

"Your answer now; the lady in due season," interposed the Queen.

"She was betrothed to a soldier, she may resent a priest," said De la
Foret, with a touch of humour, for he saw the better way was to take the
matter with some outward ease.

Elizabeth smiled.  "It is the custom of her sex to have a fondness for
both," she answered, with an acid smile.  "But your answer?"

De la Foret's face became exceeding grave.  Bowing his head, he said:
"My sword has spoken freely for the Cause; God forbid that my tongue
should not speak also.  I will do your Majesty's behest."

The jesting word that was upon the royal lips came not forth, for De la
Foret's face was that of a man who had determined a great thing, and
Elizabeth was one who had a heart for high deeds.  "The man is brave
indeed," she said under her breath, and, turning to the dumfounded
Seigneur, bade him bring in Mademoiselle Aubert.

A moment later Angele entered, came a few steps forward, made obeisance,
and stood still.  She showed no trepidation, but looked before her
steadily.  She knew not what was to be required of her, she was a
stranger in a strange land; but persecution and exile had gone far
to strengthen her spirit and greaten her composure.

Elizabeth gazed at the girl coldly and critically.  To women she was not
over-amiable; but as she looked at the young Huguenot maid, of this calm
bearing, warm of colour, clear of eye, and purposeful of face, some thing
kindled in her.  Most like it was that love for a cause, which was more
to be encouraged by her than any woman's love for a man, which as she
grew older inspired her with aversion, as talk of marriage brought
cynical allusions to her lips.

"I have your letter and its protests and its pleadings.  There were fine
words and adjurations--are you so religious, then?" she asked brusquely.

"I am a Huguenot, your noble Majesty," answered the girl, as though that
answered all.

"How is it, then, you are betrothed to a roistering soldier?" asked the
Queen.

"Some must pray for Christ's sake, and some must fight, your most
christian Majesty," answered the girl.  "Some must do both," rejoined the
Queen, in a kinder voice, for the pure spirit of the girl worked upon
her.  "I am told that Monsieur de la Foret fights fairly.  If he can pray
as well, methinks he shall have safety in our kingdom, and ye shall all
have peace.  On Trinity Sunday you shall preach in my chapel, Monsieur de
la Foret, and thereafter you shall know your fate."

She rose.  "My Lord," she said to Leicester, on whose face gloom had
settled, "you will tell the Lord Chamberlain that Monsieur de la Foret's
durance must be made comfortable in the west tower of my palace till
chapel-going of Trinity Day.  I will send him for his comfort and
instruction some sermons of Latimer."

She stepped down from the dais.  "You will come with me, mistress," she
said to Angele, and reached out her hand.

Angele fell on her knees and kissed it, tears falling down her cheek,
then rose and followed the Queen from the chamber.  She greatly desired
to look backward towards De la Foret, but some good angel bade her not.
She realised that to offend the Queen at this moment might ruin all; and
Elizabeth herself was little like to offer chance for farewell and love-
tokens.

So it was that, with bowed head, Angele left the room with the Queen of
England, leaving Lempriere and De la Foret gazing at each other, the one
bewildered, the other lost in painful reverie, and Leicester smiling
maliciously at them both.




CHAPTER X

Every man, if you bring him to the right point, if you touch him in the
corner where he is most sensitive, where he most lives, as it were; if
you prick his nerves with a needle of suggestion where all his passions,
ambitions and sentiments are at white heat, will readily throw away the
whole game of life in some mad act out of harmony with all he ever did.
It matters little whether the needle prick him by accident or blunder or
design, he will burst all bounds, and establish again the old truth that
each of us will prove himself a fool given perfect opportunity.  Nor need
the occasion of this revolution be a great one; the most trivial event
may produce the great fire which burns up wisdom, prudence and habit.

The Earl of Leicester, so long counted astute, clearheaded, and well-
governed, had been suddenly foisted out of balance, shaken from his
imperious composure, tortured out of an assumed and persistent urbanity,
by the presence in Greenwich Palace of a Huguenot exile of no seeming
importance, save what the Medici grimly gave him by desiring his head.
It appeared absurd that the great Leicester, whose nearness to the throne
had made him the most feared, most notable, and, by virtue of his
opportunities, the most dramatic figure in England, should have sleepless
nights by reason of a fugitive like Michel de la Foret.  On the surface
it was preposterous that he should see in the Queen's offer of service to
the refugee evidence that she was set to grant him special favours; it
was equally absurd that her offer of safety to him on pledge of his
turning preacher should seem proof that she meant to have him near her.
Elizabeth had left the presence-chamber without so much as a glance at
him, though she had turned and looked graciously at the stranger.  He had
hastily followed her, and thereafter impatiently awaited a summons which
never came, though he had sent a message that his hours were at her
Majesty's disposal.  Waiting, he saw Angele's father escorted from the
palace by a Gentleman Pensioner to a lodge in the park; he saw Michel de
la Foret taken to his apartments; he saw the Seigneur of Rozel walking in
the palace grounds with such possession as though they were his own,
self-content in every motion of his body.

Upon the instant the great Earl was incensed out of all proportion to the
affront of the Seigneur's existence.  He suddenly hated Lempriere only
less than he hated Michel de la Foret.  As he still waited irritably for
a summons from Elizabeth, he brooded on every word and every look she had
given him of late; he recalled her manner to him in the ante-chapel the
day before, and the admiring look she cast on De la Foret but now.  He
had seen more in it than mere approval of courage and the self-reliant
bearing of a refugee of her own religion.

These were days when the soldier of fortune mounted to high places.  He
needed but to carry the banner of bravery, and a busy sword, and his way
to power was not hindered by poor estate.  To be gently born was the one
thing needful, and Michel de la Foret was gently born; and he had still
his sword, though he chose not to use it in Elizabeth's service.  My Lord
knew it might be easier for a stranger like De la Foret, who came with no
encumbrance, to mount to place in the struggles of the Court, than for an
Englishman, whose increasing and ever-bolder enemies were undermining on
every hand, to hold his own.

He began to think upon ways and means to meet this sudden preference of
the Queen, made sharply manifest as he waited in the ante-chamber, by a
summons to the refugee to enter the Queen's apartments.  When the refugee
came forth again he wore a sword the Queen had sent him, and a packet of
Latimer's sermons were under his arm.  Leicester was unaware that
Elizabeth herself did not see De la Foret when he was thus hastily
called; but that her lady-in-waiting, the Duke's Daughter, who figured
so largely in the pictures Lempriere drew of his experiences at Greenwich
Palace, brought forth the sermons and the sword, with this message from
the Queen:

"The Queen says that it is but fair to the sword to be by Michel de la
Foret's side when the sermons are in his hand, that his choice have every
seeming of fairness.  For her Majesty says it is still his choice between
the Sword and the Book till Trinity Day."

Leicester, however, only saw the sword at the side of the refugee and the
gold-bound book under his arm as he came forth, and in a rage he left the
palace and gloomily walked under the trees, denying himself to every one.

To seize De la Foret, and send him to the Medici, and then rely on
Elizabeth's favour for his pardon, as he had done in the past?  That
might do, but the risk to England was too great.  It would be like the
Queen, if her temper was up, to demand from the Medici the return of De
la Foret, and war might ensue.  Two women, with two nations behind them,
were not to be played lightly against each other, trusting to their
common sense and humour.

As he walked among the trees, brooding with averted eyes, he was suddenly
faced by the Seigneur of Rozel, who also was shaken from his discretion
and the best interests of the two fugitives he was bound to protect, by a
late offence against his own dignity.  A seed of rancour had been sown in
his mind which had grown to a great size and must presently burst into a
dark flower of vengeance.  He, Lempriere of Rozel, with three dovecotes,
the perquage, and the office of butler to the Queen, to be called a
"farmer," to be sneered at--it was not in the blood of man, not in the
towering vanity of a Lempriere, to endure it at any price computable to
mortal mind.

Thus there were in England on that day two fools (there are as many now),
and one said:

"My Lord Leicester, I crave a word with you."

"Crave on, good fellow," responded Leicester with a look of boredom,
making to pass by.

"I am Lempriere, lord of Rozel, my lord--"

"Ah yes, I took you for a farmer," answered Leicester.  "Instead of that,
I believe you keep doves, and wear a jerkin that fits like a king's.
Dear Lord, so does greatness come with girth!"

"The King that gave me dove-cotes gave me honour, and 'tis not for the
Earl of Leicester to belittle it."

"What is your coat of arms?" said Leicester with a faint smile, but in
an assumed tone of natural interest.

"A swan upon a sea of azure, two stars above, and over all a sword with a
wreath around its point," answered Lempriere simply, unsuspecting irony,
and touched by Leicester's flint where he was most like to flare up with
vanity.

"Ah!" said Leicester.  "And the motto?"

"Mea spes supra stella--my hope is beyond the stars."

"And the wreath--of parsley, I suppose?"

Now Lempriere understood, and he shook with fury as he roared:

"Yes, by God, and to be got at the point of the sword, to put on the
heads of insolents like Lord Leicester!"  His face was flaming, he was
like a cock strutting upon a stable mound.

There fell a slight pause, and then Leicester said: "To-morrow at
daylight, eh?"

"Now, my lord, now!"

"We have no seconds."

"'Sblood!  'Tis not your way, my lord, to be stickling in detail of
courtesy."

"'Tis not the custom to draw swords in secret, Lempriere of Rozel.  Also
my teeth are not on edge to fight you."

Lempriere had already drawn his sword, and the look of his eyes was as
that of a mad bull in a ring.  "You won't fight with me--you don't think
Rozel your equal?"  His voice was high.

Leicester's face took on a hard, cruel look.  "We cannot fight among the
ladies," he said quietly.  Lempriere followed his glance, and saw the
Duke's Daughter and another in the trees near by.

He hastily put up his sword.  "When, my lord?" he asked.

"You will hear from me to-night," was the answer, and Leicester went
forward hastily to meet the ladies--they had news no doubt.

Lempriere turned on his heel and walked quickly away among the trees
towards the quarters where Buonespoir was in durance, which was little
more severe than to keep him within the palace yard.  There he found the
fool and the pirate in whimsical converse.

The fool had brought a letter of inquiry and warm greeting from Angele to
Buonespoir, who was laboriously inditing one in return.  When Lempriere
entered the pirate greeted him jovially.

"In the very pinch of time you come," he said.  "You have grammar and
syntax and etiquette."

"'Tis even so, Nuncio," said the fool.  "Here is needed prosody
potential.  Exhale!"

The three put their heads together above the paper.




CHAPTER XI

"I would know your story.  How came you and yours to this pass?  Where
were you born?  Of what degree are you?  And this Michel de la Foret,
when came he to your feet--or you to his arms?  I would know all.  Begin
where life began; end where you sit here at the feet of Elizabeth.  This
other cushion to your knees.  There--now speak.  We are alone."

Elizabeth pushed a velvet cushion towards Angele, where she half-knelt,
half-sat on the rush-strewn floor of the great chamber.  The warm light
of the afternoon sun glowed through the thick-tinted glass high up, and,
in the gleam, the heavy tapestries sent by an archduke, once suitor for
Elizabeth's hand, emerged with dramatic distinctness, and peopled the
room with silent watchers of the great Queen and the nobly-born but poor
and fugitive Huguenot.  A splendid piece of sculpture--Eleanor, wife of
Edward--given Elizabeth by another royal suitor, who had sought to be her
consort through many years, caught the warm bath of gold and crimson from
the clerestory and seemed alive and breathing.  Against the pedestal the
Queen had placed her visitor, the red cushions making vivid contrast to
her white gown and black hair.  In the half-kneeling, half-sitting
posture, with her hands clasped before her, so to steady herself to
composure, Angele looked a suppliant--and a saint.  Her pure,
straightforward gaze, her smooth, urbane forehead, the guilelessness
that spoke in every feature, were not made worldly by the intelligence
and humour reposing in the brown depths of her eyes.  Not a line vexed
her face or forehead.  Her countenance was of a singular and almost
polished smoothness, and though her gown was severely simple by
comparison with silks and velvets, furs and ruffles of a gorgeous Court
at its most gorgeous period, yet in it here and there were touches of
exquisite fineness.  The black velvet ribbon slashing her sleeves, the
slight cloud-like gathering of lace at the back of her head, gave a
distinguished softness to her appearance.

She was in curious contrast to the Queen, who sat upon heaped-up
cushions, her rich buff and black gown a blaze of jewels, her yellow
hair, now streaked with grey, roped with pearls, her hands heavy with
rings, her face past its youth, past its hopefulness, however noble and
impressive, past its vivid beauty.  Her eyes wore ever a determined look,
were persistent and vigilant, with a lurking trouble, yet flooded, too,
by a quiet melancholy, like a low, insistent note that floats through an
opera of passion, romance, and tragedy; like a tone of pathos giving deep
character to some splendid pageant, which praises whilst it commemorates,
proclaiming conquest while the grass has not yet grown on quiet houses
of the children of the sword who no more wield the sword.  Evasive,
cautious, secretive, creator of her own policy, she had sacrificed her
womanhood to the power she held and the State she served.  Vain,
passionate, and faithful, her heart all England and Elizabeth, the hunger
for glimpses of what she had never known, and was never to know, thrust
itself into her famished life; and she was wont to indulge, as now, in
fancies and follow some emotional whim with a determination very like to
eccentricity.

That, at this time, when great national events were forward, when
conspiracies abounded, when Parliament was grimly gathering strength to
compel her to marry; and her Council were as sternly pursuing their
policy for the destruction of Leicester; while that very day had come
news of a rising in the North and of fresh Popish plots hatched in
France--that in such case, this day she should set aside all business,
refuse ambassadors and envoys admission, and occupy herself with two
Huguenot refugees seemed incredible to the younger courtiers.  To such
as Cecil, however, there was clear understanding.  He knew that when she
seemed most inert, most impassive to turbulent occurrences, most careless
of consequences, she was but waiting till, in her own mind, her plans
were grown; so that she should see her end clearly ere she spoke or
moved.  Now, as the great minister showed himself at the door of the
chamber and saw Elizabeth seated with Angele, he drew back instinctively,
expectant of the upraised hand which told him he must wait.  And, in
truth, he was nothing loth to do so, for his news he cared little to
deliver, important though it was that she should have it promptly and act
upon it soon.  He turned away with a feeling of relief, however, for this
gossip with the Huguenot maid would no doubt interest her, give new
direction to her warm sympathies, which if roused in one thing were ever
more easily roused in others.  He knew that a crisis was nearing in the
royal relations with Leicester.  In a life of devotion to her service he
had seen her before in this strange mood, and he could feel that she was
ready for an outburst.  As he thought of De la Foret and the favour with
which she had looked at him he smiled grimly, for if it meant aught it
meant that it would drive Leicester to some act which would hasten his
own doom; though, indeed, it might also make another path more difficult
for himself, for the Parliament, for the people.

Little as Elizabeth could endure tales of love and news of marriage;
little as she believed in any vows, save those made to herself; little
as she was inclined to adjust the rough courses of true love, she was the
surgeon to this particular business, and she had the surgeon's love of
laying bare even to her own cynicism the hurt of the poor patient under
her knife.  Indeed, so had Angele impressed her that for once she thought
she might hear the truth.  Because she saw the awe in the other's face
and a worshipping admiration of the great protectress of Protestantism,
who had by large gifts of men and money in times past helped the Cause,
she looked upon her here with kindness.

"Speak now, mistress fugitive, and I will listen," she added, as Cecil
withdrew; and she made a motion to musicians in a distant gallery.

Angele's heart fluttered to her mouth, but the soft, simple music helped
her, and she began with eyes bent upon the ground, her linked fingers
clasping and unclasping slowly.

"I was born at Rouen, your high Majesty," she said.  "My mother was a
cousin of the Prince of Passy, the great Protestant--"

"Of Passy--ah!" said Elizabeth amazed.  "Then you are Protestants
indeed; and your face is no invention, but cometh honestly.  No, no,
'tis no accident--God rest his soul, great Passy!"

"She died--my mother--when I was a little child.  I can but just remember
her--so brightly quiet, so quick, so beautiful.  In Rouen life had little
motion; but now and then came stir and turmoil, for war sent its message
into the old streets, and our captains and our peasants poured forth to
fight for the King.  Once came the King and Queen--Francis and Mary--"

Elizabeth drew herself upright with an exclamation.  "Ah, you have seen
her--Mary of Scots," she said sharply.  "You have seen her?"

"As near as I might touch her with my hand, as near as is your high
Majesty.  She spoke to me--my mother's father was in her train;--as yet
we had not become Huguenots, nor did we know her Majesty as now the world
knows.  They came, the King and Queen--and that was the beginning."

She paused, and looked shyly at Elizabeth, as though she found it hard to
tell her story.

"And the beginning, it was--?" said Elizabeth, impatient and intent.

"We went to Court.  The Queen called my mother into her train.  But it
was in no wise for our good.  At Court my mother pined away--and so she
died in durance."

"Wherefore in durance?"

"To what she saw she would not shut her eyes; to what she heard she would
not close her soul; what was required of her she would not do."

"She would not obey the Queen?"

"She could not obey those whom the Queen favoured.  Then the tyranny that
broke her heart--"

The Queen interrupted her.

"In very truth, but 'tis not in France alone that Queen's favourites
grasp the sceptre and speak the word.  Hath a Queen a thousand eyes--can
she know truth where most dissemble?"

"There was a man--he could not know there was one true woman there, who
for her daughter's sake, for her desired advancement, and because she was
cousin of Passy, who urged it, lived that starved life; this man, this
prince, drew round her feet snares, set pit-falls for her while my father
was sent upon a mission.  Steadfast she kept her soul unspotted; but it
wore away her life.  The Queen would not permit return to Rouen--who can
tell what tale was told her by one whom she foiled?  And so she stayed.
In this slow, savage persecution, when she was like a bird that, thinking
it is free, flieth against the window-pane and falleth back beaten, so
did she stay, and none could save her.  To cry out, to throw herself upon
the spears, would have been ruin of herself, her husband and her child;
and for these she lived."

Elizabeth's eyes had kindled.  Perhaps never in her life had the life at
Court been so exposed to her.  The simple words, meant but to convey the
story, and with no thought behind, had thrown a light on her own Court,
on her own position.  Adept in weaving a sinuous course in her policy,
in making mazes for others to tread, the mazes which they in turn
prepared had never before been traced beneath her eyes to the same
vivid and ultimate effect.

"Help me, ye saints, but things are not at such a pass in this place!"
she said abruptly, but with weariness in her voice.  "Yet sometimes I
know not.  The Court is a city by itself, walled and moated, and hath a
life all its own.  'If there be found ten honest men within the city yet
will I save it,' saith the Lord.  By my father's head, I would not risk
a finger on the hazard if this city, this Court of Elizabeth were set
'twixt the fire from Heaven and eternal peace.  In truth, child, I would
lay me down and die in black disgust were it not that one might come
hereafter would make a very Sodom or Gomorrah of this land: and out
yonder--out in all my counties, where the truth of England is among my
poor burgesses, who die for the great causes which my nobles profess but
risk not their lives--out yonder all that they have won, and for which I
have striven, would be lost.  .  .  .  Speak on.  I have not heard so
plain a tongue and so little guile these twenty years."

Angele continued, more courage in her voice.  "In the midst of it all
came the wave of the new faith upon my mother.  And before ill could fall
upon her from her foes, she died and was at rest.  Then we returned to
Rouen, my father and I, and there we lived in peril, but in great
happiness of soul until the day of massacre.  That night in Paris
we were given greatly of the mercy of God."

"You were there--you were in the massacre at Paris?"

In the house of the Duke of Langon, with whom was resting after a
hazardous enterprise, Michel de la Foret."

"And here beginneth the second lesson," said the Queen with a smile on
her lips; but there was a look of scrutiny in her eyes, and something
like irony in her tone.  "And I will swear by all the stars of Heaven
that this Michel saved ye both.  Is it not so?"

"It is even so.  By his skill and bravery we found our way to safety,
and in a hiding-place near to our loved Rouen watched him return from the
gates of death."

"He was wounded then?"

"Seven times wounded, and with as little blood left in him as would fill
a cup.  But it was summer, and we were in the hills, and they brought us,
our friends of Rouen, all that we had need of; and so God was with us.

"But did he save thy life, except by skill, by indirect and fortunate
wisdom?  Was there deadly danger upon thee?  Did he beat down the sword
of death?"

"He saved my life thrice directly.  The wounds he carried were got by
interposing his own sword 'twixt death and me."

"And that hath need of recompense?"

"My life was little worth the wounds he suffered; but I waited not until
he saved it to owe it unto him.  All that it is was his before he drew
the sword."

"And 'tis this ye would call love betwixt ye--sweet givings and takings
of looks, and soft sayings, and unchangeable and devouring faith.  Is't
this--and is this all?"

The girl had spoken out of an innocent heart, but the challenge in the
Queen's voice worked upon her, and though she shrank a little, the
fulness of her soul welled up and strengthened her.  She spoke again,
and now in her need and in her will to save the man she loved, by making
this majesty of England his protector, her words had eloquence.

"It is not all, noble Queen.  Love is more than that.  It is the waking
in the poorest minds, in the most barren souls, of something greater than
themselves--as a chemist should find a substance that would give all
other things by touching of them a new and higher value; as light and
sun draw from the earth the tendrils of the seed that else had lain
unproducing.  'Tis not alone soft words and touch of hand or lip.  This
caring wholly for one outside one's self kills that self which else would
make the world blind and deaf and dumb.  None hath loved greatly but hath
helped to love in others.  Ah, most sweet Majesty, for great souls like
thine, souls born great, this medicine is not needful, for already hath
the love of a nation inspired and enlarged it; but for souls like mine
and of so many, none better and none worse than me, to love one other
soul deeply and abidingly lifts us higher than ourselves.  Your Majesty
hath been loved by a whole people, by princes and great men in a
different sort--is it not the world's talk that none that ever reigned
hath drawn such slavery of princes, and of great nobles who have courted
death for hopeless love of one beyond their star?  And is it not written
in the world's book also that the Queen of England hath loved no man, but
hath poured out her heart to a people; and hath served great causes in
all the earth because of that love which hath still enlarged her soul,
dowered at birth beyond reckoning?"  Tears filled her eyes.  "Ah, your
supreme Majesty, to you whose heart is universal, the love of one poor
mortal seemeth a small thing, but to those of little consequence it is
the cable by which they unsteadily hold over the chasm 'twixt life and
immortality.  To thee, oh greatest monarch of the world, it is a staff
on which thou need'st not lean, which thou hast never grasped; to me
it is my all; without it I fail and fall and die."

She had spoken as she felt, yet, because she was a woman and guessed
the mind of another woman, she had touched Elizabeth where her armour
was weakest.  She had suggested that the Queen had been the object of
adoration, but had never given her heart to any man; that hers was the
virgin heart and life; and that she had never stooped to conquer.
Without realising it, and only dimly moving with that end in view, she
had whetted Elizabeth's vanity.  She had indeed soothed a pride wounded
of late beyond endurance, suspecting, as she did, that Leicester had
played his long part for his own sordid purposes, that his devotion was
more alloy than precious metal.  No note of praise could be pitched too
high for Elizabeth, and if only policy did not intervene, if but no
political advantage was lost by saving De la Foret, that safety seemed
now secure.

"You tell a tale and adorn it with good grace," she said, and held out
her hand.  Angele kissed it.  "And you have said to Elizabeth what none
else dared to say since I was Queen here.  He who hath never seen the
lightning hath no dread of it.  I had not thought there was in the world
so much artlessness, with all the power of perfect art.  But we live to
be wiser.  Thou shalt continue in thy tale.  Thou hast seen Mary, once
Queen of France, now Queen of Scots--answer me fairly; without if, or
though, or any sort of doubt, the questions I shall put.  Which of us
twain, this ruin-starred queen or I, is of higher stature?"

"She hath advantage in little of your Majesty," bravely answered Angele.

"Then," answered Elizabeth sourly, "she is too high, for I myself am
neither too high nor too low.  .  .  .  And of complexion, which is the
fairer?"

"Her complexion is the fairer, but your Majesty's countenance hath truer
beauty, and sweeter majesty."  Elizabeth frowned slightly, then said:

"What exercises did she take when you were at the Court?"

"Sometimes she hunted, your Majesty, and sometimes she played upon the
virginals."

"Did she play to effect?"

"Reasonably, your noble Majesty."

"You shall hear me play, and then speak truth upon us, for I have known
none with so true a tongue since my father died."

Thereon she called to a lady who waited near in a little room to bring an
instrument; but at that moment Cecil appeared again at the door, and his
face seeming to show anxiety, Elizabeth, with a sigh, beckoned him to
enter.

"Your face, Cecil, is as long as a Lenten collect.  What raven croaks in
England on May Day eve?"  Cecil knelt before her, and gave into her hand
a paper.

"What record runs here?" she asked querulously.  "A prayer of your
faithful Lords and Commons that your Majesty will grant speech with their
chosen deputies to lay before your Majesty a cause they have at heart."

"Touching of--?" darkly asked the Queen.

"The deputies wait even now--will not your Majesty receive them?  They
have come humbly, and will go hence as humbly on the instant, if the hour
is ill chosen."

Immediately Elizabeth's humour changed.  A look of passion swept across
her face, but her eyes lighted, and her lips smiled proudly.  She avoided
troubles by every means, fought off by subtleties the issues which she
must meet; but when the inevitable hour came none knew so well to meet it
as though it were a dearest friend, no matter what the danger, how great
the stake.

"They are here at my door, these good servants of the State--shall they
be kept dangling?" she said loudly.  "Though it were time for prayers
and God's mercy yet should they speak with me, have my counsel, or my
hand upon the sacred parchment of the State.  Bring them hither, Cecil.
Now we shall see--Now you shall see, Angele of Rouen, now you shall see
how queens shall have no hearts to call their own, but be head and heart
and soul and body at the will of every churl who thinks he serves the
State and knows the will of Heaven.  Stand here at my left hand.  Mark
the players and the play."

Kneeling, the deputies presented a resolution from the Lords and Commons
that the Queen should, without more delay, in keeping with her oft-
expressed resolve and the promise of her Council, appoint one who should
succeed to the throne in case of her death "without posterity."  Her
faithful people pleaded with her gracious Majesty to forego unwillingness
to marry and seek a consort worthy of her supreme consideration, to be
raised to a place beside her near that throne which she had made the
greatest in the world.

Gravely, solemnly, the chief members of the Lords and Commons spoke, and
with as weighty pauses and devoted protestations as though this were the
first time their plea had been urged, this obvious duty had been set out
before her.  Long ago in the flush and pride of her extreme youth and the
full assurance of the fruits of marriage, they had spoken with the same
sober responsibility; and though her youth had gone and the old certainty
had for ever disappeared, they spoke of her marriage and its consequences
as though it were still that far-off yesterday.  Well for them that they
did so, for though time had flown and royal suitors without number had
become figures dim in the people's mind, Elizabeth, fed upon adulation,
invoked, admired, besieged by young courtiers, flattered by maids who
praised her beauty, had never seen the hands of the clock pass high noon,
and still remained under the dearest and saddest illusion which can rest
in a woman's mind.  Long after the hands of life's clock had moved into
afternoon, the ancient prayer was still gravely presented that she should
marry and give an heir to England's crown; and she as solemnly listened
and dropped her eyes, and strove to hide her virgin modesty behind a high
demeanour which must needs sink self in royal duty.

"These be the dear desires of your supreme Majesty's faithful Lords and
Commons and the people of the shires whose wills they represent.  Your
Majesty's life, God grant it last beyond that of the youngest of your
people so greatly blessed in your rule!  But accidents of time be many;
and while the world is full of guile, none can tell what peril may beset
the crown, if your Majesty's wisdom sets not apart, gives not to her
country, one whom the nation can surround with its care, encompass
lovingly by its duty."

The talk with Angele had had a curious influence upon the Queen.
It was plain that now she was moved by real feeling, and that, though
she deceived herself, or pretended so to do, shutting her eyes to sober
facts, and dreaming old dreams--as it were, in a world where never was a
mirror nor a timepiece--yet there was working in her a fresher spirit,
urging her to a fairer course than she had shaped for many a day.

"My lords and gentlemen and my beloved subjects," she answered presently,
and for an instant set her eyes upon Angele, then turned to them again,
"I pray you stand and hear me.  .  .  .  Ye have spoken fair words to my
face, and of my face, and of the person of this daughter of great Henry,
from whom I got whatever grace or manner or favour is to me; and by all
your reasoning you do flatter the heart of the Queen of England, whose
mind indeed sleeps not in deed or desire for this realm.  Ye have drawn a
fair picture of this mortal me, and though from the grace of the picture
the colours may fade by time, may give by weather, may be spoiled by
chance, yet my loyal mind, nor time with her swift wings shall overtake,
nor the misty clouds may darken, nor chance with her slippery foot may
overthrow.  It sets its course by the heart of England, and when it
passeth there shall be found that one shall be left behind who shall be
surety of all that hath been lying in the dim warehouse of fate for
England's high future.  Be sure that in this thing I have entered into
the weigh-house, and I hold the balance, and ye shall be well satisfied.
Ye have been fruitful in counsel, ye have been long knitting a knot never
tied, ye shall have comfort soon.  But know ye beyond peradventure that I
have bided my time with good reason.  If our loom be framed with rotten
hurdles, when our web is well-ny done, our work is yet to begin.  Against
mischance and dark discoveries my mind, with knowledge hidden from you,
hath been firmly arrayed.  If it be in your thought that I am set against
a marriage which shall serve the nation, purge yourselves, friends, of
that sort of heresy, for the belief is awry.  Though I think that to be
one and always one, neither mated nor mothering, be good for a private
woman, for a prince it is not meet.  Therefore, say to my Lords and
Commons that I am more concerned for what shall chance to England when I
am gone than to linger out my living thread.  I hope, my lords and
gentlemen, to die with a good Nunc Dimittis, which could not be if I did
not give surety for the nation after my graved bones.  Ye shall hear
soon--ye shall hear and be satisfied, and so I give you to the care of
Almighty God."

Once more they knelt, and then slowly withdrew, with faces downcast and
troubled.  They had secret knowledge which she did not yet possess, but
which at any moment she must know, and her ambiguous speech carried no
conviction to their minds.  Yet their conference with her was most
opportune, for the news she must presently receive, brought by a
messenger from Scotland who had outstripped all others, would no doubt
move her to action which should set the minds of the people at rest, and
go far to stem the tide of conspiracy flowing through the kingdom.

Elizabeth stood watching them, and remained gazing after they had
disappeared; then rousing herself, she turned to leave the room, and
beckoned to Angele to follow.




CHAPTER XII

As twilight was giving place to night Angele was roused from the reverie
into which she had fallen, by the Duke's Daughter, who whispered to her
that if she would have a pleasure given to but few, she would come
quickly.  Taking her hand the Duke's Daughter--as true and whimsical a
spirit as ever lived in troubled days and under the aegis of the sword-
led her swiftly to the Queen's chamber.  They did not enter, but waited
in a quiet gallery.

"The Queen is playing upon the virginals, and she playeth best when
alone; so stand you here by this tapestry, and you shall have pleasure
beyond payment," said the Duke's Daughter.

Angele had no thought that the Queen of her vanity had commanded that she
be placed there as though secretly, and she listened dutifully at first;
but presently her ears were ravished; and even the Duke's Daughter showed
some surprise, for never had she heard the Queen play with such grace and
feeling.  The countenance of the musician was towards them, and at last,
as though by accident, Elizabeth looked up and saw the face of her lady.

"Spy, spy," she cried.  "Come hither--come hither, all of you!"

When they had descended and knelt to her, she made as if she would punish
the Duke's Daughter by striking her with a scarf that lay at her hand,
but to Angele she said:

"How think you then, hath that other greater skill--Darnley's wife I
mean?"

"Not she or any other hath so delighted me," said Angele, with worship in
her eyes--so doth talent given to majesty become lifted beyond its
measure.

The Queen's eyes lighted.  "We shall have dancing, then," she said.  "The
dance hath charms for me.  We shall not deny our youth.  The heart shall
keep as young as the body."

An instant later the room was full of dancers, and Elizabeth gave her
hand to Leicester, who bent every faculty to pleasing her.  His face had
darkened as he had seen Angele beside her, but the Queen's graciousness,
whether assumed or real, had returned, and her face carried a look of
triumph and spirit and delight.  Again and again she glanced towards
Angele, and what she saw evidently gave her pleasure, for she laughed and
disported herself with grace and an agreeable temper, and Leicester lent
himself to her spirit with adroit wit and humility.  He had seen his
mistake of the morning, and was now intent to restore himself to favour.

He succeeded well, for the emotions roused in Elizabeth during the day,
now heightened by vanity and emulation, found in him a centre upon which
they could converge; and, in her mind, Angele, for the nonce, was
disassociated from any thought of De la Foret.  Leicester's undoubted
gifts were well and cautiously directed, and his talent of assumed
passion--his heart was facile, and his gallantry knew no bounds--was
put to dexterous use, convincing for the moment.  The Queen seemed
all complaisance again.  Presently she had Angele brought to her.

"How doth her dance compare-she who hath wedded Darnley?"

"She danceth not so high nor disposedly, with no such joyous lightness as
your high Majesty, but yet she moveth with circumspection."

"Circumspection--circumspection, that is no gift in dancing, which should
be wilful yet airily composed, thoughtless yet inducing.  Circumspection!
--in nothing else hath Mary shown it where she should.  'Tis like this
Queen perversely to make a psalm of dancing, and then pirouette with
sacred duty.  But you have spoken the truth, and I am well content.  So
get you to your rest."

She tapped Ange'le's cheek.  "You shall remain here to-night.  'Tis too
late for you to be sent abroad."  She was about to dismiss her, when
there was a sudden stir.  Cecil had entered and was making his way to the
Queen, followed by two strangers.  Elizabeth waited their approach.

"Your gracious Majesty," said Cecil, in a voice none heard save
Elizabeth, for all had fallen back at a wave of her hand, "the Queen of
Scots is the mother of a fair son."

Elizabeth's face flushed, then became pale, and she struck her knee with
her clinched hand.  "Who bringeth the news?" she inquired in a sharp
voice.

"Sir Andrew Melvill here."

"Who is with him yonder?"

"One who hath been attached to the Queen of Scots."

"He hath the ill look of such an one," she answered, and then said below
her breath bitterly: "She hath a son--and I am but a barren stock."

Rising, she added hurriedly: "We will speak to the people at the May Day
sports to-morrow.  Let there be great feasting."

She motioned to Sir Andrew Melvill to come forward, and with a gesture of
welcome and a promise of speech with him on the morrow she dismissed
them.

Since the two strangers had entered, Angele's eyes had been fastened on
the gentleman who accompanied Sir Andrew Melvill.  Her first glance at
him had sent a chill through her, and she remained confused and
disturbed.  In vain her memory strove to find where the man was set in
her past.  The time, the place, the event eluded her, but a sense of
foreboding possessed her; and her eyes followed him with strained anxiety
as he retired from the presence.




CHAPTER XIII

As had been arranged when Lempriere challenged Leicester, they met soon
after dawn among the trees beside the Thames.  A gentleman of the court,
to whom the Duke's Daughter had previously presented Lempriere, gaily
agreed to act as second, and gallantly attended the lord of Rozel in his
adventurous enterprise.  There were few at Court who had not some grudge
against Leicester, few who would not willingly have done duty at such a
time; for Leicester's friends were of fair-weather sort, ready to defend
him, to support him, not for friendship but for the crumbs that dropped
from the table of his power.  The favourite himself was attended by the
Earl of Ealing, a youngster who had his spurs to win, who thought it
policy to serve the great time-server.  Two others also came.

It was a morning little made for deeds of rancour or of blood.  As they
passed, the early morning mists above the green fields of Kent and Essex
were being melted by the summer sun.  The smell of ripening fruit came on
them with pungent sweetness, their feet crashed odorously through clumps
of tiger-lilies, and the dew on the ribbon-grass shook glistening drops
upon their velvets.  Overhead the carolling of the thrush came swimming
recklessly through the trees, and far over in the fields the ploughmen
started upon the heavy courses of their labour; while here and there
poachers with bows and arrows slid through the green undergrowth, like
spies hovering on an army's flank.

To Lempriere the morning carried no impression save that life was well
worth living.  No agitation passed across his nerves, no apprehension
reached his mind.  He had no imagination; he loved the things that his
eyes saw because they filled him with enjoyment; but why they were, or
whence they came, or what they meant or boded, never gave him meditation.
A vast epicurean, a consummate egotist, ripe with feeling and rich with
energy, he could not believe that when he spoke the heavens would not
fall.  The stinging sweetness of the morning was a tonic to all his
energies, an elation to his mind; he swaggered through the lush grasses
and boskage as though marching to a marriage.

Leicester, on his part, no more caught at the meaning of the morning, at
the long whisper of enlivened nature, than did his foe.  The day gave to
him no more than was his right.  If the day was not fine, then Leicester
was injured; but if the day was fine, then Leicester had his due.  Moral
blindness made him blind for the million deep teachings trembling round
him.  He felt only the garish and the splendid.  So it was that at
Kenilworth, where his Queen had visited him, the fetes that he had held
would far outshine the fete which would take place in Greenwich Park on
this May Day.  The fete of this May Day would take place, but would he
see it?  The thought flashed through his mind that he might not; but he
trod it under foot; not through an inborn, primitive egotism like that
of Lempriere, but through an innate arrogance, an unalterable belief that
Fate was ever on his side.  He had played so many tricks with Fate, had
mocked while taking its gifts so often, that, like the son who has
flouted his indulgent father through innumerable times, he conceived that
he should never be disinherited.  It irked him that he should be fighting
with a farmer, as he termed the Seigneur of the Jersey Isle; but there
was in the event, too, a sense of relief, for he had a will for murder.
Yesterday's events were still fresh in his mind; and he had a feeling
that the letting of Lempriere's blood would cool his own and be some cure
for the choler which the presence of these strangers at the Court had
wrought in him.

There were better swordsmen in England than he, but his skill was
various, and he knew tricks of the trade which this primitive Norman
could never have learnt.  He had some touch of wit, some biting
observation, and, as he neared the place of the encounter, he played upon
the coming event with a mordant frivolity.  Not by nature a brave man,
he was so much a fatalist, such a worshipper of his star, that he had
acquired an artificial courage which had served him well.  The unschooled
gentlemen with him roared with laughter at his sallies, and they came to
the place of meeting as though to a summer feast.

"Good-morrow, nobility," said Leicester with courtesy overdone, and
bowing much too low.  "Good-morrow, valentine," answered Lempriere,
flushing slightly at the disguised insult, and rising to the moment.

"I hear the crop of fools is short this year in Jersey, and through no
fault of yours--you've done your best most loyally," jeered Leicester, as
he doffed his doublet, his gentlemen laughing in derision.

"'Tis true enough, my lord, and I have come to find new seed in England,
where are fools to spare; as I trust in Heaven one shall be spared on
this very day for planting yonder."

He was eaten with rage, but he was cool and steady.

He was now in his linen and small clothes and looked like some untrained
Hercules.

"Well said, nobility," laughed Leicester with an ugly look.  "'Tis seed
time--let us measure out the seed.  On guard!"

Never were two men such opposites, never two so seemingly ill-matched.
Leicester's dark face and its sardonic look, his lithe figure, the
nervous strength of his bearing, were in strong contrast to the bulking
breadth, the perspiring robustness of Lempriere of Rozel.  It was not
easy of belief that Lempriere should be set to fight this toreador of a
fighting Court.  But there they stood, Lempriere's face with a great-eyed
gravity looming above his rotund figure like a moon above a purple cloud.
But huge and loose though the Seigneur's motions seemed, he was as intent
as though there were but two beings in the universe, Leicester and
himself.  A strange alertness seemed to be upon him, and, as Leicester
found when the swords crossed, he was quicker than his bulk gave warrant.
His perfect health made his vision sure; and, though not a fine
swordsman, he had done much fighting in his time, had been ever ready for
the touch of steel; and had served some warlike days in fighting France,
where fate had well befriended him.  That which Leicester meant should be
by-play of a moment became a full half-hour's desperate game.  Leicester
found that the thrust--the fatal thrust learned from an Italian master--
he meant to give, was met by a swift precision, responding to quick
vision.  Again and again he would have brought the end, but Lempriere
heavily foiled him.  The wound which the Seigneur got at last, meant to
be mortal, was saved from that by the facility of a quick apprehension.
Indeed, for a time the issue had seemed doubtful, for the endurance and
persistence of the Seigneur made for exasperation and recklessness in his
antagonist, and once blood was drawn from the wrist of the great man; but
at length Lempriere went upon the aggressive.  Here he erred, for
Leicester found the chance for which he had manoeuvred--to use the feint
and thrust got out of Italy.  He brought his enemy low, but only after a
duel the like of which had never been seen at the Court of England.  The
toreador had slain his bull at last, but had done no justice to his
reputation.  Never did man more gallantly sustain his honour with
heaviest odds against him than did the Seigneur of Rozel that day.

As he was carried away by the merry gentlemen of the Court, he called
back to the favourite:

"Leicester is not so great a swordsman after all.  Hang fast to your
honours by the skin of your teeth, my lord."




CHAPTER XIV

It was Monday, and the eyes of London and the Court were turned towards
Greenwich Park, where the Queen was to give entertainment to the French
Envoy who had come once more to urge upon the Queen marriage with a son
of the Medici, and to obtain an assurance that she would return to France
the widow of the great Montgomery and his valiant lieutenant, Michel de
la Foret.  The river was covered with boats and barges, festooned,
canopied, and hung with banners and devices; and from sunrise music and
singing conducted down the stream the gaily dressed populace--for those
were the days when a man spent on his ruff and his hose and his russet
coat as much as would feed and house a family for a year; when the fine-
figured ruflier with sables about his neck, corked slipper, trimmed
buskin, and cloak of silk or damask furred, carried his all upon his
back.

Loud-voiced gallants came floating by; men of a hundred guilds bearing
devices pompously held on their way to the great pageant; country
bumpkins up from Surrey roystered and swore that there was but one land
that God had blessed, and challenged the grinning watermen from Gravesend
and Hampton Court to deny it; and the sun with ardour drove from the sky
every invading cloud, leaving Essex and Kent as far as eye could see
perfect green gardens of opulence.

Before Elizabeth had left her bed, London had emptied itself into
Greenwich Park.  Thither the London Companies had come in their varied
dazzling accoutrements--hundreds armed in fine corselets bearing the long
Moorish pike; tall halberdiers in the unique armour called Almainrivets,
and gunners or muleteers equipped in shirts of mail with morions or steel
caps.  Here too were to come the Gentlemen Pensioners, resplendent in
scarlet, to "run with the spear;" and hundreds of men-at-arms were set
at every point to give garish bravery to all.  Thousands of citizens,
openmouthed, gazed down the long arenas of green festooned with every
sort of decoration and picturesque invention.  Cages of large birds from
the Indies, fruits, corn, fishes, grapes, hung in the trees, players
perched in the branches discoursed sweet music, and poets recited their
verses from rustic bridges or on platforms with weapons and armour hung
trophy-wise on ragged staves.  Upon a small lake a dolphin four-and-
twenty feet in length came swimming, within its belly a lively orchestra;
Italian tumblers swung from rope to bar; and crowds gathered at the
places where bear and bull-baiting were to excite the none too fastidious
tastes of the time.

All morning the gay delights went on, and at high noon the cry was
carried from mouth to mouth: "The Queen!  The Queen!"

She appeared on a balcony surrounded by her lords and ladies, and there
received the diplomatists, speaking at length to the French Envoy in a
tone of lightness and elusive cheerfulness which he was at a loss to
understand and tried in vain to pierce by cogent remarks bearing on
matters of moment involved in his embassage.  Not far away stood
Leicester, but the Queen had done no more than note his presence by a
glance, and now and again with ostentatious emphasis she spoke to Angele,
whom she had had brought to her in the morning before chapel-going.  Thus
early, after a few questions and some scrutiny, she had sent her in
charge of a gentleman-at-arms and a maid of the Duke's Daughter to her
father's lodging, with orders to change her robe, to return to the palace
in good time before noon, and to bring her father to a safe place where
he could watch the pleasures of the people.  When Angele came to the
presence again she saw that the Queen was wearing a gown of pure white
with the sleeves shot with black, such as she herself had worn when
admitted to audience yesterday.  Vexed, agitated, embittered as Elizabeth
had been by the news brought to her the night before, she had kept her
wardrobers and seamstresses at work the whole night to alter a white
satin habit to the simplicity and style of that which Angele had worn.

"What think you of my gown, my lady refugee?" she said to Angele at
last, as the Gentlemen Pensioners paraded in the space below, followed by
the Knights Tilters--at their head the Queen's Champion, Sir Henry Lee:
twenty-five of the most gallant and favoured of the courtiers of
Elizabeth, including the gravest of her counsellors and the youngest
gallant who had won her smile, Master Christopher Hatton.  Some of these
brave suitors, taken from the noblest families, had appeared in the tilt-
yard every anniversary of the year of her accession, and had lifted their
romantic office, which seemed but the service of enamoured knights, into
an almost solemn dignity.

The vast crowd disposed itself around the great improvised yard where the
Knights Tilters were to engage, and the Queen, followed by her retinue,
descended to the dais which had been set up near the palace.  Her white
satin gown, roped with pearls only at the neck and breast, glistened in
the bright sun, and her fair hair took on a burnished radiance.  As
Angele passed with her in the gorgeous procession, she could not but view
the scene with admiring eye, albeit her own sweet sober attire, a pearly
grey, seemed little in keeping; for the ladies and lords were most richly
attired, and the damask and satin cloaks, crimson velvet gowns, silk
hoods, and jewelled swords and daggers made a brave show.  She was like
some moth in a whorl of butterflies.

Her face was pale, and her eye had a curious disturbed look, as though
they had seen frightening things.  The events of last evening had tried
her simple spirit, and she shrank from this glittering show; but the
knowledge that her lover's life was in danger, and that her happiness was
here and now at stake, held her bravely to her place, beset as it was
with peril; for the Queen, with that eccentricity which had lifted her up
yesterday, might cast her down to-day, and she had good reason to fear
the power and influence of Leicester, whom she knew with a sure instinct
was intent on Michel's ruin.  Behind all her nervous shrinking and her
heart's doubt, the memory of the face of the stranger she had seen last
night with Sir Andrew Melvill tortured her.  She could not find the time
and place where she had seen the eyes that, in the palace, had filled
her with mislike and abhorrence as they looked upon the Queen.  Again
and again in her fitful sleep had she dreamt of him, and a sense of
foreboding was heavy upon her--she seemed to hear the footfall of coming
disaster.  The anxiety of her soul lent an unnatural brightness to her
eyes; so that more than one enamoured courtier made essay to engage her
in conversation, and paid her deferential compliment when the Queen's
eyes were not turned her way.  Come to the dais, she was placed not far
from her Majesty, beside the Duke's Daughter, whose whimsical nature
found frequent expression in what the Queen was wont to call "a merry
volt."  She seemed a privileged person, with whom none ventured to take
liberties, and against whom none was entitled to bear offence, for her
quips were free from malice, and her ingenuity in humour of mark.  She it
was who had put into the Queen's head that morning an idea which was
presently to startle Angele and all others.

Leicester was riding with the Knights Tilters, and as they cantered
lightly past the dais, trailing their spears in obeisance, Elizabeth
engaged herself in talk with Cecil, who was standing near, and appeared
not to see the favourite.  This was the first time since he had mounted
to good fortune that she had not thrown him a favour to pick up with his
spear and wear in her honour, and he could scarce believe that she had
meant to neglect him.  He half halted, but she only deigned an
inclination of the head, and he spurred his horse angrily on with a
muttered imprecation, yet, to all seeming, gallantly paying homage.

"There shall be doings ere this day is done.  'Beware the Gipsy'!" said
the Duke's Daughter in a low tone to Angele, and she laughed.  lightly.

"Who is the Gipsy?" asked Angele, with good suspicion, however.

"Who but Leicester," answered the other.  "Is he not black enough?"

"Why was he so called?  Who put the name upon Who but the Earl of Sussex
as he died--as noble a chief, as true a counsellor as ever spoke truth to
a Queen.  But truth is not all at Court, and Sussex was no flatterer.
Leicester bowed under the storm for a moment when Sussex showed him in
his true colours; but Sussex had no gift of intrigue, the tide turned,
and so he broke his heart, and died.  But he left a message which I
sometimes remember with my collects.  'I am now passing to another
world,' said he, 'and must leave you to your fortunes and to the Queen's
grace and goodness; but beware the Gipsy, for he will be too hard for all
of you; you know not the beast so well as I do.' But my Lord Sussex was
wrong.  One there is who knows him through and through, and hath little
joy in the knowing."

The look in the eyes of the Duke's Daughter became like steel and her
voice hardened, and Angele realised that Leicester had in this beautiful
and delicate maid-of-honour as bitter an enemy as ever brought down the
mighty from their seats; that a pride had been sometime wounded, suffered
an unwarrantable affront, which only innocence could feel so acutely.
Her heart went out to the Duke's Daughter as it had never gone out to any
of her sex since her mother's death, and she showed her admiration in her
glance.  The other saw it and smiled, slipping a hand in hers for a
moment; and then a look, half-debating, half-triumphant, came into her
face as her eyes followed Leicester down the green stretches of the
tilting-yard.

The trumpet sounded, the people broke out in shouts of delight, the
tilting began.  For an hour the handsome joust went on, the Earl of
Oxford, Charles Howard, Sir Henry Lee, Sir Christopher Hatton, and
Leicester challenging, and so even was the combat that victory seemed to
settle in the plumes of neither, though Leicester of them all showed not
the greatest skill, while in some regards greatest grace and deportment.
Suddenly there rode into the lists, whence, no one seemed to know, so
intent had the public gaze been fixed, so quickly had he come, a mounted
figure all in white, and at the moment when Sir Henry Lee had cried aloud
his challenge for the last time.  Silence fell as the bright figure
cantered down the list, lifted the gauge, and sat still upon his black
steed.  Consternation fell.  None among the people or the Knights Tilters
knew who the invader was, and Leicester called upon the Masters of the
Ceremonies to demand his name and quality.  The white horseman made no
reply, but sat unmoved, while noise and turmoil suddenly sprang up around
him.

Presently the voice of the Queen was heard clearly ringing through the
lists.  "His quality hath evidence.  Set on."

The Duke's Daughter laughed, and whispered mischievously in Angele's ear.

The gentlemen of England fared ill that day in the sight of all the
people, for the challenger of the Knights Tilters was more than a match
for each that came upon him.  He rode like a wild horseman of Yucatan.
Wary, resourceful, sudden in device and powerful in onset, he bore all
down, until the Queen cried: "There hath not been such skill in England
since my father rode these lists.  Three of my best gentlemen down, and
it hath been but breathing to him.  Now, Sir Harry Lee, it is thy turn,"
she laughed as she saw the champion ride forward; "and next 'tis thine,
Leicester.  Ah, Leicester would have at him now!" she added sharply, as
she saw the favourite spur forward before the gallant Lee.  "He is full
of choler--it becomes him, but it shall not be; bravery is not all.  And
if he failed "she smiled acidly--"he would get him home to Kenilworth and
show himself no more--if he failed, and the White Knight failed not!
What think you, dove?" she cried to the Duke's Daughter.  "Would he not
fall in the megrims for that England's honour had been over thrown?
Leicester could not live if England's honour should be toppled down like
our dear Chris Hatton and his gallants yonder."

The Duke's Daughter curtsied.  "Methinks England's honour is in little
peril--your Majesty knows well how to 'fend it.  No subject keeps it."

"If I must 'fend it, dove, then Leicester there must not fight to-day.
It shall surely be Sir Harry Lee.  My Lord Leicester must have the place
of honour at the last," she called aloud.  Leicester swung his horse
round and galloped to the Queen.

"Your Majesty," he cried in suppressed anger, "must I give place?"

"When all have failed and Leicester has won, then all yield place to
Leicester," said the Queen drily.  The look on his face was not good to
see, but he saluted gravely and rode away to watch the encounter between
the most gallant Knight Tilter in England and the stranger.  Rage was in
his heart, and it blinded him to the certainty of his defeat, for he was
not expert in the lists.  But by a sure instinct he had guessed the
identity of the White Horseman, and every nerve quivered with desire to
meet him in combat.  Last night's good work seemed to have gone for
naught.  Elizabeth's humour had changed; and to-day she seemed set on
humiliating him before the nobles who hated him, before the people who
had found in him the cause why the Queen had not married, so giving no
heir to the throne.  Perturbed and charged with anger as he was, however,
the combat now forward soon chained his attention.  Not in many a year
had there been seen in England such a display of skill and determination.
The veteran Knight Tilter, who knew that the result of this business
meant more than life to him, and that more than the honour of his
comrades was at stake--even the valour of England which had been
challenged--fought as he had never fought before, as no man had fought
in England for many a year.  At first the people cried aloud their
encouragement; but as onset and attack after onset and attack showed that
two masters of their craft, two desperate men, had met, and that the
great sport had become a vital combat between their own champion and the
champion of another land--Spain, France, Denmark, Russia, Italy?--a hush
spread over the great space, and every eye was strained; men gazed with
bated breath.

The green turf was torn and mangled, the horses reeked with sweat and
foam, but overhead the soaring skylark sang, as it were, to express the
joyance of the day.  During many minutes the only sound that broke the
stillness was the clash of armed men, the thud of hoofs, and the snorting
and the wild breathing of the chargers.  The lark's notes, however,
ringing out over the lists freed the tongue of the Queen's fool, who
suddenly ran out into the lists, in his motley and cap and bells, and in
his high trilling voice sang a fool's song to the fighting twain:

              "Who would lie down and close his eyes
                 While yet the lark sings o'er the dale?
               Who would to Love make no replies,
                 Nor drink the nut-brown ale,
               While throbs the pulse, and full 's the purse
                 And all the world 's for sale?"

Suddenly a cry of relief, of roaring excitement, burst from the people.
Both horsemen and their chargers were on the ground.  The fight was over,
the fierce game at an end.  That which all had feared, even the Queen
herself, as the fight fared on, had not come to pass--England's champion
had not been beaten by the armed mystery, though the odds had seemed
against him.

              "Though wintry blasts may prove unkind,
                 When winter's past we do forget;
               Love's breast in summer time is kind,
                 And all 's well while life 's with us yet
                   Hey, ho, now the lark is mating,
                   Life's sweet wages are in waiting!"

Thus sang the fool as the two warriors were helped to their feet.
Cumbered with their armour, and all dust-covered and blood-stained,
though not seriously hurt, they were helped to their horses, and rode to
the dais where the Queen sat.

"Ye have fought like men of old," she said, "and neither had advantage
at the last.  England's champion still may cry his challenge and not be
forsworn, and he who challenged goeth in honour again from the lists.
You, sir, who have challenged, shall we not see your face or hear your
voice?  For what country, for what prince lifted you the gauge and
challenged England's honour?"

"I crave your high Majesty's pardon"--Angele's heart stood still.  Her
love had not pierced his disguise, though Leicester's hate had done so on
the instant--"I crave your noble Majesty's grace," answered the stranger,
"that I may still keep my face covered in humility.  My voice speaks for
no country and for no prince.  I have fought for mine own honour, and to
prove to England's Queen that she hath a champion who smiteth with strong
arm, as on me and my steed this hath been seen to-day."

"Gallantly thought and well said," answered Elizabeth; "but England's
champion and his strong arm have no victory.  If gifts were given they
must needs be cut in twain.  But answer me, what is your country?  I will
not have it that any man pick up the gauge of England for his own honour.
What is your country?

"I am an exile, your high Majesty; and the only land for which I raise my
sword this day is that land where I have found safety from my enemies."

The Queen turned and smiled at the Duke's Daughter.  "I knew not where my
own question might lead, but he hath turned it to full account," she
said, under her breath.  "His tongue is as ready as his spear.  Then ye
have both laboured in England's honour, and I drink to you both," she
added, and raised to her lips a glass of wine which a page presented.
"I love ye both--in your high qualities," she hastened to add with dry
irony, and her eye rested mockingly on Leicester.

"My lords and gentlemen and all of my kingdom," she added in a clear
voice, insistent in its force, "ye have come upon May Day to take delight
of England in my gardens, and ye are welcome.  Ye have seen such a sight
as doeth good to the eyes of brave men.  It hath pleased me well, and I
am constrained to say to you what, for divers great reasons, I have kept
to my own counsels, labouring for your good.  The day hath come, however,
the day and the hour when ye shall know that wherein I propose to serve
you as ye well deserve.  It is my will--and now I see my way to its good
fulfilment--that I remain no longer in that virgin state wherein I have
ever lived."

Great cheering here broke in, and for a time she could get no further.
Ever alive to the bent of the popular mind, she had chosen a perfect
occasion to take them into her confidence--however little or much she
would abide by her words, or intended the union of which she spoke.  In
the past she had counselled with her great advisers, with Cecil and the
rest, and through them messages were borne to the people; but now she
spoke direct to them all, and it had its immediate reward--the
acclamations were as those with which she was greeted when she first
passed through the streets of London on inheriting the crown.

Well pleased, she continued: "This I will do with expedition and
weightiest judgment, for of little account though I am, he that sits
with the Queen of England in this realm must needs be a prince indeed....
So be ye sure of this that ye shall have your heart-most wishes, and
there shall be one to come after me who will wear this crown even as
I have worn, in direct descent, my father's crown.  Our dearest sister,
the Queen of the Scots, hath been delivered of a fair son; and in high
affection the news thereof she hath sent me, with a palfry which I shall
ride among you in token of the love I bear her Majesty.  She hath in her
time got an heir to the throne with which we are ever in kinship and
alliance, and I in my time shall give ye your heart's desire."

Angele, who had, with palpitating heart and swimming head, seen Michel de
la Foret leave the lists and disappear among the trees, as mysteriously
as he came, was scarce conscious of the cheers and riotous delight that
followed Elizabeth's tactful if delusive speech to the people.  A few
whispered words from the Duke's Daughter had told her that Michel had
obeyed the Queen's command in entering the lists and taking up the
challenge; and that she herself, carrying the royal message to him and
making arrangements for his accoutrement and mounting, had urged him to
obedience.  She observed drily that he had needed little pressure, and
that his eyes had lighted at the prospect of the combat.  Apart from his
innate love of fighting, he had realised that in the moment of declining
to enter the Queen's service he had been at a disadvantage, and that his
courage was open to attack by the incredulous or malicious.  This would
have mattered little were it not that he had been given unusual
importance as a prisoner by the Queen's personal notice of himself.  He
had, therefore, sprung to the acceptance, and sent his humble duty to the
Queen by her winsome messenger, who, with conspicuous dramatic skill, had
arranged secretly, with the help of a Gentleman Pensioner and the Master
of the Horse, his appearance and his exit.  That all succeeded as she had
planned quickened her pulses, and made her heart still warmer to Angele,
who, now that all was over, and her Huguenot lover had gone his
mysterious ways, seemed lost in a troubled reverie.

It was a troubled reverie indeed, for Angele's eyes were on the stranger
who was present with Sir Andrew Melvill the night before.  Her gaze upon
him now became fixed and insistent, for the sense of foreboding so heavy
on her deepened to a torturing suspense.  Where had she seen this man
before?  To what day or hour in her past did he belong?  What was there
in his smooth, smiling, malicious face that made her blood run cold?  As
she watched him, he turned his head.  She followed his eyes.  The horse
which Mary Queen of Scots had sent with the message of the birth of her
son was being led to the Queen by the dark browed, pale-faced churl who
had brought it from Scotland.  She saw a sharp dark look pass between the
two.

Suddenly her sight swam, she swayed and would have fainted, but
resolution steadied her, and a low exclamation broke from her lips.
Now she knew!

The face that had eluded her was at last in the grasp of horrified
memory.  It was the face of one who many years ago was known to have
poisoned the Due de Chambly by anointing the pommel of his saddle with a
delicate poison which the rider would touch, and touching would, perhaps,
carry to his nostrils or mouth as he rode, and die upon the instant.  She
herself had seen the Due de Chambly fall; had seen this man fly from
Paris for his life; and had thereafter known of his return to favour at
the court of Mary and Francis, for nothing could be proved against him.
The memory flashed like lightning through her brain.  She moved swiftly
forward despite the detaining hand of the Duke's Daughter.  The Queen was
already mounted, her hand already upon the pommel of the saddle.

Elizabeth noted the look of anguished anxiety in Angele's eyes, her
face like that of one who had seen souls in purgatory; and some swift
instinct, born of years upon years of peril in old days when her life was
no boon to her enemies, made her lean towards the girl, whose quick
whispered words were to her as loud as thunder.  She was, however,
composed and still.  Not a tremor passed through her.

"Your wish is granted, mistress," she said aloud, then addressed a word
to Cecil at her side, who passed on her command.  Presently she turned
slowly to the spot where Sir Andrew Melvill and the other sat upon their
horses.  She scanned complacently the faces of both, then her eyes
settled steadily on the face of the murderer.  Still gazing intently she
drew the back of her gloved fingers along the pommel.  The man saw the
motion, unnoted and unsignificant to any other save Angele, meaningless
even to Melvill, the innocent and honest gentleman at his side; and he
realised that the Queen had had a warning.  Noting the slight stir among
the gentlemen round him, he knew that his game was foiled, that there was
no escape.  He was not prepared for what followed.

In a voice to be heard only at small distance, the Queen said calmly:

"This palfry sent me by my dear sister of Scotland shall bear me among
you, friends; and in days to come I will remember how she hath given new
life to me by her loving message.  Sir Andrew Melvill, I shall have
further speech with you; and you, sir,"--speaking to the sinister figure
by his side--"come hither."

The man dismounted, and with unsteady step came forward.  Elizabeth held
out her gloved hand for him to kiss.  His face turned white.  It was come
soon, his punishment.  None knew save Angele and the Queen the doom that
was upon him, if Angele's warning was well-founded.  He knelt, and bent
his head over her hand.

"Salute, sir," she said in a low voice.

He touched his lips to her fingers.  She pressed them swiftly against his
mouth.  An instant, then he rose and stepped backwards to his horse.
Tremblingly, blindly, he mounted.

A moment passed, then Elizabeth rode on with her ladies behind her, her
gentlemen beside her.  As she passed slowly, the would-be regicide swayed
and fell from his horse, and stirred no more.

Elizabeth rode on, her hand upon the pommel of the saddle.  So she rode
for a full half-hour, and came back to her palace.  But she raised not
her gloved right hand above the pommel, and she dismounted with exceeding
care.

That night the man who cared for the horse died secretly as had done his
master, with the Queen's glove pressed to his nostrils by one whom Cecil
could trust.  And the matter was hidden from the Court and the people;
for it was given out that Melvill's friend had died of some heart
trouble.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Each of us will prove himself a fool given perfect opportunity
No note of praise could be pitched too high for Elizabeth
She had never stooped to conquer






MICHEL AND ANGELE

[A Ladder of Swords]

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 3.



CHAPTER XV

It seemed an unspeakable smallness in a man of such high place in the
State, whose hand had tied and untied myriad knots of political and court
intrigue, that he should stoop to a game which any pettifogging hanger-on
might play-and reap scorn in the playing.  By insidious arts, Leicester
had in his day turned the Queen's mind to his own will; had foiled the
diplomacy of the Spaniard, the German and the Gaul; had by subterranean
means checkmated the designs of the Medici; had traced his way through
plot and counter-plot, hated by most, loved by none save, maybe, his
Royal mistress to whom he was now more a custom than a cherished friend.
Year upon year he had built up his influence.  None had championed him
save himself, and even from the consequences of rashness and folly he had
risen to a still higher place in the kingdom.  But such as Leicester are
ever at last a sacrifice to the laborious means by which they achieve
their greatest ends-means contemptible and small.

To the great intriguers every little detail, every commonplace
insignificance is used--and must be used by them alone--to further their
dark causes.  They cannot trust their projects to brave lieutenants, to
faithful subordinates.  They cannot say, "Here is the end; this is the
work to be done; upon your shoulders be the burden!"  They must "stoop to
conquer."  Every miserable detail becomes of moment, until by-and-by the
art of intrigue and conspiracy begins to lose proportion in their minds.
The detail has ever been so important, conspiracy so much second nature,
that they must needs be intriguing and conspiring when the occasion is
trifling and the end negligible.

To all intriguers life has lost romance; there is no poem left in nature;
no ideal, personal, public or national, detains them in its wholesome
influence; no great purpose allures them; they have no causes for which
to die--save themselves.  They are so honeycombed with insincerity and
the vice of thought, that by-and-by all colours are as one, all pathways
the same; because, whichever hue of light breaks upon their world they
see it through the grey-cloaked mist of falsehood; and whether the path
be good or bad they would still walk in it crookedly.  How many men and
women Leicester had tracked or lured to their doom; over how many men and
women he had stepped to his place of power, history speaks not carefully;
but the traces of his deeds run through a thousand archives, and they
suggest plentiful sacrifices to a subverted character.

Favourite of a Queen, he must now stoop to set a trap for the ruin of
as simple a soul as ever stepped upon the soil of England; and his dark
purposes had not even the excuse of necessity on the one hand, of love or
passion on the other.  An insane jealousy of the place the girl had won
in the consideration of the Queen, of her lover who, he thought, had won
a still higher place in the same influence, was his only motive for
action at first.  His cruelty was not redeemed even by the sensuous
interest the girl might arouse in a reckless nature by her beauty and her
charm.

So the great Leicester--the Gipsy, as the dead Sussex had called him--lay
in wait in Greenwich Park for Angele to pass, like some orchard thief in
the blossoming trees.  Knowing the path by which she would come to her
father's cottage from the palace, he had placed himself accordingly.
He had thought he might have to wait long or come often for the perfect
opportunity; but it seemed as if Fate played his game for him, and that
once again the fruit he would pluck should fall into his palm.  Bright-
eyed, and elated from a long talk with the Duke's Daughter, who had given
her a message from the Queen, Angele had abstractedly taken the wrong
path in the wood.  Leicester saw that it would lead her into the maze
some distance off.  Making a detour, he met her at the moment she
discovered her mistake.  The light from the royal word her friend had
brought was still in her face; but it was crossed by perplexity now.

He stood still as though astonished at seeing her, a smile upon his face.
So perfectly did he play his part that she thought the meeting
accidental; and though in her heart she had a fear of the man and knew
how bitter an enemy he was of Michel's, his urbane power, his skilful
diplomacy of courtesy had its way.  These complicated lives, instinct
with contradiction, have the interest of forbidden knowledge.  The dark
experiences of life leave their mark and give such natures that touch of
mystery which allures even those who have high instincts and true
feelings, as one peeps over a hidden depth and wonders what lies beyond
the dark.  So Angele, suddenly arrested, was caught by the sense of
mystery in the man, by the fascination of finesse, of dark power; and it
was womanlike that all on an instant she should dream of the soul of
goodness in things evil.

Thus in life we are often surprised out of long years of prejudice, and
even of dislike and suspicion, by some fortuitous incident, which might
have chanced to two who had every impulse towards each other, not such
antagonisms as lay between Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, and this
Huguenot refugee.  She had every cue to hate hum.  Each moment of her
life in England had been beset with peril because of him-peril to the
man she loved, therefore peril to herself.  And yet, so various is the
nature of woman, that, while steering straitly by one star, she levies
upon the light of other stars.  Faithful and sincere, yet loving power,
curious and adventurous, she must needs, without intention, without
purpose, stray into perilous paths.

As Leicester stepped suddenly into Angele's gaze, she was only, as it
were, conscious of a presence in itself alluring by virtue of the history
surrounding it.  She was surprised out of an instinctive dislike, and the
cue she had to loathe him was for the moment lost.

Unconsciously, unintentionally, she smiled at him now, then, realising,
retreated, shrinking from him, her face averted.  Man or woman had found
in Leicester the delicate and intrepid gamester, exquisite in the choice
of detail, masterful in the breadth of method.  And now, as though his
whole future depended on this interview, he brought to bear a life-long
skill to influence her.  He had determined to set the Queen against her.
He did not know--not even he--that she had saved the Queen's life on that
auspicious May Day when Harry Lee had fought the white knight Michel de
la Foret and halved the honours of the lists with him.  If he had but
known that the Queen had hid from him this fact--this vital thing
touching herself and England, he would have viewed his future with a
vaster distrust.  But there could be no surer sign of Elizabeth's growing
coldness and intended breach than that she had hid from him the dreadful
incident of the poisoned glove, and the swift execution of the would-be
murderer, and had made Cecil her only confidant.  But he did know that
Elizabeth herself had commanded Michel de la Foret to the lists; and his
mad jealousy impelled him to resort to a satanic cunning towards these
two fugitives, who seemed to have mounted within a few short days as far
as had he in thrice as many years to a high place in the regard of the
Majesty of England.

To disgrace them both; to sow distrust of the girl in the Queen's mind;
to make her seem the opposite of what she was; to drop in her own mind
suspicion of her lover; to drive her to some rash act, some challenge of
the Queen herself--that was his plan.  He knew how little Elizabeth's
imperious spirit would brook any challenge from this fearless girl
concerning De la Foret.  But to convince her that the Queen favoured
Michel in some shadowed sense, that De la Foret was privy to a dark
compact--so deep a plot was all worthy of a larger end.  He had well
inspired the Court of France through its ambassador to urge the Medici to
press actively and bitterly for De la Foret's return to France and to the
beheading sword that waited for him; and his task had been made light by
international difficulties, which made the heart of Elizabeth's foreign
policy friendship with France and an alliance against Philip of Spain.
She had, therefore, opened up, even in the past few days, negotiations
once again for the long-talked-of marriage with the Duke of Anjou, the
brother of the King, son of the Medici.  State policy was involved, and,
if De la Foret might be a counter, the pledge of exchange in the game,
as it were, the path would once more be clear.

He well believed that Elizabeth's notice of De la Foret was but a fancy
that would pass, as a hundred times before such fancies had come and
gone; but against that brighter prospect there lay the fact that never
before had she shown himself such indifference.  In the past she had
raged against him, she had imprisoned him; she had driven him from her
presence in her anger, but always her paroxysms of rage had been
succeeded by paroxysms of tenderness.  Now he saw a colder light in the
sky, a greyer horizon met his eye.  So at every corner of the compass he
played for the breaking of the spell.

Yet as he now bowed low before Angele there seemed to show in his face a
very candour of surprise, of pleasure, joined to a something friendly and
protective in his glance and manner.  His voice insinuated that bygones
should be bygones; it suggested that she had misunderstood him.  It
pleaded against the injustice of her prejudice.

"So far from home!" he said with a smile.

"More miles from home," she replied, thinking of never-returning days in
France, "than I shall ever count again."

"But no, methinks the palace is within a whisper," he responded.

"Lord Leicester knows well I am a prisoner; that I no longer abide in the
palace," she answered.

He laughed lightly.  "An imprisonment in a Queen's friendship.  I bethink
me, it is three hours since I saw you go to the palace.  It is a few
worthless seconds since you have got your freedom."

She nettled at his tone.  "Lord Leicester takes great interest in my
unimportant goings and comings.  I cannot think it is because I go and
come."

He chose to misunderstand her meaning.  Drawing closer he bent over her
shoulder.  "Since your arrival here, my only diary is the tally of your
coming and going."  Suddenly, as though by an impulse of great frankness,
he added in a low tone:

"And is it strange that I should follow you--that I should worship grace
and virtue?  Men call me this and that.  You have no doubt been filled
with dark tales of my misdeeds.  Has there been one in the Court, even
one, who, living by my bounty or my patronage, has said one good word of
me?  And why?  For long years the Queen, who, maybe, might have been
better counselled, chose me for her friend, adviser--because I was true
to her.  I have lived for the Queen, and living for her have lived for
England.  Could I keep--I ask you, could I keep myself blameless in the
midst of flattery, intrigue, and conspiracy?  I admit that I have played
with fiery weapons in my day; and must needs still do so.  The
incorruptible cannot exist in the corrupted air of this Court.  You have
come here with the light of innocence and truth about you.  At first I
could scarce believe that such goodness lived, hardly understood it.  The
light half-blinded and embarrassed; but, at last, I saw!  You of all this
Court have made me see what sort of life I might have lived.  You have
made me dream the dreams of youth and high unsullied purpose once again.
Was it strange that in the dark pathways of the Court I watched your
footsteps come and go, carrying radiance with you?  No--Leicester has
learned how sombre, sinister, has been his past, by a presence which is
the soul of beauty, of virtue, and of happy truth.  Lady, my heart is
yours.  I worship you."

Overborne for the moment by the eager, searching eloquence of his words,
she had listened bewildered to him.  Now she turned upon him with panting
breath and said:

"My lord, my lord, I will hear no more.  You know I love Monsieur de la
Foret, for whose sake I am here in England--for whose sake I still
remain."

"'Tis a labour of love but ill requited," he answered with suggestion in
his tone.

"What mean you, my lord?" she asked sharply, a kind of blind agony in
her voice; for she felt his meaning, and though she did not believe him,
and knew in her soul he slandered, there was a sting, for slander ever
scorches where it touches.

"Can you not see?" he said.  "May Day--why did the Queen command him to
the lists?  Why does she keep him here-in the palace?  Why, against the
will of France, her ally, does she refuse to send him forth?  Why,
unheeding the laughter of the Court, does she favour this unimportant
stranger, brave though he be?  Why should she smile upon him?  .  .  .
Can you not see, sweet lady?"

"You know well why the Queen detains him here," she answered calmly now.
"In the Queen's understanding with France, exiles who preach the faith
are free from extradition.  You heard what the Queen required of him--
that on Trinity Day he should preach before her, and upon this preaching
should depend his safety."

"Indeed, so her Majesty said with great humour," replied Leicester.  "So
indeed she said; but when we hide our faces a thin veil suffices.  The
man is a soldier--a soldier born.  Why should he turn priest now?  I pray
you, think again.  He was quick of wit; the Queen's meaning was clear to
him; he rose with seeming innocence to the fly, and she landed him at the
first toss.  But what is forward bodes no good to you, dear star of
heaven.  I have known the Queen for half a lifetime.  She has wild whims
and dangerous fancies, fills her hours of leisure with experiences--an
artist is the Queen.  She means no good to you."

She had made as if to leave him, though her eyes searched in vain for the
path which she should take; but she now broke in impatiently:

"Poor, unnoted though I am, the Queen of England is my friend," she
answered.  "What evil could she wish me?  From me she has naught to fear.
I am not an atom in her world.  Did she but lift her finger I am done.
But she knows that, humble though I be, I would serve her to my last
breath; because I know, my Lord Leicester, how many there are who serve
her foully, faithlessly; and there should be those by her who would serve
her singly."

His eyes half closed, he beat his toe upon the ground.  He frowned, as
though he had no wish to hurt her by words which he yet must speak.  With
calculated thought he faltered.

"Yet do you not think it strange," he said at last, "that Monsieur de la
Foret should be within the palace ever, and that you should be banished
from the palace?  Have you never seen the fly and the spider in the web?
Do you not know that they who have the power to bless or ban, to give joy
or withhold it, appear to give when they mean to withhold?  God bless us
all--how has your innocence involved your judgment!"

She suddenly flushed to the eyes.  "I have wit enough," she said acidly,
"to feel that truth which life's experience may not have taught me.  It
is neither age nor evil that teaches one to judge 'twixt black and white.
God gives the true divination to human hearts that need."

It was a contest in which Leicester revelled--simplicity and single-
mindedness against the multifarious and double-tongued.  He had made many
efforts in his time to conquer argument and prejudice.  When he chose,
none could be more insinuating or turn the flank of a proper argument by
more adroit suggestion.  He used his power now.

"You think she means well by you?  You think that she, who has a thousand
ladies of a kingdom at her call, of the best and most beautiful--and
even," his voice softened, "though you are more beautiful than all, that
beauty would soften her towards you?  When was it Elizabeth loved beauty?
When was it that her heart warmed towards those who would love or wed?
Did she not imprison me, even in these palace grounds, for one whole year
because I sought to marry?  Has she not a hundred times sent from her
presence women with faces like flowers because they were in contrast to
her own?  Do you see love blossoming at this Court?  God's Son! but she
would keep us all like babes in Eden an' she could, unmated and unloved."

He drew quickly to her and leant over her, whispering down her shoulder.
"Do you think there is any reason why all at once she should change her
mind and cherish lovers?"

She looked up at him fearlessly and firmly.

"In truth, I do.  My Lord Leicester, you have lived in the circle of her
good pleasure, near to her noble Majesty, as you say, for half a
lifetime.  Have you not found a reason why now or any time she should
cherish love and lovers?  Ah, no, you have seen her face, you have heard
her voice, but you have not known her heart!"

"Ah, opportunity lacked," he said in irony and with a reminiscent smile.
"I have been busy with State affairs, I have not sat on cushions,
listening to royal fingers on the virginals.  Still, I ask you, do you
think there is a reason why from her height she should stoop down to
rescue you or give you any joy?  Wherefore should the Queen do aught to
serve you?  Wherefore should she save your lover?"

It was on Angele's lips to answer, "Because I saved her life on May Day."
It was on her lips to tell of the poisoned glove, but she only smiled,
and said:

"But, yes, I think, my lord, there is a reason, and in that reason I have
faith."

Leicester saw how firmly she was fixed in her idea, how rooted was her
trust in the Queen's intentions towards her; and he guessed there was
something hidden which gave her such supreme confidence.

"If she means to save him, why does she not save him now?  Why not end
the business in a day--not stretch it over these long mid-summer weeks?"

"I do not think it strange," she answered.  "He is a political prisoner.
Messages must come and go between England and France.  Besides, who
calleth for haste?  Is it I who have most at stake?  It is not the first
time I have been at Court, my lord.  In these high places things are
orderly,"--a touch of sarcasm came into her tone,--"life is not a mighty
rushing wind, save to those whom vexing passion drives to hasty deeds."

She made to move on once more, but paused, still not certain of her way.

"Permit me to show you," he said with a laugh and a gesture towards a
path.  "Not that--this is the shorter.  I will take you to a turning
which leads straight to your durance--and another which leads elsewhere."

She could not say no, because she had, in very truth, lost her way, and
she might wander far and be in danger.  Also, she had no fear of him.
Steeled to danger in the past, she was not timid; but, more than all, the
game of words between them had had its fascination.  The man himself, by
virtue of what he was, had his fascination also.  The thing inherent in
all her sex, to peep over the hedge, to skirt dangerous fires lightly, to
feel the warmth distantly and not be scorched--that was in her, too; and
she lived according to her race and the long predisposition of the ages.
Most women like her--as good as she--have peeped and stretched out hands
to the alluring fire and come safely through, wiser and no better.  But
many, too, bewildered and confused by what they see--as light from a
mirror flashed into the eye half blinds--have peeped over the hedge and,
miscalculating their power of self-control, have entered in, and returned
no more into the quiet garden of unstraying love.

Leicester quickly put on an air of gravity.  "I warn you that danger lies
before you.  If you cross the Queen--and you will cross the Queen when
you know the truth, as I know it--you will pay a heavy price for refusing
Leicester as your friend."

She made a protesting motion and seemed about to speak, but suddenly,
with a passionate gesture, Leicester added: "Let them go their way.
Monsieur de la Foret will be tossed aside before another winter comes.
Do you think he can abide here in the midst of plot and intrigue, and
hated by the people of the Court?  He is doomed.  But more, he is
unworthy of you; while I can serve you well, and I can love you well."
She shrank away from him.  "No, do not turn from me, for in very truth,
Leicester's heart has been pierced by the inevitable arrow.  You think I
mean you evil?"

He paused with a sudden impulse continued: "No! no!  And if there be a
saving grace in marriage, marriage it shall be, if you will but hear me.
You shall be my wife--Leicester's wife.  As I have mounted to power so I
will hold power with you--with you, the brightest spirit that ever
England saw.  Worthy of a kingdom with you beside me, I shall win to
greater, happier days; and at Kenilworth, where kings and queens have
lodged, you shall be ruler.  We will leave this Court until Elizabeth,
betrayed by those who know not how to serve her, shall send for me again.
Here--the power behind the throne--you and I will sway this realm through
the aging, sentimental Queen.  Listen, and look at me in the eyes--
I speak the truth, you read my heart.  You think I hated you and hated De
la Foret.  By all the gods, it's true I hated him, because I saw that he
would come between me and the Queen.  A man must have one great passion.
Life itself must be a passion.  Power was my passion--power, not the
Queen.  You have broken all that down.  I yield it all to you--for your
sake and my own.  I would steal from life yet before my sun goes to its
setting a few years of truth and honesty and clear design.  At heart I am
a patriot--a loyal Englishman.  Your cause--the cause of Protestantism--
did I not fight for it at Rochelle?  Have I not ever urged the Queen to
spend her revenue for your cause, to send her captains and her men to
fight for it?"

She raised her head in interest, and her lips murmured: "Yes, yes, I know
you did that."

He saw his advantage and pursued it.  "See, I will be honest with you--
honest, at last, as I have wished in vain to be, for honesty was
misunderstood.  It is not so with you--you understand.  Dear, light of
womanhood, I speak the truth now.  I have been evil in my day I admit it
--evil because I was in the midst of evil.  I betrayed because I was
betrayed; I slew, else I should have been slain.  We have had dark days
in England, privy conspiracy and rebellion; and I have had to thread my
way through dreadful courses by a thousand blind paths.  Would it be no
joy to you if I, through your influence, recast my life--remade my
policy, renewed my youth--pursuing principle where I have pursued
opportunity?  Angele, come to Kenilworth with me.  Leave De la Foret to
his fate.  The way to happiness is with me.  Will you come?"

He had made his great effort.  As he spoke he almost himself believed
that he told the truth.  Under the spell of his own emotional power it
seemed as though he meant to marry her, as though he could find happiness
in the union.  He had almost persuaded himself to be what he would have
her to believe he might be.

Under the warmth and convincing force of his words her pulses had beat
faster, her heart had throbbed in her throat, her eyes had glistened;
but not with that light which they had shed for Michel de la Foret.
How different was this man's wooing--its impetuous, audacious, tender
violence, with that quiet, powerful, almost sacred gravity of her
Camisard lover!  It is this difference--the weighty, emotional
difference--between a desperate passion and a pure love which has ever
been so powerful in twisting the destinies of a moiety of the world to
misery, who otherwise would have stayed contented, inconspicuous and
good.  Angele would have been more than human if she had not felt the
spell of the ablest intriguer, of the most fascinating diplomatist of his
day.

Before he spoke of marriage the thrill--the unconvincing thrill though it
was--of a perilous temptation was upon her; but the very thing most meant
to move her only made her shudder; for in her heart of hearts she knew
that he was ineradicably false.  To be married to one constitutionally
untrue would be more terrible a fate for her than to be linked to him in
a lighter, more dissoluble a bond.  So do the greatest tricksters of this
world overdo their part, so play the wrong card when every past
experience suggests it is the card to play.  He knew by the silence that
followed his words, and the slow, steady look she gave him, that she was
not won nor on the way to the winning.

"My lord," she said at last, and with a courage which steadied her
affrighted and perturbed innocence, "you are eloquent, you are fruitful
of flattery, of those things which have, I doubt not, served you well in
your day.  But, if you see your way to a better life, it were well you
should choose one of nobler mould than I.  I am not made for sacrifice,
to play the missioner and snatch brands from the burning.  I have enough
to do to keep my own feet in the ribbon-path of right.  You must look
elsewhere for that guardian influence which is to make of you a paragon."

"No, no," he answered sharply, "you think the game not worth the candle
--you doubt me and what I can do for you; my sincerity, my power you
doubt."

"Indeed, yes, I doubt both," she answered gravely, "for you would have me
believe that I have power to lead you.  With how small a mind you credit
me!  You think, too, that you sway this kingdom; but I know that you
stand upon a cliff's edge, and that the earth is fraying 'neath your
tread.  You dare to think that you have power to drag down with you the
man who honours me with--"

"With his love, you'd say.  Yet he will leave you fretting out your soul
until the sharp-edged truth cuts your heart in twain.  Have you no pride?
I care not what you say of me--say your worst, and I will not resent it,
for I will still prove that your way lies with me."

She gave a bitter sigh, and touched her forehead with trembling fingers.
"If words could prove it, I had been convinced but now, for they are well
devised, and they have music too; but such a music, my lord, as would
drown the truth in the soul of a woman.  Your words allure, but you have
learned the art of words.  You yourself--oh, my lord, you who have tasted
all the pleasures of this world, could you then have the heart to steal
from one who has so little that little which gives her happiness?"

"You know not what can make you happy--I can teach you that.  By God's
Son!  but you have wit and intellect and are a match for a prince, not
for a cast off Camisard.  I shall ere long be Lord--Lieutenant of
these Isles-of England and Ireland.  Come to my nest.  We will fly far
--ah, your eye brightens, your heart leaps to mine--I feel it now, I--"

"Oh, have done, have done," she passionately broke in; "I would rather
die, be torn upon the rack, burnt at the stake, than put my hand in
yours!  And you do not wish it--you speak but to destroy, not to cherish.
While you speak to me I see all those"--she made a gesture as though to
put something from her "all those to whom you have spoken as you have
done to me.  I hear the myriad falsehoods you have told--one whelming
confusion.  I feel the blindness which has crept upon them--those poor
women--as you have sown the air with the dust of the passion which you
call love.  Oh, you never knew what love meant, my lord!  I doubt if,
when you lay in your mother's arms, you turned to her with love.  You
never did one kindly act for love, no generous thought was ever born in
you by love.  Sir, I know it as though it were written in a book; your
life has been one long calculation--your sympathy or kindness a
calculated thing.  Good-nature, emotion you may have had, but never the
divine thing by which the world is saved.  Were there but one little
place where that Eden flower might bloom within your heart, you could not
seek to ruin that love which lives in mine and fills it, conquering all
the lesser part of me.  I never knew of how much love I was capable until
I heard you speak today.  Out of your life's experience, out of all that
you have learned of women good and evil, you--for a selfish, miserable
purpose--would put the gyves upon my wrists, make me a pawn in your dark
game; a pawn which you would lose without a thought as the game went on.

"If you must fight, my lord, if you must ruin Monsieur de la Foret and a
poor Huguenot girl, do it by greater means than this.  You have power,
you say.  Use it then; destroy us, if you will.  Send us to the Medici:
bring us to the block, murder us--that were no new thing to Lord
Leicester.  But do not stoop to treachery and falsehood to thrust us
down.  Oh, you have made me see the depths of shame to-day!  But yet,"
her voice suddenly changed, a note of plaintive force filled it--"I have
learned much this hour--more than I ever knew.  Perhaps it is that we
come to knowledge only through fire and tears."  She smiled sadly.
"I suppose that sometime some day, this page of life would have scorched
my sight.  Oh, my lord, what was there in me that you dared speak so to
me?  Was there naught to have stayed your tongue and stemmed the tide in
which you would engulf me?"  He had listened as in a dream at first.  She
had read him as he might read himself, had revealed him with the certain
truth, as none other had done in all his days.  He was silent for a long
moment, then raised his hand in protest.

"You have a strange idea of what makes offence and shame.  I offered you
marriage," he said complacently.  "And when I come to think upon it,
after all that you have said, fair Huguenot, I see no cause for railing.
You call me this and that; to you I am a liar, a rogue, a cut-throat,
what you will; and yet, and yet, I will have my way--I will have my way
in the end."

"You offered me marriage--and meant it not.  Do I not know?  Did you rely
so little on your compelling powers, my lord, that you must needs resort
to that bait?  Do you think that you will have your way to-morrow if you
have failed to-day?"

With a quick change of tone and a cold, scornful laugh he rejoined: "Do
you intend to measure swords with me?"

"No, no, my lord," she answered quietly; "what should one poor unfriended
girl do in contest with the Earl of Leicester?  But yet, in very truth,
I have friends, and in my hour of greatest need I shall go seeking."

She was thinking of the Queen.  He guessed her thought.

"You will not be so mad," he said urbanely again.  "Of what can you
complain to the Queen?  Tut, tut, you must seek other friends than the
Majesty of England!"

"Then, my lord, I will," she answered bravely.  "I will seek the help of
such a Friend as fails not when all fails, even He who putteth down the
mighty from their seats and exalteth the humble."

"Well, well, if I have not touched your heart," he answered gallantly,
"I at least have touched your wit and intellect.  Once more I offer you
alliance.  Think well before you decline."

He had no thought that he would succeed, but it was ever his way to
return to the charge.  It had been the secret of his life's success so
far.  He had never taken a refusal.  He had never believed that when man
or woman said no that no was meant; and, if it were meant, he still
believed that constant dropping would wear away the stone.  He still held
that persistence was the greatest lever in the world, that unswerving
persistence was the master of opportunity.

They had now come to two paths in the park leading different ways.

"This road leads to Kenilworth, this to your prison," he said with a slow
gesture, his eyes fixed upon hers.  "I will go to my prison, then," she
said, stepping forward, "and alone, by your leave."

Leicester was a good sportsman.  Though he had been beaten all along the
line, he hid his deep chagrin, choked down the rage that was in him.
Smiling, he bowed low.

"I will do myself the honour to visit your prison to-morrow," he said.

"My father will welcome you, my lord," she answered, and, gathering up
her skirt, ran down the pathway.

He stood unmoving, and watched her disappear.  "But I shall have my way
with them both," he said aloud.

The voice of a singer sounded in the green wood.  Half consciously
Leicester listened.  The words came shrilling through the trees:

                   "Oh, love, it is a lily flower,
                    (Sing, my captain, sing, my lady!)
                    The sword shall cleave it,
                    Life shall leave it
                    Who shall know the hour?
                    (Sing, my lady, still!)"

Presently the jingling of bells mingled with the song, then a figure in
motley burst upon him.  It was the Queen's fool.

"Brother, well met--most happily met!" he cried.  "And why well met,
fool?" asked Leicester.  "Prithee, my work grows heavy, brother.  I seek
another fool for the yoke.  Here are my bells for you.  I will keep my
cap.  And so we will work together, fool: you for the morning, I for the
afternoon, and the devil take the night-time!  So God be with you,
Obligato!"

With a laugh he leaped into the undergrowth, and left Leicester standing
with the bells in his hand.




CHAPTER XVI

Angele had come to know, as others in like case have ever done, how
wretched indeed is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours.  She had
saved the Queen's life upon May Day, and on the evening of that day the
Queen had sent for her, had made such high and tender acknowledgment of
her debt as would seem to justify for her perpetual honour.  And what
Elizabeth said she meant; but in a life set in forests of complications
and opposing interests the political overlapped the personal in her
nature.  Thus it was that she had kept the princes of the world dangling,
advancing towards marriage with them, retreating suddenly, setting off
one house against the other, allying herself to one European power
to-day, with another to-morrow, her own person and her crown the pawn
with which she played.  It was not a beautiful thing in a woman, but it
was what a woman could do; and, denied other powers given to men--as to
her father--she resorted to astute but doubtful devices to advance her
diplomacy.  Over all was self-infatuation, the bane of princes, the curse
of greatness, the source of wide injustice.  It was not to be expected,
as Leicester had said, that Elizabeth, save for the whim of the moment,
would turn aside to confer benefit upon Angele or to keep her in mind,
unless constrained to do so for some political reason.

The girl had charmed the Queen, had, by saving her life, made England
her long debtor; but Leicester had judged rightly in believing that the
Queen might find the debt irksome; that her gratitude would be corroded
by other destructive emotions.  It was true that Angele had saved her
life, but Michel had charmed her eye.  He had proved himself a more
gallant fighter than any in her kingdom; and had done it, as he had said,
in her honour.  So, as her admiration for Michel grew, her debt to Angele
became burdensome; and, despite her will, there stole into her mind the
old petulance and smothered anger against beauty and love and marriage.
She could ill bear that one near her person should not be content to
flourish in the light and warmth of her own favour, setting aside all
other small affections.  So it was that she had sent Angele to her father
and kept De la Foret in the palace.  Perplexed, troubled by new
developments, the birth of a son to Mary Queen of Scots, the demand of
her Parliament that she should marry, the pressure of foreign policy
which compelled her to open up again negotiations for marriage with the
Duke of Anjou--all these combined to detach her from the interest she had
suddenly felt in Angele.  But, by instinct, she knew also that Leicester,
through jealousy, had increased the complication; and, fretful under the
long influence he had had upon her, she steadily lessened intercourse
with him.  The duel he fought with Lempriere on May Day came to her ears
through the Duke's Daughter, and she seized upon it with sharp petulance.
First she ostentatiously gave housing and care to Lempriere, and went to
visit him; then, having refused Leicester audience, wrote to him.

"What is this I hear," she scrawled upon the paper, "that you have forced
a quarrel with the Lord of Rozel, and have well-ny ta'en his life!  Is
swording then your dearest vice that you must urge it on a harmless
gentle man, and my visitor?  Do you think you hold a charter of freedom
for your self-will?  Have a care, Leicester, or, by God!  you shall know
another sword surer than your own."

The rage of Leicester on receiving this knew no bounds; for though he had
received from Elizabeth stormy letters before, none had had in it the
cold irony of this missive.  The cause of it?  Desperation seized him.
With a mad disloyalty he read in every word of Elizabeth's letter, Michel
de la Foret, refugee.  With madder fury he determined to strike for the
immediate ruin of De la Foret, and Angele with him--for had she not
thrice repulsed him as though he had been some village captain?  After
the meeting in the maze he had kept his promise of visiting her "prison."
By every art, and without avail, he had through patient days sought to
gain an influence over her; for he saw that if he could but show the
Queen that the girl was open to his advances, accepted his protection,
her ruin would be certain--in anger Elizabeth would take revenge upon
both refugees.  But however much he succeeded with Monsieur Aubert, he
failed wholly with Angele.  She repulsed him still with the most certain
courtesy, with the greatest outward composure; but she had to make her
fight alone, for the Queen forbade intercourse with Michel, and she must
have despaired but for the messages sent now and then by the Duke's
Daughter.

Through M. Aubert, to whom Leicester was diligently courteous, and whom
he sought daily, discussing piously the question of religion so dear to
the old man's heart, he strove to foster in Angele's mind the suspicion
he had ventured at their meeting in the maze, that the Queen, through
personal interest in Michel, was saving his life to keep him in her
household.  So well did he work on the old man's feelings that when he
offered his own protection to M. Aubert and Angele, whatever the issue
with De la Foret might be, he was met with an almost tearful response of
gratitude.  It was the moment to convey a deep distrust of De la Foret to
the mind of the old refugee, and it was subtly done.

Were it not better to leave the Court where only danger surrounded them,
and find safety on Leicester's own estate, where no man living could
molest them?  Were it not well to leave Michel de la Foret to his fate,
what ever it would be?  Thrice within a week the Queen had sent for De la
Foret--what reason was there for that, unless the Queen had a secret
personal interest in him?  Did M. Aubert think it was only a rare touch
of humour which had turned De la Foret into a preacher, and set his fate
upon a sermon to be preached before the Court?  He himself had long held
high office, had been near to her Majesty, and he could speak with more
knowledge than he might use--it grieved him that Mademoiselle Aubert
should be placed in so painful a position.

Sometimes as the two talked Angele would join them; and then there was
a sudden silence, which made her flush with embarrassment, anxiety or
anger.  In vain did she assume a cold composure, in vain school herself
to treat Leicester with a precise courtesy; in vain her heart protested
the goodness of De la Foret and high uprightness of the Queen; the
persistent suggestions of the dark Earl worked upon her mind in spite
of all.  Why had the Queen forbidden her to meet Michel, or write to him,
or to receive letters from him?  Why had the Queen, who had spoken such
gratitude, deserted her?  And now even the Duke's Daughter wrote to her
no more, sent her no further messages.  She felt herself a prisoner, and
that the Queen had forgotten her debt.  She took to wandering to that
part of the palace-grounds where she could see the windows of the tower
her lover inhabited.  Her old habit of cheerful talk deserted her, and
she brooded.  It was long before she heard of the duel between the
Seigneur and Lord Leicester--the Duke's Daughter had kept this from her,
lest she should be unduly troubled--and when, in anxiety, she went to the
house where Lempriere had been quartered, he had gone, none could tell
her whither.  Buonespoir was now in close confinement, by secret orders
of Leicester, and not allowed to walk abroad; and thus with no friend
save her father, now so much under the influence of the Earl, she was
bitterly solitary.  Bravely she fought the growing care and suspicion in
her heart; but she was being tried beyond her strength.  Her father had
urged her to make personal appeal to the Queen; and at times, despite her
better judgment, she was on the verge of doing so.  Yet what could she
say?  She could not go to the Queen of England and cry out, like a silly
milk-maid: "You have taken my lover--give him back to me!"  What proof
had she that the Queen wanted her lover?  And if she spoke, the
impertinence of the suggestion might send back to the fierce Medici that
same lover, to lose his head.

Leicester, who now was playing the game as though it were a hazard for
states and kingdoms, read the increasing trouble in her face; and waited
confidently for the moment when in desperation she would lose her self-
control and go to the Queen.

But he did not reckon with the depth of the girl's nature and her true
sense of life.  Her brain told her that what she was tempted to do she
should not; that her only way was to wait; to trust that the Queen of
England was as much true woman as Queen, and as much Queen as true woman;
and that the one was held in high equipoise by the other.  Besides,
Trinity Day would bring the end of it all, and that was not far off.  She
steeled her will to wait till then, no matter how dark the sky might be.

As time went on, Leicester became impatient.  He had not been able to
induce M. Aubert to compel Angele to accept a quiet refuge at Kenilworth;
he saw that this plan would not work, and he deployed his mind upon
another.  If he could but get Angele to seek De la Foret in his apartment
in the palace, and then bring the matter to Elizabeth's knowledge with
sure proof, De la Foret's doom would be sealed.  At great expense,
however; for, in order to make the scheme effective, Angele should visit
De la Foret at night.  This would mean the ruin of the girl as well.
Still that could be set right; because, once De la Foret was sent to the
Medici the girl's character could be cleared; and, if not, so much the
surer would she come at last to his protection.  What he had professed in
cold deliberation had become in some sense a fact.  She had roused in him
an eager passion.  He might even dare, when De la Foret was gone, to
confess his own action in the matter to the Queen, once she was again
within his influence.  She had forgiven him more than that in the past,
when he had made his own mad devotion to herself excuse for his rashness
or misconduct.

He waited opportunity, he arranged all details carefully, he secured the
passive agents of his purpose; and when the right day came he acted.

About ten o'clock one night, a half-hour before the closing of the palace
gates, when no one could go in or go out save by permit of the Lord
Chamberlain, a footman from a surgeon of the palace came to Angele,
bearing a note which read:

     "Your friend is very ill, and asks for you.  Come hither alone; and
     now, if you would come at all."

Her father was confined to bed with some ailment of the hour, and asleep
--it were no good to awaken him.  Her mind was at once made up.  There
was no time to ask permission of the Queen.  She knew the surgeon's
messengers by sight, this one was in the usual livery, and his master's
name was duly signed.  In haste she made herself ready, and went forth
into the night with the messenger, her heart beating hard, a pitiful
anxiety shaking her.  Her steps were fleet between the lodge and the
palace.  They were challenged nowhere, and the surgeon's servant,
entering a side door of the palace, led her hastily through gloomy halls
and passages where they met no one, though once in a dark corridor some
one brushed against her.  She wondered why there were no servants to show
the way, why the footman carried no torch or candle; but haste and
urgency seemed due excuse, and she thought only of Michel, and that she
would soon see him-dying, dead perhaps before she could touch his hand!
At last they emerged into a lighter and larger hallway, where her guide
suddenly paused, and said to Angel, motioning towards a door: "Enter.
He is there."

For a moment she stood still, scarce able to breathe, her heart hurt her
so.  It seemed to her as though life itself was arrested.  As the
servant, without further words, turned and left her, she knocked, opened
the door without awaiting a reply, and stepping into semidarkness, said
softly:

"Michel!  Michel!"




CHAPTER XVII

At Angle's entrance a form slowly raised itself on a couch, and a voice,
not Michel's, said: "Mademoiselle--by our Lady, 'tis she!"

It was the voice of the Seigneur of Rozel, and Angle started back amazed.

"You, Monsieur--you!" she gasped.  "It was you that sent for me?"

"Send?  Not I--I have not lost my manners yet.  Rozel at Court is no
greater fool than Lempriere in Jersey."

Angle wrung her hands.  "I thought it De la Foret who was ill.  The
surgeon said to come quickly."  Lempriere braced himself against the
wall, for he was weak, and his fever still high.  "Ill?--not he.  As
sound in body and soul as any man in England.  That is a friend, that De
la Foret lover of yours, or I'm no butler to the Queen.  He gets leave
and brings me here and coaxes me back to life again--with not a wink of
sleep for him these five days past till now."

Angel had drawn nearer, and now stood beside the couch, trembling and
fearful, for it came to her mind that she had been made the victim of
some foul device.  The letter had read: "Your friend is ill."  True,
the Seigneur was her friend, but he had not sent for her.

"Where is De la Foret?" she asked quickly.  "Yonder, asleep," said
the Seigneur, pointing to a curtain which divided the room from one
adjoining.  Angel ran quickly towards the door, then stopped short.  No,
she would not waken him.  She would go back at once.  She would leave the
palace by the way she came.  Without a word she turned and went towards
the door opening into the hallway.  With her hand upon the latch she
stopped short again; for she realised that she did not know her way
through the passages and corridors, and that she must make herself known
to the servants of the palace to obtain guidance and exit.  As she stood
helpless and confused, the Seigneur called hoarsely: "De la Foret--De la
Foret!"  Before Angele could decide upon her course, the curtain of the
other room was thrust aside, and De la Foret entered.  He was scarce
awake, and he yawned contentedly.  He did not see Angele, but turned
towards Lempriere.  For once the Seigneur had a burst of inspiration.
He saw that Angele was in the shadow, and that De la Foret had not
observed her.  He determined that the lovers should meet alone.

"Your arm, De la Foret," he grunted.  "I'll get me to the bed in yonder
room--'tis easier than this couch."  "Two hours ago you could not bear
the bed, and must get you to the couch--and now!  Seigneur, do you know
the weight you are?" he added, laughing, as he stooped, and helping
Lempriere gently to his feet, raised him slowly in his arms and went
heavily with him to the bedroom.  Angele watched him with a strange
thrill of timid admiration and delight.  Surely it could not be that
Michel--her Michel--could be bought from his allegiance by any influence
on earth.  There was the same old simple laugh on his lips, as, with
chaffing words, he carried the huge Seigneur to the other room.  Her
heart acquitted him then and there of all blame, past or to come.

"Michel!" she said aloud involuntarily--the call of her spirit which
spoke on her lips against her will.

De la Foret had helped Lempriere to the bed again as he heard his name
called, and he stood suddenly still, looking straight before him into
space.  Angele's voice seemed ghostly and unreal.

"Michel!" he heard again, and he came forward into the room where she
was.  Yet once again she said the word scarcely above a whisper, for the
look of rapt wonder and apprehension in his manner overcame her.  Now he
turned towards her, where she stood in the shadow by the door.  He saw
her, but even yet he did not stir, for she seemed to him still an
apparition.

With a little cry she came forward to him.  "Michel--help me!" she
murmured, and stretched out her hands.  With a cry of joy he took her in
his arms and pressed her to his heart.  Then a realisation of danger came
to him.

"Why did you come?" he asked.

She told him hastily.  He heard with astonishment, and then said: "There
is some foul trick here.  Have you the message?"  She handed it to him.
"It is the surgeon's writing, verily," he said; "but it is still a
trick, for the sick man here is Rozel.  I see it all.  You and I
forbidden to meet--it was a trick to bring you here."

"Oh, let me go!" she cried.  "Michel, Michel, take me hence."  She
turned towards the door.

"The gates are closed," he said, as a cannon boomed on the evening air.

Angele trembled violently.  "Oh, what will come of this?" she cried, in
tearful despair.

"Be patient, sweet, and let me think," he answered.  At that moment there
came a knocking at the door, then it was thrown open, and there stepped
inside the Earl of Leicester, preceded by a page bearing a torch.

"Is Michel de la Foret within?" he called; then stopped short, as though
astonished, seeing Angele.  "So!  so!" he said, with a contemptuous
laugh.  Michel de la Foret's fingers twitched.  He quickly stepped in
front of Angele, and answered: "What is your business here, my lord?"

Leicester languorously took off a glove, and seemed to stifle a yawn in
it; then said: "I came to take you into my service, to urge upon you for
your own sake to join my troops, going upon duty in the North; for I fear
that if you stay here the Queen Mother of France will have her way.  But
I fear I am too late.  A man who has sworn himself into service d'amour
has no time for service de la guerre."

"I will gladly give an hour from any service I may follow to teach the
Earl of Leicester that he is less a swordsman than a trickster."

Leicester flushed, but answered coolly: "I can understand your chagrin.
You should have locked your door.  It is the safer custom."  He bowed
lightly towards Angele.  "You have not learned our English habits of
discretion, Monsieur de la Foret.  I would only do you service.  I
appreciate your choler.  I should be no less indignant.  So, in the
circumstances, I will see that the gates are opened, of course you did
not realise the flight of time,--and I will take Mademoiselle to her
lodgings.  You may rely on my discretion.  I am wholly at your service
--tout a vous, as who should say in your charming language."

The insolence was so veiled in perfect outward courtesy that it must have
seemed impossible for De la Foret to reply in terms equal to the moment.
He had, however, no need to reply, for the door of the room suddenly
opened, and two pages stepped inside with torches.

They were followed by a gentleman in scarlet and gold, who said, "The
Queen!" and stepped aside.

An instant afterwards Elizabeth, with the Duke's Daughter, entered.

The three dropped upon their knees, and Elizabeth waved without the pages
and the gentleman-in-waiting.  When the doors closed, the Queen eyed the
three kneeling figures, and as her glance fell on Leicester a strange
glitter came into her eyes.  She motioned all to rise, and with a hand
upon the arm of the Duke's Daughter, said to Leicester:

"What brings the Earl of Leicester here?"

"I came to urge upon Monsieur the wisdom of holding to the Sword and
leaving the Book to the butter-fingered religious.  Your Majesty needs
good soldiers."

He bowed, but not low, and it was clear he was bent upon a struggle.  He
was confounded by the Queen's presence, he could not guess why she should
have come; and that she was prepared for what she saw was clear.

"And brought an eloquent pleader with you?"  She made a scornful gesture
towards Angele.

"Nay, your Majesty; the lady's zeal outran my own, and crossed the
threshold first."

The Queen's face wore a look that Leicester had never seen on it before,
and he had observed it in many moods.

"You found the lady here, then?"

"With Monsieur alone.  Seeing she was placed unfortunately, I offered to
escort her hence to her father.  But your Majesty came upon the moment."

There was a ring of triumph in Leicester's voice.  No doubt, by some
chance, the Queen had become aware of Angele's presence, he thought.
Fate had forestalled the letter he had already written on this matter
and meant to send her within the hour.  Chance had played into his hands
with perfect suavity.  The Queen, less woman now than Queen, enraged by
the information got he knew not how, had come at once to punish the gross
breach of her orders and a dark misconduct-so he thought.

The Queen's look, as she turned it on Angele, apparently had in it what
must have struck terror to even a braver soul than that of the helpless
Huguenot girl.

"So it is thus you spend the hours of night?  God's faith, but you are
young to be so wanton!" she cried in a sharp voice.  "Get you from my
sight and out of my kingdom as fast as horse and ship may carry you--as
feet may bear you."  Leicester's face lighted to hear.  "Your high
Majesty," pleaded the girl, dropping on her knees, "I am innocent.  As
God lives, I am innocent."

"The man, then, only is guilty?" the Queen rejoined with scorn.  "Is it
innocent to be here at night, my palace gates shut, with your lover-
alone?"  Leicester laughed at the words.

"Your Majesty, oh, your gracious Majesty, hear me.  We were not alone--
not alone--"

There was a rustle of curtains, a heavy footstep, and Lempriere of Rozel
staggered into the room.  De la Foret ran to help him, and throwing an
arm around him, almost carried him towards the couch.  Lempriere,
however, slipped from De la Foret's grasp to his knees on the floor
before the Queen.

"Not alone, your high and sacred Majesty, I am here--I have been here
through all.  I was here when Mademoiselle came, brought hither by trick
of some knave not fit to be your immortal Majesty's subject.  I speak the
truth, for I am butler to your Majesty and no liar.  I am Lempriere of
Rozel."

No man's self-control could meet such a surprise without wavering.
Leicester was confounded, for he had not known that Lempriere was housed
with De la Foret.  For a moment he could do naught but gaze at Lempriere.
Then, as the Seigneur suddenly swayed and would have fallen, the instinct
of effective courtesy, strong in him, sent him with arms outstretched to
lift him up.  Together, without a word, he and De la Foret carried him to
the couch and laid him down.  That single act saved Leicester's life.
There was something so naturally (though, in truth, it was so
hypocritically) kind in the way he sprang to his enemy's assistance that
an old spirit of fondness stirred in the Queen's breast, and she looked
strangely at him.  When, however, they had disposed of Lempriere and
Leicester had turned again towards her, she said: "Did you think I had no
loyal and true gentlemen at my Court, my lord?  Did you think my leech
would not serve me as fair as he would serve the Earl of Leicester?  You
have not bought us all, Robert Dudley, who have bought and sold so long.
The good leech did your bidding and sent your note to the lady; but there
your bad play ended and Fate's began.  A rabbit's brains, Leicester--and
a rabbit's end.  Fate has the brains you need."

Leicester's anger burst forth now under the lash of ridicule.  "I cannot
hope to win when your Majesty plays Fate in caricature."

With a little gasp of rage Elizabeth leaned over and slapped his face
with her long glove.  "Death of my life, but I who made you do unmake
you!" she cried.

He dropped his hand on his sword.  "If you were but a man, and not--" he
said, then stopped short, for there was that in the Queen's face which
changed his purpose.  Anger was shaking her, but there were tears in her
eyes.  The woman in her was stronger than the Queen.  It was nothing to
her at this moment that she might have his life as easily as she had
struck his face with her glove; this man had once shown the better part
of himself to her, and the memory of it shamed her for his own sake now.
She made a step towards the door, then turned and spoke:

"My Lord, I have no palace and no ground wherein your footstep will not
be trespass.  Pray you, remember."

She turned towards Lempriere, who lay on his couch faint and panting.
"For you, my Lord of Rozel, I wish you better health, though you have
lost it somewhat in a good cause."

Her glance fell on De la Foret.  Her look softened.  "I will hear you
preach next Sunday, sir."

There was an instant's pause, and then she said to Angele, with gracious
look and in a low voice: "You have heard from me that calumny which the
innocent never escape.  To try you I neglected you these many days; to
see your nature even more truly than I knew it, I accused you but now.
You might have been challenged first by one who could do you more harm
than Elizabeth of England, whose office is to do good, not evil.  Nets
are spread for those whose hearts are simple, and your feet have been
caught.  Be thankful that we understand; and know that Elizabeth is your
loving friend.  You have had trials--I have kept you in suspense--there
has been trouble for us all; but we are better now; our minds are more
content; so all may be well, please God!  You will rest this night with
our lady-dove here, and to-morrow early you shall return in peace to your
father.  You have a good friend in our cousin."  She made a gentle motion
towards the Duke's Daughter.  "She has proved it so.  In my leech
she has a slave.  To her you owe this help in time of need.  She hath
wisdom, too, and we must listen to her, even as I have done this day."

She inclined her head towards the door.  Leicester opened it, and as she
passed out she gave him one look which told him that his game was lost,
if not for ever, yet for time uncertain and remote.  "You must not blame
the leech, my lord," she said, suddenly turning back.  "The Queen of
England has first claim on the duty of her subjects.  They serve me for
love; you they help at need as time-servers."

She stepped on, then paused again and looked back.  "Also I forbid
fighting betwixt you," she said, in a loud voice, looking at De la Foret
and Leicester.

Without further sign or look, she moved on.  Close behind came Angele and
the Duke's Daughter, and Leicester followed at some distance.




CHAPTER XVIII

Not far from the palace, in a secluded place hidden by laburnum, roses,
box and rhododendrons, there was a quaint and beautiful retreat.  High
up on all sides of a circle of green the flowering trees and shrubs
interlaced their branches, and the grass, as smooth as velvet, was of
such a note as soothed the eye and quieted the senses.  In one segment of
the verdant circle was a sort of open bower made of poles, up which roses
climbed and hung across in gay festoons; and in two other segments mossy
banks made resting-places.  Here, in days gone by, when Robert Dudley,
Earl of Leicester, first drew the eyes of his Queen upon him, Elizabeth
came to listen to his vows of allegiance, which swam in floods of
passionate devotion to her person.  Christopher Hatton, Sir Henry Lee,
the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, a race of gallants, had knelt
upon this pleasant sward.  Here they had declared a devotion that,
historically platonic, had a personal passion which, if rewarded by no
personal requital, must have been an expensive outlay of patience and
emotion.

But those days had gone.  Robert Dudley had advanced far past his
fellows, had locked himself into the chamber of the Queen's confidence,
had for long proved himself necessary to her, had mingled deference and
admiration with an air of monopoly, and had then advanced to an air of
possession, of suggested control.  Then had begun his decline.  England
and England's Queen could have but one ruler, and upon an occasion in the
past Elizabeth made it clear by the words she used: "God's death, my
Lord, I have wished you well; but my favour is not so locked up for you
that others shall not partake thereof; and, if you think to rule here,
I will take a course to see you forthcoming.  I will have here but one
mistress and no master."

In these words she but declared what was the practice of her life, the
persistent passion of her rule.  The world could have but one sun, and
every man or woman who sought its warmth must be a sun-worshipper.  There
could be no divided faith, no luminaries in the sky save those which
lived by borrowed radiance.

Here in this bright theatre of green and roses poets had sung the praises
of this Queen to her unblushing and approving face; here ladies thrice as
beautiful as she had begged her to tell them the secret of her beauty, so
much greater than that of any living woman; and she was pleased even when
she knew they flattered but to gain her smile--it was the tribute that
power exacts.  The place was a cenotaph of past romance and pleasure.
Every leaf of every tree and flower had impressions of glories, of love,
ambition and intrigue, of tears and laughter, of joyousness and ruin.
Never a spot in England where so much had been said and done, so far
reaching in effect and influence.  But its glory was departed, its day
was done, it was a place of dreams and memories: the Queen came here no
more.  Many years had withered since she had entered this charmed spot;
and that it remained so fine was but evidence of the care of those to
whom she had given strict orders seven years past, that in and out of
season it must be ever kept as it had erstwhile been.  She had never
entered the place since the day the young Marquis of Wessex, whom she had
imprisoned for marrying secretly and without her consent, on his release
came here, and, with a concentrated bitterness and hate, had told her
such truths as she never had heard from man or woman since she was born.
He had impeached her in such cold and murderous terms as must have made
wince even a woman with no pride.  To Elizabeth it was gall and wormwood.
When he at last demanded the life of the young wife who had died in
enforced seclusion, because she had married the man she loved, Elizabeth
was so confounded that she hastily left the place, saying no word in
response.  This attack had been so violent, so deadly, that she had
seemed unnerved, and forbore to command him to the Tower or to death.

"You, in whose breast love never stirred, deny the right to others whom
God blessed with it," he cried.  "Envious of mortal happiness that dare
exist outside your will or gift, you sunder and destroy.  You, in whose
hands was power to give joy, gave death.  What you have sown you shall
reap.  Here on this spot I charge you with high treason, with treachery
to the people over whom you have power as a trust, which trust you have
made a scourge."

With such words as these he had assailed her, and for the first time in
her life she had been confounded.  In safety he had left the place, and
taken his way to Italy, from which he had never returned, though she had
sent for him in kindness.  Since that day Elizabeth had never come
hither; and by-and-by none of her Court came save the Duke's Daughter,
and her fool, who both made it their resort.  Here the fool came upon the
Friday before Trinity Day, bringing with him Lempriere and Buonespoir,
to whom he had much attached himself.

It was a day of light and warmth, and the place was like a basket of
roses.  Having seen the two serving-men dispose, in a convenient place,
the refreshment which Lempriere's appetite compelled, the fool took
command of the occasion and made the two sit upon a bank, while he
prepared the repast.

Strangest of the notable trio was the dwarfish fool with his shaggy black
head, twisted mouth, and watchful, wandering eye, whose foolishness was
but the flaunting cover of shrewd observation and trenchant vision.
Going where he would, and saying what he listed, now in the Queen's inner
chamber, then in the midst of the Council, unconsidered, and the butt of
all, he paid for his bed and bounty by shooting shafts of foolery which
as often made his listeners shrink as caused their laughter.  The Queen
he called Delicio, and Leicester, Obligato--as one who piped to another's
dance.  He had taken to Buonespoir at the first glance, and had
frequented him, and Lempriere had presently been added to his favour.
He had again and again been messenger between them, as also of late
between Angele and Michel, whose case he viewed from a stand-point of
great cheerfulness, and treated them as children playing on the sands--
as, indeed, he did the Queen and all near to her.  But Buonespoir, the
pirate, was to him reality and the actual, and he called him Bono
Publico.  At first Lempriere, ever jealous of his importance, was
inclined to treat him with elephantine condescension; but he could not
long hold out against the boon archness of the jester, and he collapsed
suddenly into as close a friendship as that between himself and
Buonespoir.

A rollicking spirt was his own fullest stock-in-trade, and it won him
like a brother.

So it was that here, in the very bosom of the forest, lured by the pipe
the fool played, Lempriere burst forth into song, in one hand a bottle
of canary, in the other a handful of comfits:

                   "Duke William was a Norman
                    (Spread the sail to the breeze!)
                    That did to England ride;
                    At Hastings by the Channel
                    (Drink the wine to the lees!)
                    Our Harold the Saxon died.
                    If there be no cakes from Normandy,
                    There'll be more ale in England!"

"Well sung, nobility, and well said," cried Buonespoir, with a rose by
the stem in his mouth, one hand beating time to the music, the other
clutching a flagon of muscadella; "for the Normans are kings in England,
and there's drink in plenty at the Court of our Lady Duchess."

"Delicio shall never want while I have a penny of hers to spend," quoth
the fool, feeling for another tune.  "Should conspirators prevail, and
the damnedest be, she hath yet the Manor of Rozel and my larder," urged
Lempriere, with a splutter through the canary.

"That shall be only when the Fifth wind comes--it is so ordained,
Nuncio!" said the fool blinking.  Buonespoir set down his flagon.
"And what wind is the Fifth wind?" he asked, scratching his bullethead,
his child-like, widespread eyes smiling the question.

"There be now four winds--the North wind and his sisters, the East, the
West, and South.  When God sends a Fifth wind, then conspirators shall
wear crowns.  Till then Delicio shall sow and I shall reap, as is
Heaven's will."

Lempriere lay back and roared with laughter.  "Before Belial, there never
was such another as thou, fool.  Conspirators shall die and not prevail,
for a man may not marry his sister, and the North wind shall have no
progeny.  So there shall be no Fifth wind."

"Proved, proved," cried the fool.  "The North wind shall go whistle for a
mate--there shall be no Fifth wind.  So, Delicio shall still sail by the
compass, and shall still compass all, and yet be compassed by none; for
it is written, Who compasseth Delicio existeth not."

Buonespoir watched a lark soaring, as though its flight might lead him
through the fool's argument clearly.  Lempriere closed his eye, and
struggled with it, his lips outpursed, his head sunk on his breast.
Suddenly his eyes opened, he brought the bottle of canary down with a
thud on the turf.  "'Fore Michael and all angels, I have it, fool; I
travel, I conceive.  De Carteret of St. Ouen's must have gone to the
block ere conceiving so.  I must conceive thus of the argument.  He who
compasseth the Queen existeth not, for compassing, he dieth."

"So it is by the hour-glass and the fortune told in the porringer.  You
have conceived like a man, Nuncio."

"And conspirators, I conceive, must die, so long as there be honest men
to slay them," rejoined the Seigneur.

"Must only honest men slay conspirators?  Oh, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego!" wheezed Buonespoir with a grin.  He placed his hand upon his
head in self-pity.  "Buonespoir, art thou damned by muscadella?" he
murmured.

"But thou art purged of the past, Bono Publico," answered the fool.
"Since Delicio hath looked upon thee she hath shredded the Tyburn lien
upon thee--thou art flushed like a mountain spring; and conspirators
shall fall down by thee if thou, passant, dost fall by conspirators in
the way.  Bono Publico, thou shalt live by good company.  Henceforth
contraband shall be spurned and the book of grace opened."

Buonespoir's eyes laughed like a summer sky, but he scratched his head
and turned over the rose-stem in his mouth reflectively.  "So be it,
then, if it must be; but yesterday the Devon sea-sweeper, Francis Drake,
overhauled me in my cottage, coming from the Queen, who had infused him
of me.  'I have heard of you from a high masthead,' said he.  'If the
Spanish main allure you, come with me.  There be galleons yonder still;
they shall cough up doubloons.'  'It hath a sound of piracy,' said I.
'I am expurgated.  My name is written on clean paper now, blessed be the
name of the Queen!'  'Tut, tut, Buonesperado,' laughed he, 'you shall
forget that Tyburn is not a fable if you care to have doubloons reminted
at the Queen's mint.  It is meet Spanish Philip's head be molted to
oblivion, and Elizabeth's raised, so that good silver be purged of Popish
alloy.'  But that I had sworn by the little finger of St. Peter when the
moon was full, never to leave the English seas, I also would have gone
with Drake of Devon this day.  It is a man and a master of men that Drake
of Devon."

"'Tis said that when a man hath naught left but life, and hath treated
his honour like a poor relation, he goes to the Spanish main with Drake
and Grenville," said Lempriere.

"Then must Obligato go, for he hath such credentials," said the fool,
blowing thistle-down in the air.  "Yesterday was no Palm Sunday to
Leicester.  Delicio's head was high.  'Imperial Majesty,' quoth Obligato,
his knees upon the rushes, 'take my life but send me not forth into
darkness where I shall see my Queen no more.  By the light of my Queen's
eyes have I walked, and pains of hell are my Queen's displeasure.'
'Methinks thy humbleness is tardy,' quoth Delicio.  'No cock shall crow
by my nest,' said she.  'And, by the mantle of Elijah, I am out with sour
faces and men of phlegm and rheum.  I will be gay once more.  So get thee
gone to Kenilworth, and stray not from it on thy peril.  Take thy malaise
with thee, and I shall laugh again.'  Behold he goeth.  So that was the
end of Obligato, and now cometh another tune."

"She hath good cheer?" asked Lempriere eagerly.  "I have never seen
Delicio smile these seven years as she smiled to-day; and when she kissed
Amicitia I sent for my confessor and made my will.  Delicio hath come to
spring-time, and the voice of the turtle is in her ear."  "Amicitia--and
who is Amicitia?" asked Lempriere, well flushed with wine.

"She who hath brought Obligato to the diminuendo and finale," answered
the fool; "even she who hath befriended the Huguenottine of the black
eyes."

"Ah, she, the Duke's Daughter--v'la, that is a flower of a lady!  Did she
not say that my jerkin fitted neatly when I did act as butler to her
adorable Majesty three months syne?  She hath no mate in the world save
Mademoiselle Aubert, whom I brought hither to honour and to fame."

"To honour and fame, was it--but by the hill of desperandum, Nuncio,"
said the fool, prodding him with his stick of bells.

"'Desperandum'!  I know not Latin; it amazes me," said Lempriere, waving
a lofty hand.

"She--the Huguenottine--was a-mazed also, and from the maze was played by
Obligato."

"How so!  how so!" cried the Seigneur, catching at his meaning.  "Did
Leicester waylay and siege?  'Sblood, had I known this, I'd have broached
him and swallowed him even on crutches."

"She made him raise the siege, she turned his own guns upon him, and in
the end hath driven him hence."  By rough questioning Lempriere got from
the fool by snatches the story of the meeting in the maze, which had left
Leicester standing with the jester's ribboned bells in his hand.  Then
the Seigneur got to his feet, and hugged the fool, bubbling with
laughter.

"By all the blood of all the saints, I will give thee burial in my own
grave when all's done," he spluttered; "for there never was such fooling,
never such a wise fool come since Confucius and the Khan.  Good be with
you, fool, and thanks be for such a lady.  Thanks be also for the Duke's
Daughter.  Ah, how she laid Leicester out!  She washed him up the shore
like behemoth, and left him gaping."

Buonespoir intervened.  "And what shall come of it?  What shall be the
end?  The Honeyflower lies at anchor--there be three good men in waiting,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and--"

The Seigneur interrupted.  "There's little longer waiting.  All's well!
Her high hereditary Majesty smiled on me when she gave Leicester conge
and fiery quittance.  She hath me in favour, and all shall be well with
Michel and Angele.  O fool, fool, fantastic and flavoured fool, sing me
a song of good content, for if this business ends not with crescendo and
bell-ringing, I am no butler to the Queen nor keep good company!"

Seating themselves upon the mossy bank, their backs to the westward sun,
the fool peered into the green shadows and sang with a soft melancholy an
ancient song that another fool had sung to the first Tudor:

                   "When blows the wind and drives the sleet,
                    And all the trees droop down;
                    When all the world is sad,
                    'tis meet Good company be known:
                    And in my heart good company
                    Sits by the fire and sings to me.

                   "When warriors return, and one
                    That went returns no more;
                    When dusty is the road we run,
                    And garners have no store;
                    One ingle-nook right warm shall be
                    Where my heart hath good company.

                   "When man shall flee and woman fail,
                    And folly mock and hope deceive,
                    Let cowards beat the breast and wail,
                    I'll homeward hie; I will not grieve:
                    I'll draw the blind, I'll there set free
                    My heart's beloved boon company.

                   "When kings shall favour, ladies call
                    My service to their side;
                    When roses grow upon the wall
                    Of life, with love inside;
                    I'll get me home with joy to be
                    In my heart's own good company!"

"Oh, fool, oh, beneficent fool, well done!  'Tis a song for a man--
'twould shame De Carteret of St. Ouen's to his knees," cried Lempriere.

"Oh, benignant fool, well done!  'twould draw me from my meals," said a
voice behind the three; and, turning hastily about, they saw, smiling and
applausive, the Duke's Daughter.  Beside her was Angele.

The three got to their feet, and each made obeisance after his kind-
Buonespoir ducking awkwardly, his blue eyes bulging with pleasure,
Lempriere swelling with vanity and spreading wide acknowledgment of their
presence, the fool condescending a wave of welcome.  "Oh!  abundant
Amicitia!" cried the fool to the Duke's Daughter, "thou art saved by so
doing.  So get thee to thanksgiving and God's mercy."

"Wherefore am I saved by being drawn from my meals by thy music, fool?"
she asked, linking her arm in Angele's.

"Because thou art more enamoured of lampreys than of man; and it is
written that thou shalt love thy fellow man, and he that loveth not is
lost: therefore thou art lost if thou lingerest at meals."

"Is it so, then?  And this lady--what thinkest thou?  Must she also
abstain and seek good company?"

"No, verily, Amicitia, for she is good company itself, and so she may
sleep in the larder and have no fear."

"And what think you--shall she be happy?  Shall she have gifts of fate?"

"Discriminately so, Amicitia.  She shall have souvenirs and no suspicions
of Fate.  But she shall not linger here, for all lingerers in Delicio's
Court are spied upon--not for their soul's good.  She shall go hence,
and--"

"Ay, princely lady, she shall go hence," interposed Lempriere, who had
panted to speak, and could bear silence no longer.  "Her high Majesty
will kiss her on the brow, and in Jersey Isle she shall blossom and bloom
and know bounty--or never more shall I have privilege and perquage."

He lumbered forward and kissed Angele's hand as though conferring
distinction, but with great generosity.  "I said that all should go well,
and so it shall.  Rozel shall prevail.  The Queen knows on what rock to
build, as I made warrant for her, and will still do so."

His vanity was incorrigible, but through it ran so child-like a spirit
that it bred friendship and repulsed not.  The Duke's Daughter pressed
the arm of Angele, who replied:

"Indeed it has been so according to your word, and we are--I am--shall
ever be beholden.  In storm you have been with us, so true a pilot and so
brave a sailor; and if we come to port and the quiet shore, there shall
be spread a feast of remembrance which shall never grow cold, Seigneur."

                   "One ingle-nook right warm shall be
                    Where my heart hath good company,"

sang the fool, and catching by the arm Buonespoir, who ducked his head in
farewell, ran him into the greenwood.  Angele came forward as if to stay
Buonespoir, but stopped short reflectively.  As she did so, the Duke's
Daughter whispered quickly into Lempriere's ear.

Swelling with pride he nodded, and said: "I will reach him and discover
myself to him, and bring him, if he stray, most undoubted and infallible
lady," and with an air of mystery he made a heavily respectful exit.

Left alone, the two ladies seated themselves in the bower of roses, and
for a moment were silent.  Presently the Duke's Daughter laughed aloud.

"In what seas of dear conceit swims your leviathan Seigneur, heart's-
ease?"

Angele stole a hand into the cool palm of the other.  "He was builded for
some lonely sea all his own.  Creation cheated him.  But God give me ever
such friends as he, and I shall indeed 'have good company' and fear no
issue."  She sighed.

"Remains there still a fear?  Did you not have good promise in the
Queen's words that night?"

"Ay, so it seemed, and so it seemed before--on May Day, and yet--"

"And yet she banished you, and tried you, and kept you heart-sick?
Sweet, know you not how bitter a thing it is to owe a debt of love to one
whom we have injured?  So it was with her.  The Queen is not a saint, but
very woman.  Marriage she hath ever contemned and hated; men she hath
desired to keep her faithful and impassioned servitors.  So does power
blind us.  And the braver the man, the more she would have him in her
service, at her feet, the centre of the world."

"I had served her in a crisis, an hour of peril.  Was naught due me?"

The Duke's Daughter drew her close.  "She never meant but that all should
be well.  And because you had fastened on her feelings as never I have
seen another of your sex, so for the moment she resented it; and because
De la Foret was yours--ah, if you had each been naught to the other, how
easy it would have run!  Do you not understand?"

"Nay, then, and yea, then--and I put it from me.  See, am I not happy
now?  Upon your friendship I build."

"Sweet, I did what I could.  Leicester filled her ears with poison
every day, mixed up your business and great affairs with France,
sought to convey that you both were not what you are; until at last I
countermarched him."  She laughed merrily.  "Ay, I can laugh now, but it
was all hanging by a thread, when my leech sent his letter that brought
you to the palace.  It had grieved me that I might not seek you, or write
to you in all those sad days; but the only way to save you was by keeping
the Queen's command; for she had known of Leicester's visits to you, of
your meeting in the maze, and she was set upon it that alone, all alone,
you should be tried to the last vestige of your strength.  If you had
failed--"

"If I had failed--" Angele closed her eyes and shuddered.  "I had not
cared for myself, but Michel--" "If you had failed, there had been no
need to grieve for Michel.  He then had not grieved for thee.  But see,
the wind blows fair, and in my heart I have no fear of the end.  You
shall go hence in peace.  This morning the Queen was happier than I have
seen her these many years: a light was in her eye brighter than showeth
to the Court.  She talked of this place, recalled the hours spent here,
spoke even softly of Leicester.  And that gives me warrant for the
future.  She has relief in his banishment, and only recalls older and
happier days when, if her cares were no greater, they were borne by the
buoyancy of girlhood and youth.  Of days spent here she talked until mine
own eyes went blind.  She said it was a place for lovers, and if she knew
any two lovers who were true lovers, and had been long parted, she would
send them here."

"There be two true lovers, and they have been long parted," murmured
Angele.

"But she commanded these lovers not to meet till Trinity Day, and she
brooks not disobedience even in herself.  How could she disobey her own
commands?  But"--her eyes were on the greenwood and the path that led
into the circle--"but she would shut her eyes to-day, and let the world
move on without her, let lovers thrive, and birds be nesting without heed
or hap.  Disobedience shall thrive when the Queen connives at it--and so
I leave you to your disobedience, sweet."

With a laugh she sprang to her feet, and ran.  Amazed and bewildered
Angele gazed after her.  As she stood looking she heard her name called
softly.

Turning, she saw Michel.  They were alone.




CHAPTER XIX

When De la Foret and Angele saw the Queen again it was in the royal
chapel.

Perhaps the longest five minutes of M. de la Foret's life were those in
which he waited the coming of the Queen on that Trinity Sunday which was
to decide his fate.  When he saw Elizabeth enter the chapel his eyes
swam, till the sight of them was lost in the blur of colour made by the
motions of gorgeously apparelled courtiers and the people of the
household.  When the Queen had taken her seat and all was quiet, he
struggled with himself to put on such a front of simple boldness as he
would wear upon day of battle.  The sword the Queen had given him was at
his side, and his garb was still that of a gentleman, not of a Huguenot
minister such as Elizabeth in her grim humour, and to satisfy her bond
with France, would make of him this day.

The brown of his face had paled in the weeks spent in the palace and in
waiting for this hour; anxiety had toned the ruddy vigour of his bearing;
but his figure was the figure of a soldier, and his hand that of a strong
man.  He shook a little as he bowed to her Majesty, but that passed, and
when at last his eye met that of the Duke's Daughter he grew steady; for
she gave him as plainly as though her tongue spoke, a message from
Angele.  Angele herself he did not see--she was kneeling in an obscure
corner, her father's hand in hers, all the passion of her life pouring
out in prayer.

De la Foret drew himself up with an iron will.  No nobler figure of a man
ever essayed to preach the Word, and so Elizabeth thought; and she
repented of the bitter humour which had set this trial as his chance of
life in England and his freedom from the hand of Catherine.  The man
bulked larger in her eyes than he had ever done, and she struggled with
herself to keep the vow she had made to the Duke's Daughter the night
that Angele had been found in De la Foret's rooms.  He had been the
immediate cause, fated or accidental, of the destined breach between
Leicester and herself; he had played a significant part in her own life.
Glancing at her courtiers, she saw that none might compare with him, the
form and being of calm boldness and courage.  She sighed she knew scarce
why.

When De la Foret first opened his mouth and essayed to call the
worshippers to prayer, no words came forth--only a dry whisper.  Some
ladies simpered, and more than one courtier laughed silently.  Michel
saw, and his face flamed up.  But he laid a hand on himself, and a moment
afterwards his voice came forth, clear, musical, and resonant, speaking
simple words, direct and unlacquered sentences, passionately earnest
withal.  He stilled the people to a unison of sentiment, none the less
interested and absorbed because it was known that he had been the cause
of the great breach between the Queen and the favourite.  Ere he had
spoken far, flippant gallants had ceased to flutter handkerchiefs, to
move their swords idly upon the floor.

He took for his text: "Stand and search for the old paths."  The
beginning of all systems of religion, the coming of the Nazarene, the
rise and growth of Christianity, the martyrdoms of the early church, the
invasion of the truth by false doctrine, the abuses of the Church, the
Reformation, the martyrdom of the Huguenots for the return to the early
principles of Christianity, the "search for the old paths," he set forth
in a tone generous but not fiery, presently powerful and searching, yet
not declamatory.  At the last he raised the sword that hung by his side,
and the Book that lay before him, and said:

"And what matter which it is we wield--this steel that strikes for God,
or this Book which speaks of Him?  For the Book is the sword of the
Spirit, and the sword is the life of humanity; for all faith must be
fought for, and all that is has been won by strife.  But the paths
wherein ye go to battle must be the old paths; your sword shall be your
staff by day, and the Book your lantern by night.  That which ye love ye
shall teach, and that which ye teach ye shall defend; and if your love be
a true love your teaching shall be a great teaching, and your sword a
strong sword which none may withstand.  It shall be the pride of
sovereign and of people; and so neither 'height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God.'"

Ere he had ended, some of the ladies were overcome, the eyes of the
Duke's Daughter were full of tears, and Elizabeth said audibly, when he
ceased speaking: "On my soul, I have no bishop with a tongue like his.
Would that my Lord of Ely were here to learn how truth should be spoke.
Henceforth my bishops shall first be Camisards."

Of that hour's joyful business the Queen wrote thus to the Medici before
the day was done:

Cancelling all other letters on the matter, this M. de la Foret shall
stay in my kingdom.  I may not be the headsman of one of my faith--as
eloquent a preacher as he was a brave soldier.  Abiding by the strict
terms of our treaty with my brother of France, he shall stay with us in
peace, and in our own care.  He hath not the eloquence of a Knox, but he
hath the true thing in him, and that speaks.

To the Duke's Daughter the Queen said: "On my soul, he shall be married
instantly, or my ladies will carry him off and murder him for love."

And so it was that the heart of Elizabeth the Queen warmed again and
dearly towards two Huguenot exiles, and showed that in doing justice she
also had not so sour a heart towards her sex as was set down to her
credit.  Yet she made one further effort to keep De la Foret in her
service.  When Michel, once again, declined, dwelt earnestly on his duty
towards the widow of his dead chief, and begged leave to share her exile
in Jersey, Elizabeth said: "On my soul, but I did not think there was any
man on earth so careless of princes' honours!"

To this De la Foret replied that he had given his heart and life to one
cause, and since Montgomery had lost all, even life, the least Michel de
la Foret could do was to see that the woman who loved him be not
unprotected in the world.  Also, since he might not at this present fight
for the cause, he could speak for it; and he thanked the Queen of England
for having shown him his duty.  All that he desired was to be quiet for a
space somewhere in "her high Majesty's good realm," till his way was
clear to him.

"You would return to Jersey, then, with our friend of Rozel?" Elizabeth
said, with a gesture towards Lempriere, who, now recovered from his
wound, was present at the audience.

De la Foret inclined his head.  "If it be your high Majesty's pleasure."

And Lempriere of Rozel said: "He would return with myself your noble
Majesty's friend before all the world, and Buonespoir his ship the
Honeyflower."

Elizabeth's lips parted in a smile, for she was warmed with the luxury of
doing good, and she answered:

"I know not what the end of this will be, whether our loyal Lempriere
will become a pirate or Buonespoir a butler to my Court; but it is too
pretty a hazard to forego in a world of chance.  By the rood, but I have
never, since I sat on my father's throne, seen black so white as I have
done this past three months.  You shall have your Buonespoir, good Rozel;
but if he plays pirate any more--tell him this from his Queen--upon an
English ship, I will have his head, if I must needs send Drake of Devon
to overhaul him."

That same hour the Queen sent for Angele, and by no leave, save her own,
arranged the wedding-day, and ordained that it should take place at
Southampton, whither the Comtesse de Montgomery had come on her way to
Greenwich to plead for the life of Michel de la Foret, and to beg
Elizabeth to relieve her poverty.  Both of which things Elizabeth did,
as the annals of her life record.

After Elizabeth--ever self-willed--had declared her way about the
marriage ceremony, looking for no reply save that of silent obedience,
she made Angele sit at her feet and tell her whole story again from first
to last.  They were alone, and Elizabeth showed to this young refugee
more of her own heart than any other woman had ever seen.  Not by words
alone, for she made no long story; but once she stooped and kissed Angele
upon the cheek, and once her eyes filled up with tears, and they dropped
upon her lap unheeded.  All the devotion shown herself as a woman had
come to naught; and it may be that this thought stirred in her now.  She
remembered how Leicester and herself had parted, and how she was denied
all those soft resources of regret which were the right of the meanest
women in her realm.  For, whatever she might say to her Parliament and
people, she knew that all was too late--that she would never marry and
that she must go childless and uncomforted to her grave.  Years upon
years of delusion of her people, of sacrifice to policy, had at last
become a self-delusion, to which her eyes were not full opened yet--she
sought to shut them tight.  But these refugees, coming at the moment of
her own struggle, had changed her heart from an ever-growing bitterness
to human sympathy.  When Angele had ended her tale once more, the Queen
said:

"God knows, ye shall not linger in my Court.  Such lives have no place
here.  Get you back to my Isle of Jersey, where ye may live in peace.
Here all is noise, self-seeking and time-service.  If ye twain are not
happy I will say the world should never have been made."

Before they left Greenwich Palace--M. Aubert and Angele, De la Foret,
Lempriere, and Buonespoir--the Queen made Michel de la Foret the gift of
a chaplaincy to the Crown.  To Monsieur Aubert she gave a small pension,
and in Angele's hands she placed a deed of dower worthy of a generosity
greater than her own.

At Southampton, Michel and Angele were married by royal license,
and with the Comtesse de Montgomery set sail in Buonespoir's boat,
the Honeyflower, which brought them safe to St. Helier's, in the Isle
of Jersey.




CHAPTER XX

Followed several happy years for Michel and Angele.  The protection of
the Queen herself, the chaplaincy she had given De la Foret, the
friendship with the Governor of the island; and the boisterous tales
Lempriere had told of those days at Greenwich Palace quickened the
sympathy and held the interest of the people at large; while the simple
lives of the two won their way into the hearts of all, even, at last, to
that of De Carteret of St. Ouen's.  It was Angele herself who brought the
two Seigneurs together at her own good table; and it needed all her tact
on that occasion to prevent the ancient foes from drinking all the wine
in her cellar.

There was no parish in Jersey that did not know their goodness, but
mostly in the parishes of St. Martin's and Rozel were their faithful
labours done.  From all parts of the island people came to hear Michel
speak, though that was but seldom; and when he spoke he always wore the
sword the Queen had given him, and used the Book he had studied in her
palace.  It was to their home that Buonespoir the pirate--faithful to his
promise to the Queen that he would harry English ships no more came
wounded, after an engagement with a French boat sent to capture him,
carried thither by Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.  It was there he
died, after having drunk a bottle of St. Ouen's muscadella, brought
secretly to him by his unchanging friend, Lempriere, so hastening the
end.

The Comtesse de Montgomery, who lived in a cottage near by, came
constantly to the little house on the hillside by Rozel Bay.  She had
never loved her own children more than she did the brown-haired child
with the deep-blue eyes, which was the one pledge of the great happiness
of Michel and Angele.

Soon after this child was born, M. Aubert had been put to rest in St.
Martin's churchyard, and there his tombstone might be seen so late as a
hundred years ago.  So things went softly by for seven years, and then
Madame de Montgomery journeyed to England, on invitation of the Queen and
to better fortune, and Angele and De la Foret were left to their quiet
life in Jersey.  Sometimes this quiet was broken by bitter news from
France, of fresh persecution, and fresh struggle on the part of the
Huguenots.  Thereafter for hours, sometimes for days, De la Foret would
be lost in sorrowful and restless meditation; and then he fretted against
his peaceful calling and his uneventful life.  But the gracious hand of
his wife and the eyes of his child led him back to cheerful ways again.

Suddenly one day came the fearful news from England that the plague had
broken out, and that thousands were dying.  The flight from London was
like the flight of the children of Israel into the desert.  The dead-
carts filled with decaying bodies rattled through the foul streets, to
drop their horrid burdens into the great pit at Aldgate; the bells of
London tolled all day and all night for the passing of human souls.
Hundreds of homes, isolated because of a victim of the plague found
therein, became ghastly breeding-places of the disease, and then silent,
disgusting graves.  If a man shivered in fear, or staggered from
weakness, or for very hunger turned sick, he was marked as a victim, and
despite his protests was huddled away with the real victims to die the
awful death.  From every church, where clergy were left to pray, went up
the cry for salvation from "plague, pestilence, and famine."  Scores of
ships from Holland and from France lay in the Channel, not allowed to
touch the shores of England, nor permitted to return whence they came.
On the very day that news of this reached Jersey, came a messenger from
the Queen of England for Michel de la Foret to hasten to her Court for
that she had need of him, and it was a need which would bring him honour.
Even as the young officer who brought the letter handed it to De la Foret
in the little house on the hill-side above Rozel Bay, he was taken
suddenly ill, and fell at the Camisard's feet.

De la Foret straightway raised him in his arms.  He called to his wife,
but, bidding her not come near, he bore the doomed man away to the lonely
Ecrehos Rocks lying within sight of their own doorway.  Suffering no one
to accompany him, he carried the sick man to the boat which had brought
the Queen's messenger to Rozel Bay.  The sailors of the vessel fled, and
alone De la Foret set sail for the Ecrehos.

There upon the black rocks the young man died, and Michel buried him in
the shore-bed of the Maitre Ile.  Then, after two days--for he could bear
suspense no longer--he set sail for Jersey.  Upon that journey there is
no need to dwell.  Any that hath ever loved a woman and a child must
understand.  A deep fear held him all the way, and when he stepped on
shore at Rozel Bay he was as one who had come from the grave, haggard and
old.

Hurrying up the hillside to his doorway, he called aloud to his wife, to
his child.  Throwing open the door, he burst in.  His dead child lay upon
a couch, and near by, sitting in a chair, with the sweat of the dying on
her brow, was Angele.  As he dropped on his knee beside her, she smiled
and raised her hand as if to touch him, but the hand dropped and the head
fell forward on his breast.  She was gone into a greater peace.

Once more Michel made a journey-alone--to the Ecrehos, and there, under
the ruins of the old Abbey of Val Richer, he buried the twain he had
loved.  Not once in all the terrible hours had he shed a tear; not once
had his hand trembled; his face was like stone, and his eyes burned with
an unearthly light.

He did not pray beside the graves; but he knelt and kissed the earth
again and again.  He had doffed his robes of peace, and now wore the garb
of a soldier, armed at all points fully.  Rising from his knees, he
turned his face towards Jersey.

"Only mine!  Only mine!" he said aloud in a dry, bitter voice.

In the whole island, only his loved ones had died of the plague.  The
holiness and charity and love of Michel and Angele had ended so!

When once more he set forth upon the Channel, he turned his back on
Jersey and shaped his course towards France, having sent Elizabeth his
last excuses for declining a service which would have given him honour,
fame and regard.  He was bent upon a higher duty.

Not long did he wait for the death he craved.  Next year, in a Huguenot
sortie from Anvers, he was slain.  He died with these words on his lips:

"Maintenant, Angele!"

In due time the island people forgot them both, but the Seigneur of Rozel
caused a stone to be set up on the highest point of land that faces
France, and on the stone were carved the names of Michel and Angele.
Having done much hard service for his country and for England's Queen,
Lempriere at length hung up his sword and gave his years to peace.  From
the Manor of Rozel he was wont to repair constantly to the little white
house, which remained as the two had left it,--his own by order of the
Queen,--and there, as time went on, he spent most of his days.  To the
last he roared with laughter if ever the name of Buonespoir was mentioned
in his presence; he swaggered ever before the Royal Court and De Carteret
of St. Ouen's; and he spoke proudly of his friendship with the Duke's
Daughter, who had admired the cut of his jerkin at the Court of
Elizabeth.  But in the house where Angele had lived he moved about as
though in the presence of a beloved sleeper he would not awake.

Michel and Angele had had their few years of exquisite life and love,
and had gone; Lempriere had longer measure of life and little love, and
who shall say which had more profit of breath and being?  The generations
have passed away, and the Angel of Equity hath a smiling pity as she
scans the scales and the weighing of the Past.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Never believed that when man or woman said no that no was meant
Slander ever scorches where it touches






ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR THE ENTIRE "MICHEL AND ANGELE":

Boldness without rashness, and hope without vain thinking
Each of us will prove himself a fool given perfect opportunity
Never believed that when man or woman said no that no was meant
No note of praise could be pitched too high for Elizabeth
Nothing is futile that is right
Religion to him was a dull recreation invented chiefly for women
She had never stooped to conquer
Slander ever scorches where it touches






JOHN ENDERBY

By Gilbert Parker



I

Of all the good men that Lincolnshire gave to England to make her proud,
strong and handsome, none was stronger, prouder and more handsome than
John Enderby, whom King Charles made a knight against his will.

"Your gracious Majesty," said John Enderby, when the King was come to
Boston town on the business of draining the Holland fen and other matters
more important and more secret, "the honour your Majesty would confer is
well beyond a poor man like myself, for all Lincolnshire knows that I am
driven to many shifts to keep myself above water.  Times have been hard
these many years, and, craving your Majesty's pardon, our taxes have been
heavy."

"Do you refuse knighthood of his Majesty?" asked Lord Rippingdale, with
a sneer, patting the neck of his black stallion with a gloved hand.

"The King may command my life, my Lord Rippingdale," was Enderby's reply,
"he may take me, body and bones and blood, for his service, but my poor
name must remain as it is when his Majesty demands a price for honouring
it."

"Treason," said Lord Rippingdale just so much above his breath as the
King might hear.

"This in our presence!" said the King, tapping his foot upon the ground,
his brows contracting, and the narrow dignity of the divine right lifting
his nostrils scornfully.

"No treason, may it please your Majesty," said Enderby, "and it were
better to speak boldly to the King's face than to be disloyal behind
his back.  My estates will not bear the tax which the patent of this
knighthood involves.  I can serve the country no better as Sir John
Enderby than as plain John Enderby, and I can serve my children best by
shepherding my shattered fortunes for their sakes."

For a moment Charles seemed thoughtful, as though Enderby's reasons
appealed to him, but Lord Rippingdale had now the chance which for ten
years he had invited, and he would not let it pass.

"The honour which his Majesty offers, my good Lincolnshire squire, is
more to your children than the few loaves and fishes which you might
leave them.  We all know how miserly John Enderby has grown."

Lord Rippingdale had touched the tenderest spot in the King's mind.  His
vanity was no less than his impecuniosity, and this was the third time in
one day he had been defeated in his efforts to confer an honour, and
exact a price beyond all reason for that honour.  The gentlemen he had
sought had found business elsewhere, and were not to be seen when his
messengers called at their estates.  It was not the King's way to give
anything for nothing.  Some of these gentlemen had been benefited by the
draining of the Holland fens, which the King had undertaken, reserving a
stout portion of the land for himself; but John Enderby benefited
nothing, for his estates lay further north, and near the sea, not far
from the town of Mablethorpe.  He had paid all the taxes which the King
had levied and had not murmured beyond his own threshold.

He spoke his mind with candour, and to him the King was still a man to
whom the truth was to be told with directness, which was the highest
honour one man might show another.

"Rank treason!" repeated Lord Rippingdale, loudly.  "Enderby has been in
bad company, your Majesty.  If you are not wholly with the King, you are
against him.  'He that is not with me is against me, and he that
gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.'"

A sudden anger seized the King, and turning, he set foot in the stirrup,
muttering something to himself, which boded no good for John Enderby.
A gentleman held the stirrup while he mounted, and, with Lord Rippingdale
beside him in the saddle, he turned and spoke to Enderby.  Self-will and
resentment were in his tone.  "Knight of Enderby we have made you," he
said, "and Knight of Enderby you shall remain.  Look to it that you pay
the fees for the accolade."

"Your Majesty," said Enderby, reaching out his hand in protest, "I will
not have this greatness you would thrust upon me.  Did your Majesty need,
and speak to me as one gentleman to another in his need, then would I
part with the last inch of my land; but to barter my estate for a gift
that I have no heart nor use for--your Majesty, I cannot do it."

The hand of the King twisted in his bridle-rein, and his body stiffened
in anger.

"See to it, my Lord Rippingdale," he said, "that our knight here pays to
the last penny for the courtesy of the accolade.  You shall levy upon his
estate."

"We are both gentlemen, your Majesty, and my rights within the law are no
less than your Majesty's," said Enderby stoutly.

"The gentleman forgets that the King is the fountain of all law," said
Lord Rippingdale obliquely to the King.

"We will make one new statute for this stubborn knight," said Charles;
"even a writ of outlawry.  His estates shall be confiscate to the Crown.
Go seek a King and country better suited to your tastes, our rebel Knight
of Enderby."

"I am still an Enderby of Enderby, and a man of Lincolnshire, your
Majesty," answered the squire, as the King rode towards Boston church,
where presently he should pray after this fashion with his subjects there
assembled:

     "Most heartily we beseech Thee with Thy favour to behold our most
     gracious sovereign King Charles.  Endue him plenteously with
     Heavenly gifts; grant him in health and wealth long to live;
     strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies;
     and, finally, after this life, he may attain everlasting joy and
     felicity."

With a heavy heart Enderby turned homewards; that is, towards Mablethorpe
upon the coast, which lies between Saltfleet Haven and Skegness, two
ports that are places of mark in the history of the kingdom, as all the
world knows.

He had never been so vexed in his life.  It was not so much anger against
the King, for he had great reverence for the monarchy of England; but
against Lord Rippingdale his mind was violent.  Years before, in a
quarrel between the Earl of Lindsey and Lord Rippingdale, upon a public
matter which Parliament settled afterwards, he had sided with the Earl of
Lindsey.  The two Earls had been reconciled afterwards, but Lord
Rippingdale had never forgiven Enderby.

In Enderby's brain ideas worked somewhat heavily; but to-day his
slumberous strength was infused with a spirit of action and the warmth of
a pervasive idea.  There was no darkness in his thoughts, but his pulse
beat heavily and he could hear the veins throbbing under his ear
impetuously.  Once or twice as he rode on in the declining afternoon he
muttered to himself.  Now it was: "My Lord Rippingdale, indeed!" or "Not
even for a King!" or "Sir John Enderby, forsooth!  Sir John Enderby,
forsooth!"  Once again he spoke, reining in his horse beside a tall cross
at four corners, near Stickford by the East Fen.  Taking off his hat he
prayed:

"Thou just God, do Thou judge between my King and myself.  Thou knowest
that I have striven as an honest gentleman to do right before all men.
When I have seen my sin, oh, Lord, I have repented!  Now I have come upon
perilous times, the gins are set for my feet.  Oh, Lord, establish me in
true strength!  Not for my sake do I ask that Thou wilt be with me and
Thy wisdom comfort me, but for the sake of my good children.  Wilt Thou
spare my life in these troubles until they be well formed; till the lad
have the bones of a man, and the girl the wise thought of a woman--for
she hath no mother to shield and teach her.  And if this be a wrong
prayer, my God, forgive it: for I am but a blundering squire, whose
tongue tells lamely what his heart feels."

His head was bowed over his horse's neck, his face turned to the cross,
his eyes were shut, and he did not notice the strange and grotesque
figure that suddenly appeared from among the low bushes by the fen near
by.

It was an odd creature perched upon stilts; one of those persons called
the stilt-walkers.  They were no friends of the King, nor of the Earl of
Lindsey, nor of my Lord Rippingdale, for the draining of these fens took
from them their means of living.  They were messengers, postmen and
carriers across the wide stretch of country from Spilsby, even down to
the river Witham, and from Boston Deep down to Market Deeping and over to
the sea.  Since these fens were drained one might travel from Market
Deeping to the Wolds without wetting a foot.

"Aw'll trooble thee a moment, maister," said the peasant.  "A stilt-
walker beant nowt i' the woorld.  Howsome'er, aw've a worrd to speak i'
thy ear."

Enderby reined in his horse, and with a nod of complaisance (for he was a
man ever kind to the poor, and patient with those who fared ill in the
world) he waited for the other to speak.

"Thoo'rt the great Enderby of Enderby, maister," said the peasant,
ducking his head and then putting on his cap; "aw've known thee sin tha
wast no bigger nor a bit grass'opper i' the field.  Wilt tha ride long,
Sir John Enderby, and aw'll walk aside thee, ma grey nag with thy
sorrel."  He glanced down humorously at his own long wooden legs.

Enderby turned his horse round and proceeded on his way slowly, the old
man striding along beside him like a stork.

"Why do you dub me Knight?" he asked, his eyes searching the face of the
old man.

"Why shouldna aw call thee Knight if the King calls thee Knight?  It is
the dooty of a common man to call thee Sir John, and tak off his hat at
saying o' it."  His hat came off, and he nodded in such an odd way that
Enderby burst out into a good honest laugh.  "Dooth tha rememba little
Tom Dowsby that went hoonting wi' thee when tha wert not yet come to
age?" continued the stilt-walker.  "Doost tha rememba when, for a jest,
thee and me stopped the lord bishop, tha own uncle, in the highway at
midnight, and took his poorse from him, and the rich gold chain from his
neck?  And doost tha rememba that tha would have his apron too, for tha
said that if it kept a bishop clean, wouldna it keep highwaymen clean,
whose work was not so clean as a bishop's?  Sir John Enderby, aw loove
thee better than the King, an' aw loove thee better than my Lord
Rippin'dale-ay, theere's a sour heart in a goodly body!"

John Enderby reined up his horse and looked the stilt-walker in the face.

"Are you little Tom Dowsby?" exclaimed he.  "Are you that scamp?"  He
laughed all at once as though he had not a trouble in the world.  "And do
you keep up your evil practices?  Do you still waylay bishops?"

"If aw confessed to Heaven or man, aw would confess to thee, Sir John
Enderby; but aw'll confess nowt."

"And how know you that I am Sir John Enderby?"

"Even in Sleaford town aw kem to know it.  Aw stood no further from his
Majesty and Lord Rippin'dale than aw stand from you, when the pair talked
by the Great Boar inn.  Where doos tha sleep to-night?"

"At Spilsby."

"To-night the King sleeps at Sutterby on the Wolds.  'Tis well for thee
tha doost not bide wi' his Majesty.  Theer, aw've done thee a service."

"What service have you done me?"

"Aw've told thee that tha moost sleep by Spilsby when the King sleeps at
Sutterby.  Fare-thee-well, maister."

Doffing his cap once more, the stilt-walker suddenly stopped, and,
turning aside, made his way with an almost incredible swiftness across
the fen, taking the ditches with huge grotesque strides.  Enderby looked
back and watched him for a moment curiously.  Suddenly the man's words
began to repeat themselves in Enderby's head: "To-night the King sleeps
at Sutterby on the Wolds.  'Tis well for thee tha doost not bide wi' his
Majesty."  Presently a dozen vague ideas began to take form.  The man had
come to warn him not to join the King at Sutterby.

There was some plot against Charles!  These stiltwalkers were tools in
the hands of the King's foes, who were growing more powerful every day.
He would sleep to-night, not at Spilsby, but at Sutterby.  He was a loyal
subject; no harm that he could prevent should come to the King.

Before you come to Sutterby on the Wolds, as you travel north to the
fenland, there is a combe through which the highway passes, and a stream
which has on one side many rocks and boulders, and on the other a sort of
hedge of trees and shrubs.  It was here that the enemies of the King,
that is, some stilt-walkers, with two dishonourable gentlemen who had
suffered from the King's oppressions, placed themselves to way lay his
Majesty.  Lord Rippingdale had published it abroad that the King's route
was towards Horncastle, but at Stickney by the fens the royal party
separated, most of the company passing on to Horncastle, while Charles,
Lord Rippingdale and two other cavaliers proceeded on a secret visit to a
gentleman at Louth.

It was dark when the King and his company came to the combe.  Lord
Rippingdale suggested to his Majesty that one of the gentlemen should
ride ahead to guard against surprise or ambush, but the King laughed,
and said that his shire of Lincoln bred no brigands, and he rode on.
He was in the coach with a gentleman beside him, and Lord Rippingdale
rode upon the right.  Almost as the hoofs of the leaders plunged into the
stream there came the whinny of a horse from among the boulders.
Alarmed, the coachman whipped up his team and Lord Rippingdale clapped
his hand upon his sword.

Even as he did it two men sprang out from among the rocks, seized the
horses' heads, and a dozen others swarmed round, all masked and armed,
and calling upon the King's party to surrender, and to deliver up their
valuables.  One ruffian made to seize the bridle of Lord Rippingdale's
horse, but my lord's sword severed the fellow's hand at the wrist.

"Villain," he shouted, "do you know whom you attack?"

For answer, shots rang out; and as the King's gentlemen gathered close to
the coach to defend him, the King himself opened the door and stepped
out.  As he did so a stilt struck him on the head.  Its owner had aimed
it at Lord Rippingdale; but as my lord's horse plunged, it missed him,
and struck the King fair upon the crown of the head.  He swayed, groaned
and fell back into the open door of the coach.  Lord Rippingdale was at
once beside him, sword drawn, and fighting gallantly.

"Scoundrels," he cried, "will you kill your King?"

"We will have the money which the King carries," cried one of his
assailants.  "The price of three knighthoods and the taxes of two shires
we will have."

One of the King's gentlemen had fallen, and another was wounded.  Lord
Rippingdale was hard pressed, but in what seemed the last extremity of
the King and his party there came a shout from the other side of the
stream:

"God save the King!  For the King!  For the King!"

A dozen horsemen splashed their way across the stream, and with swords
and pistols drove through the King's assailants and surrounded his coach.
The ruffians made an attempt to rally and resist the onset, but presently
broke and ran, pursued by a half-dozen of his Majesty's defenders.  Five
of the assailants were killed and several were wounded.

As Lord Rippingdale turned to Charles to raise him, the coach-door was
opened upon the other side, a light was thrust in, and over the
unconscious body of the King my lord recognised John Enderby.

"His Majesty"--began John Enderby.

"His Majesty is better," replied Lord Rippingdale, as the King's eyes
half opened.  "You lead these gentlemen?  This should bring you a
barony,--Sir John," my lord added, half graciously, half satirically; for
the honest truth of this man's nature vexed him.  "The King will thank
you."

"John Enderby wants no reward for being a loyal subject, my lord,"
answered Enderby.

Then with another glance at the King, in which he knew that his Majesty
was recovered, he took off his hat, bowed, and, mounting his horse, rode
away without a word.

At Sutterby the gentlemen received gracious thanks of the King who had
been here delivered from the first act of violence made against him in
his reign.

Of the part which Enderby had played Lord Rippingdale said no more to the
King than this:

"Sir John Enderby was of these gentlemen who saved your Majesty's life.
Might it not seem to your Majesty that--"

"Was he of them?" interrupted the King kindly; then, all at once, out of
his hurt vanity and narrow self-will, he added petulantly: "When he hath
paid for the accolade of his knighthood, then will we welcome him to us,
and make him Baron of Enderby."

Next day when Enderby entered the great iron gates of the grounds of
Enderby House the bell was ringing for noon.  The house was long and low,
with a fine tower in the centre, and two wings ran back, forming the
court-yard, which would have been entirely inclosed had the stables moved
up to complete the square.

When Enderby came out into the broad sweep of grass and lawn, flanked on
either side by commendable trees, the sun shining brightly, the rooks
flying overhead, and the smell of ripe summer in the air, he drew up his
horse and sat looking before him.

"To lose it!  To lose it!" he said, and a frown gathered upon his
forehead.

Even as he looked, the figure of a girl appeared in the great doorway.
Catching sight of the horseman, she clapped her hands and waved them
delightedly.

Enderby's face cleared, as the sun breaks through a mass of clouds and
lightens all the landscape.  The slumberous eyes glowed, the square head
came up.  In five minutes he had dismounted at the great stone steps and
was clasping his daughter in his arms.

"Felicity, my dear daughter!" he said, tenderly and gravely.

She threw back her head with a gaiety which bespoke the bubbling laughter
in her heart, and said:

"Booh! to thy solemn voice.  Oh, thou great bear, dost thou love me with
tears in thine eyes?"

She took his hand and drew him inside the house, where, laying aside his
hat and gloves and sword, they passed into the great library.

"Come, now, tell me all the places thou hast visited," she said, perching
herself on his arm-chair.

He told her, and she counted them off one by one upon her fingers.

"That is ninety miles of travel thou hast had.  What is the most pleasing
thing thou hast seen?"

"It was in Stickford by the fen," he answered, after a perplexed pause.
"There was an old man upon the roadside with his head bowed in his hands.
Some lads were making sport of him, for he seemed so woe-begone and old.
Two cavaliers of the King came by.  One of them stopped and drove the
lads away, then going to the old man, he said: 'Friend, what is thy
trouble?' The old man raised his melancholy face and answered: 'Aw'm
afeared, sir.' 'What fear you?' inquired the young gentleman.  'I fear ma
wife, sir,' replied the old man.  At that the other cavalier sat back in
his saddle and guffawed merrily.  'Well, Dick,' said he to his friend,
'that is the worst fear in this world.  Ah, Dick, thou hast ne'er been
married!'  'Why do you fear your wife?' asked Dick.  'Aw've been robbed
of ma horse and saddle and twelve skeins o' wool.  Aw'm lost, aw'm
ruined and shall raise ma head nevermore.  To ma wife aw shall ne'er
return.'  'Tut tut, man,' said Dick, 'get back to your wife.  You are
master of your own house; you rule the roost.  What is a wife?  A wife's
a woman.  You are a man.  You are bigger and stronger, your bones are
harder.  Get home and wear a furious face and batter in the door and say:
"What, ho, thou huzzy!"  Why, man, fear you the wife of your bosom?'
The old man raised his head and said: 'Tha doost not know ma wife or tha
wouldst not speak like that.'  At that Dick laughed and said: 'Fellow, I
do pity thee;' and taking the old man by the shoulders, he lifted him
on his own horse and took him to the village fair.  There he bought him
twelve skeins of wool and sent him on his way rejoicing, with a horse
worth five times his own."

With her chin in her hands the girl had listened intently to the story.
When it was finished she said: "What didst thou say was the gentleman's
name?"

"His friend called him Dick.  He is a poor knight, one Sir Richard
Mowbray, of Leicester, called at Court and elsewhere Happy Dick Mowbray,
for they do say a happier and braver heart never wore the King's
uniform."

"Indeed I should like to know that Sir Richard Mowbray.  And, tell me
now, who is the greatest person thou hast seen in thy absence?"

"I saw the King--at Boston town."

"The King!  The King!"  Her eyes lightened, her hands clapped merrily.
"What did he say to thee?  Now, now, there is that dark light in thine
eyes again.  I will not have it so!"  With her thumbs she daintily drew
down the eyelids and opened them again.  "There, that's better.  Now what
did the King say to thee?"

"He said to me that I should be Sir John Enderby, of Enderby."

"A knight!  A knight!  He made thee a knight?" she asked gaily.  She
slipped from his knee and courtesied before him, then seeing the
heaviness of his look, she added: "Booh, Sir John Enderby, why dost thou
look so grave?  Is knighthood so big a burden thou dost groan under it?"

"Come here, my lass," he said gently.  "Thou art young, but day by day
thy wisdom grows, and I can trust thee.  It is better thou shouldst know
from my own lips the peril this knighthood brings, than that trouble
should suddenly fall and thou be unprepared."

Drawing her closely to him he told her the story of his meeting with the
King; of Lord Rippingdale; of the King's threat to levy upon his estates
and to issue a writ of outlawry against him.

For a moment the girl trembled, and Enderby felt her hands grow cold in
his own, for she had a quick and sensitive nature and passionate
intelligence and imagination.

"Father," she cried pantingly, indignantly, "the King would make thee an
outlaw, would seize upon thy estates, because thou wouldst not pay the
price of a paltry knighthood!"  Suddenly her face flushed, the blood came
back with a rush, and she stood upon her feet.  "I would follow thee to
the world's end rather than that thou shouldst pay one penny for that
honour.  The King offered thee knighthood?  Why, two hundred years before
the King was born, an Enderby was promised an earldom.  Why shouldst thou
take a knighthood now?  Thou didst right, thou didst right."  Her fingers
clasped in eager emphasis.

"Dost thou not see, my child," said he, "that any hour the King's troops
may surround our house and take me prisoner and separate thee from me?
I see but one thing to do; even to take thee at once from here and place
thee with thy aunt, Mistress Falkingham, in Shrewsbury."

"Father," the girl said, "thou shalt not put me away from thee.
Let the King's men surround Enderby House and the soldiers and my Lord
Rippingdale levy upon the estates of Enderby.  Neither his Majesty nor my
Lord Rippingdale dare put a finger upon me--I would tear their eyes out."

Enderby smiled half sadly at her, and answered "The fear of a woman is
one of the worst fears in this world.  Booh!"

So ludicrously did he imitate her own manner of a few moments before that
humour drove away the flush of anger from her face, and she sat upon his
chair-arm and said:

"But we will not part; we will stand here till the King and Lord
Rippingdale do their worst--is it not so, father?"

He patted her head caressingly.

"Thou sayest right, my lass; we will remain at Enderby.  Where is thy
brother Garrett?"

"He has ridden over to Mablethorpe, but will return within the hour," she
replied.

At that moment there was a sound of hoofs in the court-yard.  Running to
a rear window of the library Mistress Felicity clapped her hands and
said:

"It is he--Garrett."

Ten minutes afterwards the young man entered.  He was about two years
older than his sister; that is, seventeen.  He was very tall for his age,
with dark hair and a pale dry face, and of distinguished bearing.  Unlike
his father, he was slim and gracefully built, with no breadth or power to
his shoulders, but with an athletic suppleness and a refinement almost
womanlike.  He was tenacious, overbearing, self-willed, somewhat silent
and also somewhat bad-tempered.

There was excitement in his eye as he entered.  He came straight to his
father, giving only a nod to Mistress Felicity, who twisted her head in a
demure little way, as though in mockery of his important manner.

"Booh!--my lord duke!" she said almost under her breath.

"Well, my son," said Enderby, giving him his hand, "your face has none so
cheerful a look.  Hast thou no welcome for thy father?"

"I am glad you are home again, sir," said young Enderby, more dutifully
than cordially.

There was silence for a moment.

"You do not ask my news," said his father, eyeing him debatingly.

"I have your news, sir," was the young man's half sullen reply.

His sister came near her father, where she could look her brother
straight in the face, and her deep blue eyes fixed upon him intently.
The smile almost faded from her lips, and her square chin seemed suddenly
to take on an air of seriousness and strength.

"Well, sir?" asked his father.

"That you, sir, have refused a knighthood of the King; that he insists
upon your keeping it; that he is about to levy upon your estates: and
that you are outlawed from England."

"And what think you about the matter?" asked his father.

"I think it is a gentleman's duty to take the King's gifts without
question," answered the young man.

"Whether the King be just or not, eh?  Where would England have been, my
son, if the barons had submitted to King John?  Where would the Enderbys
have been had they not withstood the purposes of Queen Mary?  Come, come,
the King has a chance to prove himself as John Enderby has proven
himself.  Midst other news, heard you not that last night I led a dozen
gentlemen to the rescue of the King?"

"'Twas said in the village that his Majesty would remove his interdict
and make you a baron, sir, if you met his levy for the knighthood."

"That I shall never do.  Answer me, my son, do you stand with the King or
with your father in this?"

"I am an Enderby," answered the youth, moodily, "and I stand with the
head of our house."

That night as candles were being lighted, three score of the King's men,
headed by Lord Rippingdale, placed themselves before the house, and an
officer was sent forward to summon forth John Enderby.

Enderby had gathered his men together, and they were posted for defence
at the doorways and entrances, and along the battlements.  The windows
were all heavily shuttered and barred.

The young officer commissioned to demand an interview with Enderby came
forward and knocked at the great entrance door.  It opened presently and
showed within the hallway a dozen men well armed.  Enderby came forward
to meet him.

"I am Sir Richard Mowbray," said the newcomer.  "I am sent by Lord
Rippingdale, who arrives on a mission from his Majesty."

Enderby, recognising his visitor, was mild in his reply.

"Sir Richard Mowbray, I pray you tell Lord Rippingdale that he is
welcome--as commissioner of the King."

Mowbray smiled and bowed.

"My lord begs me to ask that you will come forth and speak with him, Sir
John?"

"My compliments to Lord Rippingdale, Sir Richard, and say that I can
better entertain his Majesty's commissioner within my own house."

"And all who wait with him?" asked the young officer, with a dry sort of
smile.

"My lord, and his officers and gentlemen, but not his troopers."

Mowbray bowed, and as he lifted his head again he saw the face of
Mistress Felicity looking through the doorway of the library.  Their eyes
met.  On a sudden a new impulse came to his thoughts.

"Sir John Enderby," said he, "I know how honourable a man you are, and I
think I know the way you feel.  But, as one gentleman to another, permit
me a word of counsel.  'Twere better to humour my Lord Rippingdale, and
to yield up to the King's demands, than to lose all.  Lack of money and
estate--that is hard enough on a single man like me, but with a gentleman
who has the care of a daughter, perhaps"--his look again met the young
lady's face--"the case is harder.  A little yielding on your part--"

"I will not yield," was Enderby's reply.

Mowbray bowed once more, and retired without more speaking.

In a few moments he returned, Lord Rippingdale with him.  The entrance
doors were once more opened, and my lord, in a temper, at once began:

"You press your courtesies too far, Sir John Enderby."

"Less strenuously than the gentlemen of the road pressed their
discourtesies upon his Majesty and yourself last night, my lord."

"I am come upon that business.  For your bravery and loyalty, if you will
accept the knighthood, and pay the sum set as the courtesy of the
accolade, his Majesty will welcome you at Court, and raise you to a
barony.  But his Majesty must see that his dignity be not injured."

"The King may have my life and all my goods as a gift, but I will not
give either by these indirect means.  It does not lie in a poor squire
like me to offend the King's dignity."

"You are resolved?"

"I am resolved," answered Enderby, stubbornly.  "Then you must bear the
consequences, and yield up your estates and person into my hands.
Yourself and your family are under arrest, to be dealt with hereafter as
his Majesty sees fit."

"I will not yield up my estates, nor my person, nor my son and daughter,
of my free will."

With an incredulous smile, Rippingdale was about to leave and enter upon
a siege of the house, when he saw young Enderby and caught a strange look
in his face.

"Young gentleman," said he, "are you a cipher in this game?  A barony
hangs on this.  Are you as stubborn and unruly as the head of your
house?"

Garrett Enderby made no reply, but turned and walked into the library,
his father's and sister's eyes following him in doubt and dismay, for the
chance was his at that moment to prove himself.

A moment afterwards Lord Rippingdale was placing his men to attack the
house, disposing of some to secure a timber to batter in the door, and of
some to make assaults upon the rear of the building.  Enderby had placed
his men advantageously to resist attack, giving the defence of the rear
of the house to his son.  Mistress Felicity he had sent to an upper room
in the care of her aunt.

Presently the King's men began the action, firing wherever a figure
showed itself, and carrying a log to batter in the entrance door.
Enderby's men did good work, bringing down four of the besiegers at the
first volley.

Those who carried the log hesitated for a moment, and Enderby called
encouragingly to his men.

At this exciting moment, while calling to his men, he saw what struck him
dumb--his son hurrying forward with a flag of truce to Lord Rippingdale!
Instantly my lord commanded his men to retire.

"Great God!" said Sir John, with a groan, "my son--my only son--
a traitor!"  Turning to his men he bade them cease firing.

Throwing open the entrance doors, he stood upon the steps and waited for
Lord Rippingdale.

"You see, Sir John Enderby, your son--" began my lord.

"It was to maintain my rights, and for my son's sake and my daughter's,
that I resisted the command of the King," interrupted the distressed and
dishonoured gentleman, "but now--"

"But now you yield?"

He inclined his head, then looking down to the place where his son stood,
he said:

"My son--my only son!"  And his eyes filled with tears.

His distress was so moving that even Rippingdale was constrained to say:

"He did it for your sake.  His Majesty will--" With a gesture of despair
Enderby turned and entered the house, and passed into the library, where
he found his daughter.  Pale and tearful she threw herself into his arms.

At eleven o'clock that night as they sat in the same room, while Lord
Rippingdale and his officers supped in the dining-room, Sir Richard
Mowbray hurriedly entered.

"Come quickly," said he; "the way is clear--here by this window.  The
sentinels are drunk.  You will find horses by the gate of the grape-
garden, and two of your serving-men mounted.  They will take you to a
hiding-place on the coast--I have instructed them."

As he talked he helped them through the window, and bade them good-bye
hurriedly; but he did not let Mistress Felicity's hand drop till he had
kissed it and wished her a whispered God-speed.

When they had gone he listened for a time, but hearing no sound of
surprise or discovery, he returned to the supper room, where Garrett
Enderby sat drinking with Lord Rippingdale and the cavaliers.




II

Seven years went by before John Enderby saw his son again or set foot in
Enderby House.  Escaping to Holland on a night when everything was taken
from him save his honour and his daughter, he had lived there with
Mistress Felicity, taking service in the army of the country.

Outlaw as he was, his estates given over to his son who now carried a
knighthood bestowed by King Charles, he was still a loyal subject to the
dynasty which had dishonoured him.  When the King was beheaded at
Whitehall he mourned and lamented the miserable crime with the best of
his countrymen.

It was about this time that he journeyed into France, and there he stayed
with his daughter two years.  Mistress Falkingham, her aunt, was with
her, and watched over her as carefully as when she was a child in Enderby
House.

About this time, Cromwell, urged by solicitous friends of the outlaw,
sent word to him to return to England, that he might employ him in
foreign service, if he did not care to serve in England itself.
Cromwell's message was full of comforting reflections upon his sufferings
and upon the injustice that had been done to him by the late King.  For
his daughter's sake, who had never been entirely happy out of England,
Enderby returned, and was received with marked consideration by Cromwell
at Whitehall.

"Your son, sir," said Cromwell, "hath been a follower of the man of sin.
He was of those notorious people who cried out against the work of God's
servants when Charles paid the penalty of his treason at Whitehall.  Of
late I have received news that he is of those children of Belial who are
intriguing to bring back the second Charles.  Two days ago he was bidden
to leave Enderby House.  If he be found among those who join the Scotch
army to fight for the Pretender, he shall bear the penalty of his
offence."

"He has been ill advised, your Highness," said Enderby.

"He shall be advised better," was the stern reply.  "We will have peace
in England, and we will, by the help of the Lord's strong arm, rid this
realm of these recalcitrant spirits.  For you, sir, you shall return to
your estate at Enderby, and we will use you abroad as opportunity shall
occur.  Your son has taken to himself the title which the man of sin
conferred upon you, to your undoing."

"Your Highness," replied Enderby, "I have but one desire, and that is
peace.  I have been outlawed from England so long, and my miseries have
been so great, that I accept gladly what the justice of your Highness
gives thus freely.  But I must tell your Highness that I was no enemy of
King Charles, and am no foe to his memory.  The wrong was done by him to
me, and not returned by me to him, and the issue is between our Maker and
ourselves.  But it is the pride of all Englishmen that England be well
governed, and strong and important in the eyes of the nations; and all
these things has your Highness achieved.  I will serve my country
honourably abroad, or rest peacefully here on my own estate, lifting no
hand against your Highness, though I hold to the succession in the
monarchy."

Cromwell looked at him steadily and frowningly for a minute, then
presently, his face clearing, he said: "Your words, detached from your
character, sir, would be traitorous; but as we stand, two gentlemen of
England face to face, they seem to me like the words of an honest man,
and I love honesty before all other, things.  Get to your home, sir.
You must not budge from it until I send for you.  Then, as proof of your
fidelity to the ruler of your country, you shall go on whatever mission I
send you."

"Your Highness, I will do what seems my duty in the hour of your
summons."

"You shall do the will of the Lord," answered the Protector, and, bowing
a farewell, turned upon his heel.  Enderby looked after him a moment,
then moved towards the door, and as he went out to mount his horse he
muttered to himself:

"The will of the Lord as ordained by Oliver Cromwell--humph!"

Then he rode away up through Trafalgar Square and into the Tottenham
Court Road, and so on out into the Shires until he came to Enderby House.

Outside all was as he had left it seven years before, though the hedges
were not so well kept and the grass was longer before the house.  An air
of loneliness pervaded all the place.  No one met him at the door.  He
rode round into the court-yard and called.  A man-servant came out.  From
him he learned that four of Cromwell's soldiers were quartered in the
house, that all the old servants, save two, were gone, and that his son
had been expelled the place by Cromwell's order two days before.  Inside
the house there was less change.  Boon companion of the boisterous
cavaliers as his son had been, the young man's gay hours had been spent
more away from Enderby House than in it.

When young Enderby was driven from his father's house by Cromwell, he
determined to join the Scotch army which was expected soon to welcome
Charles the Second from France.  There he would be in contact with Lord
Rippingdale and his Majesty.  When Cromwell was driven from his place,
great honours might await him.  Hearing in London, however, that his
father had returned, and was gone on to the estate, he turned his horse
about and rode back again, travelling by night chiefly, and reached
Enderby House four days after his father's arrival there.

He found his father seated alone at the dinner-table.  Swinging wide open
the door of the dining-room he strode in aggressively.

The old man stood up in his place at the table and his eyes brightened
expectantly when he saw his son, for his brain was quickened by the
thought that perhaps, after all his wrong-doing, the boy had come back
to stand by him, a repentant prodigal.  He was a man of warm and firm
spirit, and now his breast heaved with his emotions.  This boy had been
the apple of his eye.  Since the day of his birth he had looked for great
things from him, and had seen in him the refined perpetuation of the
sturdy race of the Enderbys.  He counted himself but a rough sort of
country gentleman, and the courtly face of his son had suggested the
country gentleman cast in a finer mould.  He was about to speak kindly as
of old, but the young man, with clattering spurs, came up to the other
end of the table, and with a dry insolence said:

"By whose invitation do you come here?"

The blood fled from the old man's heart.  For a moment he felt sick, and
his face turned white.  He dropped his head a little and looked at his
son steadily and mournfully.

"Shall a man need an invitation to his own house, my son?" he said at
last.

The arrogant lips of the young man tightened; he tossed up his head.
"The house is mine.  I am the master here.  You are an outlaw."

"An outlaw no longer," answered the old man, "for the Protector has
granted me again the home of which I was cruelly dispossessed."

"The Protector is a rebel!" returned the young man, and his knuckles
rapped petulantly upon the table.  "I stand for the King--for King
Charles the Second.  When you were dispossessed, his late martyred
Majesty made me master of this estate and a knight also."

The old man's hands clinched, in the effort to rule himself to quietness.

"You are welcome to the knighthood which I have never accepted," said he;
"but for these estates--"  All at once a fierce anger possessed him,
and the great shoulders heaved up and down with emotion--"but for these
estates, sir, no law nor king can take them from me.  I am John Enderby,
the first son of a first son, the owner of these lands since the time my
mother gave me birth.  You, sir, are the first of our name that ever was
a traitor to his house."

So intent were the two that they did not see or hear three men who drew
aside the curtains at the end of the room and stood spying upon them--
three of Cromwell's men.  Young Enderby laughed sneeringly and answered:

"It was a King of England that gave Enderby Manor to the Enderbys.  The
King is the source of all estate and honour, and I am loyal to the King.
He is a traitor who spurns the King's honour and defies it.  He is a
traitor who links his fortunes with that vile, murderous upstart, that
blethering hypocrite, Oliver Cromwell.  I go to Scotland to join King
Charles, and before three months are over his Majesty will have come into
his own again and I also into my own here at Enderby."

The old man trembled with the fierceness of his emotions.

"I only am master here," he said, "and I should have died upon this
threshold ere my Lord Rippingdale and the King's men had ever crossed it,
but for you, an Enderby, who deserted me in the conflict--a coward who
went over to the enemies of our house."

The young man's face twitched with a malignant anger.  He suddenly
started forward, and with a sidelong blow struck his father with the flat
of his sword.  A red ridge of bruised flesh instantly rose upon the old
man's cheek and ear.  He caught the arm of the chair by which he stood,
staggering back as though he had received a mortal wound.

"No, no, no!" he said, his voice gulping with misery and horror. --"No,
no!  Kill me, if you will--I but cannot fight you.  Oh, my God, my God!"
he gasped scarcely above a whisper.  "Unnatural-unnatural!"  He said no
more, for, upon the instant, four men entered the room.  They were of
Cromwell's Ironsides.  Young Enderby looked round swiftly, ready to
fight, but he saw at once that he was trapped.  The old man also laid his
hand upon his sword, but he saw that the case was hopeless.  He dropped
into his chair and leaned his head upon his hands.

                    ......................

Two months went by.  The battle of Dunbar was fought, and Charles had
lost it.  Among the prisoners was Garrett Enderby, who had escaped from
his captors on the way from Enderby House to London, and had joined the
Scottish army.  He was now upon trial for his life.  Cromwell's anger
against him was violent.  The other prisoners of war were treated as
such, and were merely confined to prison, but young Enderby was charged
with blasphemy and sedition, and with assaulting one of Cromwell's
officers--for on the very day that young Enderby made the assault,
Cromwell's foreign commission for John Enderby was on its way to
Lincolnshire.

Of the four men who had captured Garrett Enderby at Enderby House, three
had been killed in battle, and the other had deserted.  The father was
thus the chief witness against his son.  He was recalled from Portugal
where he had been engaged upon Cromwell's business.

The young man's judges leaned forward expectantly as John Enderby took
his place.  The Protector himself sat among them.

"What is your name, sir?" asked Cromwell.  "John Enderby, your
Highness."

"It hath been said that you hold a title given you by the man of sin."

"I have never taken a title from any man, your Highness."

A look of satisfaction crossed the gloomy and puritanical faces of the
officers of the court-martial.  Other questions were put, and then came
the vital points.  To the first of these, as to whether young Enderby had
uttered malignant and seditious libels against the Protector, the old man
would answer nothing.

"What speech hath ever been between my son and myself," he said, "is
between my son and myself only."  A start of anger travelled round the
circle of the court-martial.  Young Enderby watched his father curiously
and sullenly.

"Duty to country comes before all private feeling," said Cromwell.
"I command you, sir, on peril of a charge of treason against yourself, to
answer the question of the Court.  'If thy right hand offend thee, cut it
off; if thy foot cause thee to stumble, heave it to the shambles.  The
pernicious branch of the just tree shall be cloven and cast into the
brush-heap.'  You are an officer of this commonwealth, sir?" asked
Cromwell, again.

"By your Highness's permission," he replied.

"Did your son strike you upon the face with the flat of his sword upon
the night recorded in this charge against him?"

"What acts have passed between my son and myself are between my son and
myself only," replied Enderby, steadily.  He did not look at his son, but
presently the tears rolled down his cheeks, so that more than one of his
judges who had sons of their own were themselves moved.  But they took
their cue from the Protector, and made no motion towards the old man's
advantage.  Once more Cromwell essayed to get Enderby's testimony, but,
"I will not give witness against my son," was his constant and dogged
reply.  At last Cromwell rose in anger.

"We will have justice in this realm of England," said he, "though it turn
the father against the son and the son against the father.  Though the
house be divided against itself yet the Lord's work shall be done."

Turning his blazing eyes upon John Enderby, he said: "Troublous and
degenerate man, get gone from this country, and no more set foot in it
on peril of your life.  We recalled you from outlawry, believing you to
be a true lover of your country, but we find you malignant, seditious
and dangerous."

He turned towards the young man.

"You, sir, shall get you back to prison until other witnesses be found.
Although we know your guilt, we will be formal and just."

With an impatient nod to an officer beside him, he waved his hand towards
father and son.

As he was about to leave the room, John Enderby stretched out a hand to
him appealingly.

"Your Highness," said he, "I am an old man."

"Will you bear witness in this cause?" asked Cromwell, his frown
softening a little.

"Your Highness, I have suffered unjustly; the lad is bone of my bone and
flesh of my flesh.  I cannot--"

With an angry wave of the hand Cromwell walked heavily from the room.

Some touch of shame came to the young man's cold heart, and he spoke to
his father as the officers were about to lead him away.

"I have been wrong, I have misunderstood you, sir," he said, and he
seemed about to hold out his hand.  But it was too late.  The old man
turned on him, shaking his shaggy head.

"Never, sir, while I live.  The wrong to me is little.  I can take my
broken life into a foreign land and die dishonoured and forgotten.  But
my other child, my one dear child who has suffered year after year with
me--for the wrong you have done her, I never, never, never will forgive
you.  Not for love of you have I spoken as I did to-day, but for the
honour of the Enderbys and because you were the child of your mother."

Two days later at Southampton the old man boarded a little packet-boat
bound for Havre.




III

The years went by again.  At last all was changed in England.  The
monarchy was restored, and the land was smiling and content.  One day
there was a private reading in the Queen's chamber of the palace.  The
voice of the reader moved in pleasant yet vibrant modulations:

     "The King was now come to a time when his enemies wickedly began to
     plot against him secretly and to oppose him in his purposes; which,
     in his own mind, were beneficent and magnanimous.  From the shire
     where his labours had been most unselfish came the first malignant
     insult to his person and the first peril to his life, prefiguring
     the hellish plots and violence which drove him to his august
     martyrdom--"

The King had entered quietly as the lady-in-waiting read this passage to
the Queen, and, attracted by her voice, continued to listen, signifying
to the Queen, by a gesture, that she and her ladies were not to rise.
This was in the time when Charles was yet devoted to his Princess of
Portugal, and while she was yet happy and undisturbed by rumours--or
assurances--of her Lord's wandering affections.

"And what shire was that?" asked the King at that point where the
chronicler spoke of his royal father's "august martyrdom."

"The shire of Lincoln, your Majesty," said the young lady who read,
flushing.  Then she rose from her footstool at the Queen's feet, and made
the King an elaborate courtesy.

Charles waved a gentle and playful gesture of dissent from her extreme
formality, and, with a look of admiration, continued:

"My Lord Rippingdale should know somewhat of that 'first violence' of
which you have read, Mistress Falkingham.  He is of Lincolnshire."

"He knows all, your Majesty; he was present at that 'first violence.'"

"It would be amusing for Rippingdale to hear these records--my Lord
Clarendon's, are they not?  Ah--not in the formal copy of his work?  And
by order of my Lord Rippingdale?  Indeed!  And wherefore, my Lord
Rippingdale?"

"Shall I read on, your Majesty?" asked the young lady, with heightened
colour, and a look of adventure and purpose in her eyes.  Perhaps, too,
there was a look of anger in them--not against the King, for there was a
sort of eagerness or appealing in the glance she cast towards his
Majesty.

The Queen lifted her eyes to the King half doubtfully, for the question
seemed to her perilous, Charles being little inclined, as a rule, to
listen to serious reading, though he was ever gay in conversation, and
alert for witty badinage.  His Majesty, however, seemed more than
complaisant; he was even boyishly eager.

The young lady had been but a short time in the household, having come
over with the Queen from Portugal, where she had been brought to the
notice of the then Princess by her great coolness and bravery in rescuing
a young lady of Lisbon from grave peril.  She had told the Princess then
that she was the daughter of an exiled English gentleman, and was in the
care of her aunt, one Mistress Falkingham, while her father was gone on
an expedition to Italy.  The Princess, eager to learn English, engaged
her, and she had remained in the palace till the Princess left for
England.  A year passed, and then the Queen of England sent for her, and
she had been brought close to the person of her Majesty.

At a motion from Charles, who sat upon a couch, idly tapping the buckles
on his shoes with a gold-handled staff, the young lady placed herself
again at the Queen's feet and continued reading:

     "It was when the King was come to Boston town upon the business of
     the Fens and to confer sundry honours and inquire into the taxes,
     and for further purpose of visiting a good subject at Louth, who
     knew of the secret plans of Pym and Hampden, that this shameful
     violence befel our pious and illustrious prince.  With him was my
     Lord Rippingdale and--"

"Ah, ah, my Lord Rippingdale!" said Charles, half aloud, "so this is
where my lord and secret history meet--my dear, dumb lord."

Continuing, the young lady read a fair and just account of the King's
meeting with John Enderby, of Enderby's refusal to accept the knighthood,
and of his rescue of the King at Sutterby.

"Enderby?  Enderby?" interjected the King, "that was not one Sir Garrett
Enderby who was with the Scottish army at Dunbar?"

"No, your Majesty," said the young lady, scarcely looking up from the
page she held, "Sir Garrett Enderby died in Portugal, where he fled,
having escaped from prison and Cromwell's vengeance."

"What Enderby did this fine thing then?  My faith, my martyred father had
staunch men--even in Lincolnshire."

"The father of Sir Garrett Enderby it was, your Majesty."

"How came the son by the knighthood?  'S'death, it seems to me I have a
memory of this thing somewhere, if I could but find it!"

"His gracious Majesty of sacred memory gave him his knighthood."

"Let me hear the whole story.  Is it all there, Mistress Falkingham?"
said the King, nodding towards the pages she held.

"It is not all here, your Majesty; but I can tell what so many in England
know, and something of what no one in England knows."

The Queen put out her hand as if to stay the telling, for she saw what an
impression her fair reader had made upon the King.  But the young lady
saw no one save Charles--she did not note the entrance of two gentle men,
one of whom looked at her in surprise.  This was Sir Richard Mowbray of
Leicester.  The other was Lord Rippingdale (now lord chamberlain), who
had brought Sir Richard thither at the request of the King.  Sir Richard
had been momentarily expected on his return from a mission to Spain, and
my Lord had orders to bring him to the King on the very instant of his
arrival.

The King waved his hand when Lord Rippingdale would have come forward,
and the young lady continued with the history of John Enderby.  She
forgot her surroundings.  It seemed as though she were giving vent to the
suppressed feelings, imaginations, sufferings and wrongs of years.
Respectfully, but sadly, when speaking of the dead King; eloquently,
tenderly, when speaking of her father; bitterly, when speaking of Oliver
Cromwell, she told the story with a point, a force and a passionate
intelligence, which brought to the face of Charles a look of serious
admiration.  He straightened himself where he sat, and did not let his
eyes wander from the young lady's face.  As she spoke of Sir Garrett
Enderby and his acts--his desertion when Lord Rippingdale laid siege to
the house, his quarrel with his father, the trial of the son, the
father's refusal to testify against him, and the second outlawing by
Cromwell--her voice faltered, but she told the tale bravely and
determinedly; for she now saw Lord Rippingdale in the chamber.  Whenever
she had mentioned his name in the narrative, it was with a slight
inflection of scorn, which caused the King to smile; and when she spoke
of the ruin of Enderby House, her brother's death and her father's years
of exile, tears came into the Queen's eyes, and the King nodded his head
in sympathy.

Sir Richard Mowbray, with face aflame, watched her closely.  As she
finished her story he drew aside to where she could not see him without
turning round.  But Lord Rippingdale she saw with ease, and she met his
eyes firmly, and one should say, with some malicious triumph, were she
not a woman.

"My lord Rippingdale," said the King, slowly and bitingly, "what shall be
done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour?"

"Were I Mordecai I could better answer that question, Sir," was my Lord's
reply.

"Perhaps my Lord Rippingdale could answer for Haman, then," returned his
Majesty.

"My imagination is good, but not fifty cubits high, Sir."

The answer pleased the King.  For he ever turned life into jest--his
sorrows and his joys.  He rose motioning towards the door, and Lord
Rippingdale passed out just behind him, followed by Sir Richard Mowbray,
who stole a glance at the young chronicler as he went.  She saw him, then
recognised him, and flushed scarlet.

She did not dare, however, to let him come to her.  He understood, and he
went his way after the King and Lord Rippingdale.

In all the years that had passed since the night he had helped her father
and herself to escape from Enderby House; since he aided them to leave
their hiding-place on the coast and escape to Holland, she had never
forgotten his last words to her, the laughing look of his eyes, the
pressure of his hand.  Many a time since she had in her own mind thought
of him as she had heard her father call him, even as "Happy Dick
Mowbray!" and the remembrance of his joyous face had been a help to her
in all her sufferings.  His brown hair was now streaked with grey, but
the light in the face was the same; there was the same alertness and
buoyant health in the figure and the same row of laughing white teeth.

As she stood watching the departing figure, she scarcely knew that the
Queen was preparing to go to her bed-chamber.  She became aware of it
definitely by the voice of her Majesty, now somewhat petulant.

Two hours later she was walking alone in one of the galleries when,
hearing a gentle step behind her, she turned and saw the King.  She made
an obeisance and was about to move on, when he stopped her, speaking
kindly to her, and thanking her for the great pleasure she had given him
that afternoon.

"What should be done for this quasi knight of Enderby?" asked the King.

"He saved the life of the King," she said; then boldly, confidently,
"your Majesty, for conscience sake he lost all--what can repay him for
his dishonoured years and his ruined home!"

"What think you, Mistress, should be done with him?  Speak freely of the
man whom the King delighteth to honour."

She felt the sincerity under the indolent courtesy, and spoke as only a
woman can speak for those she loves.  "Your Majesty, he should have the
earldom promised his ancestor by Wolsey, and his estates restored to him
as he left them."

The King laughed dryly.

"He might refuse the large earldom, as he scorned the little knighthood."

"If your Majesty secured him estates suitable to his rank he could have
no reason to refuse.  He was solicitous and firm then for his son--but
now!"

Her reply was as diplomatic and suggestive as it was sincere, and Charles
loved such talents.

"Upon my soul, dear Mistress Falkingham, I love your cleverness," said
the King, "and I will go further, I--" He stooped and whispered in her
ear, but she drew back in affright and anxiety.

"Oh, your Majesty, your Majesty," she said, "I had not thought--"

She moved on distractedly, but he put out his hand and stayed her.

"Ah, a moment, sweetheart," he urged.

"I must go to the Queen," she answered hurriedly.  "Oh, your Majesty,
your Majesty," she repeated, "would you ruin me?"  Her eyes filled with
tears.  "Until the Queen welcomed me here I have had nothing but sorrow.
I am friendless and alone."

"No, no," said Charles, kindly, "not alone while Charles is King in
England."

"I am little more than an orphan here," she said, "for my father is now
only a common soldier, your Majesty, and--"

"A common soldier!" repeated Charles a little stiffly; "they told me he
was a gentleman of England doing service in Italy."

"My father is in your Majesty's household guard," she answered.  "He was
John Enderby--alas! none would recognise him now as such."

The King stared at her a moment.  "You--you--Mistress--you are John
Enderby's daughter?"

Her reply was scarce above a whisper.  "His only child, Sir."

"Upon my soul!  Upon my soul!" was all Charles said for a moment, and
then he added: "Why did you not speak before?"

"My father would not permit me, your Majesty.  He is only returned to
England these few months."

"He is here to--?"

"To be near to myself, Sir."

The King bowed low over her hand.

"Mistress Enderby," said he, frankly, "we are honoured by your presence
in this place.  To-morrow morning at eleven your father shall come to us.
You are still but a child in face," he said; "and yet--eh?"

"I am twenty-seven years old," she answered frankly.

"Quite old enough to be a countess," he said charmingly, "and young
enough to enjoy the honours thereof."  So saying he bowed again, and with
a gracious smile dismissed her.  She went so quickly that she did not see
two gentlemen almost at her elbow as she left the gallery.  One of them
was Lord Rippingdale.

"Ha," said my lord, with a wicked smile, "a new violet in the King's
garden!"

His companion turned on him swiftly.

"My lord," said he, "this is the second time to-day you have slandered
this lady."

The other lifted his eyebrows.

"Is it a slander to say that the King finds a lady charming at any hour
o' the clock?" he rejoined.

Sir Richard slapped him across the cheek with his glove.

"I take a pleasant duty from John Enderby's shoulders, my lord.  I will
meet you at your pleasure."

The next morning at sunrise Lord Rippingdale declared with his last
breath that he did not know the lady was John Enderby's daughter, and he
begged Sir Richard to carry to Enderby his regret for all past wrongs.

Sir Richard came in upon the King at the moment that his Majesty was
receiving John Enderby--a whiteheaded old man, yet hale and strong, and
wearing the uniform of the King's Guard.  The fire of Enderby's eye was
not quenched.  The King advanced towards him, and said:

"You are welcome to our Court, Squire Enderby.  You have been absent too
long.  You will honour us by accepting a tardy justice--without a price,"
he added, in a low tone.

"Your Majesty," said Enderby, "for me justice comes too late, but for my
child--"

"An earldom can never come too late--eh?" asked the King, smiling gaily.

"For me, your Majesty, all comes too late except--" his voice shook a
little--"except the house where I was born."

Charles looked at him gravely.

"Upon my soul, Enderby," said he, "you are a man to be envied.  We will
not rob you of your good revenge on our house or of your independence.
But still we must have our way.  Your daughter,"--he turned lightly
towards Felicity,--"if she will not refuse me, and she cannot upon the
ground that you refused my father--she shall be Countess of Enderby in
her own right; with estates in keeping."

Womanlike, Mistress Felicity had no logical argument against an honour so
munificently ordained.  "And now for your estates--who holds them?"
asked the King.

"Lord Rippingdale, your Majesty," answered Enderby.

"Yes, yes, my lord Haman!  We have already sent for him.  It is long past
the time."  His brow darkened.

Sir Richard Mowbray stepped forward and said: "Your Majesty, Lord
Rippingdale is beyond obedience or reparation;" and then he gave the
message of the dead man to John Enderby.

A month later Mowbray was permitted to return to Court, and with him came
John Enderby and the Countess of Enderby.  When Charles was told how
matters had gone between the younger two, he gave vent to a mock
indignation; and in consequence he made Sir Richard Mowbray an earl also,
that, as he said, they might both be at the same nearness to him; for
etiquette was tyrannical, and yet he did not know which of them he loved
better!

As for the man so long dishonoured, Charles swore that since John Enderby
came not to the King at Court, the King would go to him at Enderby.  And
go he did in good temper and in great friendship for many a year.






"THERE IS SORROW ON THE SEA"


By Gilbert Parker





I

                              "YORK FACTORY, HUDSON'S BAY,
                                   "23rd September, 1747.

"MY DEAR COUSIN FANNY,--It was a year last April Fool's Day, I left you
on the sands there at Mablethorpe, no more than a stone's throw from the
Book-in-Hand Inn, swearing that you should never see me or hear from me
again.  You remember how we saw the coast-guards flash their lights here
and there, as they searched the sands for me? how one came bundling down
the bank, calling, 'Who goes there?'  You remember that when I said, 'A
friend,' he stumbled, and his light fell to the sands and went out, and
in the darkness you and I stole away: you to your home, with a
whispering, 'God-bless-you, Cousin Dick,' over your shoulder, and I with
a bit of a laugh that, maybe, cut to the heart, and that split in a sob
in my own throat--though you didn't hear that.

"'Twas a bad night's work that, Cousin Fanny, and maybe I wish it undone,
and maybe I don't; but a devil gets into the heart of a man when he has
to fly from the lass he loves, while the friends of his youth go hunting
him with muskets, and he has to steal out of the backdoor of his own
country and shelter himself, like a cold sparrow, up in the eaves of the
world.

"Ay, lass, that's how I left the fens of Lincolnshire a year last April
Fool's Day.  There wasn't a dyke from, Lincoln town to Mablethorpe that I
hadn't crossed with a running jump; and there wasn't a break in the
shore, or a sink-hole in the sand, or a clump of rushes, or a samphire
bed, from Skegness to Theddlethorpe, that I didn't know like every line
of your face.  And when I was a slip of a lad-ay, and later too--how you
and I used to snuggle into little nooks of the sand-hills, maybe just
beneath the coast-guard's hut, and watch the tide come swilling in-water-
daisies you used to call the breaking surf, Cousin Fanny.  And that was
like you, always with a fancy about everything you saw.  And when the
ships, the fishing-smacks with their red sails, and the tall-masted brigs
went by, taking the white foam on their canvas, you used to wish that you
might sail away to the lands you'd heard tell of from old skippers that
gathered round my uncle's fire in the Book-in-Hand.  Ay, a grand thing I
thought it would be, too, to go riding round the world on a well-washed
deck, with plenty of food and grog, and maybe, by-and-by, to be first
mate, and lord it from fo'castle bunk to stern-rail.

"You did not know, did you, who was the coast-guardsman that stumbled as
he came on us that night?  It looked a stupid thing to do that, and let
the lantern fall.  But, lass, 'twas done o' purpose.  That was the one
man in all the parish that would ha' risked his neck to let me free.
'Twas Lancy Doane, who's give me as many beatings in his time as I him.
We were always getting foul one o' t'other since I was big enough to shy
a bit of turf at him across a dyke, and there isn't a spot on's body that
I haven't hit, nor one on mine that he hasn't mauled.  I've sat on his
head, and he's had his knee in my stomach till I squealed, and we never
could meet without back-talking and rasping 'gainst the grain.  The night
before he joined the coast-guardsmen, he was down at the Book-in-Hand,
and 'twas little like that I'd let the good chance pass--I might never
have another; for Gover'ment folk will not easy work a quarrel on their
own account.  I mind him sittin' there on the settle, his shins against
the fire, a long pipe going, and Casey of the Lazy Beetle, and Jobbin the
mate of the Dodger, and Little Faddo, who had the fat Dutch wife down by
the Ship Inn, and Whiggle the preaching blacksmith.  And you were
standin' with your back to the shinin' pewters, and the great jug of ale
with the white napkin behind you; the light o' the fire wavin' on your
face, and your look lost in the deep hollow o' the chimney.  I think of
you most as you were that minute, Cousin Fanny, when I come in.  I tell
you straight and fair, that was the prettiest picture I ever saw; and
I've seen some rare fine things in my travels.  'Twas as if the thing had
been set by some one, just to show you off to your best.  Here you were,
a slip of a lass, straight as a bulrush, and your head hangin' proud on
your shoulders; yet modest too, as you can see off here in the North the
top of the golden-rod flower swing on its stem.  You were slim as slim,
and yet there wasn't a corner on you; so soft and full and firm you were,
like the breast of a quail; and I mind me how the shine of your cheeks
was like the glimmer of an apple after you've rubbed it with a bit of
cloth.  Well, there you stood in some sort of smooth, plain, clingin'
gown, a little bit loose and tumblin' at the throat, and your pretty foot
with a brown slipper pushed out, just savin' you from bein' prim.  That's
why the men liked you--you didn't carry a sermon in your waist-ribbon,
and the Lord's Day in the lift o' your chin; but you had a smile to give
when 'twas the right time for it, and men never said things with you
there that they'd have said before many another maid.

"'Twas a thing I've thought on off here, where I've little to do but
think, how a lass like you could put a finger on the lip of such rough
tykes as Faddo, Jobbin, and the rest, keepin' their rude words under flap
and button.  Do you mind how, when I passed you comin' in, I laid my hand
on yours as it rested on the dresser?  That hand of yours wasn't a tiny
bit of a thing, and the fingers weren't all taperin' like a simperin'
miss from town, worked down in the mill of quality and got from graftin'
and graftin', like one of them roses from the flower-house at Mablethorpe
Hall--not fit to stand by one o' them that grew strong and sweet with no
fancy colour, in the garden o' the Book-in-Hand.  Yours was a hand that
talked as much as your lips or face, as honest and white; and the palm
all pink, and strong as strong could be, and warmin' every thread in a
man's body when he touched it.  Well, I touched your hand then, and you
looked at me and nodded, and went musin' into the fire again, not seemin'
to hear our gabble.

"But, you remember--don't you?--how Jobbin took to chaffin' of Lancy
Doane, and how Faddo's tongue got sharper as the time got on, and many a
nasty word was said of coast-guards and excisemen, and all that had to do
with law and gover'ment.  Cuts there were at some of Laney's wild doings
in the past, and now and then they'd turn to me, saying what they thought
would set me girdin' Lancy too.  But I had my own quarrel, and I wasn't
to be baited by such numskulls.  And Lancy--that was a thing I couldn't
understand--he did no more than shrug his shoulder and call for more ale,
and wish them all good health and a hundred a year.  I never thought he
could ha' been so patient-like.  But there was a kind of little smile,
too, on his face, showin' he did some thinkin'; and I guessed he was
bidin' his time.

"I wasn't as sharp as I might ha' been, or I'd ha' seen what he was
waitin' for, with that quiet provokin' smile on his face, and his eyes
smoulderin' like.  I don't know to this day whether you wanted to leave
the room when you did, though 'twas about half after ten o'clock, later
than I ever saw you there before.  But when my uncle come in from Louth,
and give you a touch on the shoulder, and said: 'To bed wi' you, my
lass,' you waited for a minute longer, glancin' round on all of us, at
last lookin' steady at Lancy; and he got up from his chair, and took off
his hat to you with a way he had.  You didn't stay a second after that,
but went away straight, sayin' good-night to all of us, but Lancy was the
only one on his feet.

"Just as soon as the door was shut behind you, Lancy turned round to the
fire, and pushed the log with his feet in a way a man does when he's
think-in' a bit.  And Faddo give a nasty laugh, and said:

"' Theer's a dainty sitovation.  Theer's Mr. Thomas Doane, outlaw and
smuggler, and theer's Mr. Lancy Doane his brother, coast-guardsman.  Now,
if them two should 'appen to meet on Lincolnshire coast, Lord, theer's a
sitovation for ye--Lord, theer's a cud to chew!  'Ere's one gentleman
wants to try 'is 'and at 'elpin' Prince Charlie, and when 'is Up doesn't
amount to anythink, what does the King on 'is throne say?  He says, "As
for Thomas Doane, Esquire, aw've doone wi' 'im."  And theer's another
gentleman, Mr. Lancy Doane, Esquire.  He turns pious, and says, "Aw'm
goin' for a coast-guardsman."  What does the King on his throne say?  'E
says, 'Theer's the man for me.'"

But aw says, "Aw've doone, aw've doone wi' Mr. Lancy Doane, Esquire, and
be damned to 'im!"  He! he!  Theer's a fancy sitovation for ye.  Mr.
Thomas Doane, Esquire, smuggler and outlaw, an' Mr. Lancy Doane, Esquire,
coast-guardsman.  Aw've doone.  Ho! ho!  That gits into my crop.'

"I tell you these things, Cousin Fanny, because I'm doubtin' if you ever
heard them, or knew exactly how things stood that night.  I never was a
friend of Lancy Doane, you understand, but it's only fair that the truth
be told about that quarrel, for like as not he wouldn't speak himself,
and your father was moving in and out; and, I take my oath, I wouldn't
believe Faddo and the others if they was to swear on the Bible.  Not that
they didn't know the truth when they saw it, but they did love just to
let their fancy run.  I'm livin' over all the things that happened that
night--livin' them over to-day, when everything's so quiet about me here,
so lonesome.  I wanted to go over it all, bit by bit, and work it out in
my head, just as you and I used to do the puzzle games we played in the
sands.  And maybe, when you're a long way off from things you once lived,
you can see them and understand them better.  Out here, where it's so
lonely, and yet so good a place to live in, I seem to get the hang o'
the world better, and why some things are, and other things aren't;
and I thought it would pull at my heart to sit down and write you a long
letter, goin' over the whole business again; but it doesn't.  I suppose I
feel as a judge does when he goes over a lot of evidence, and sums it all
up for the jury.  I don't seem prejudiced one way or another.  But I'm
not sure that I've got all the evidence to make me ken everything; and
that's what made me bitter wild the last time that I saw you.  Maybe you
hadn't anything to tell me, and maybe you had, and maybe, if you ever
write to me out here, you'll tell me if there's anything I don't know
about them days.

"Well, I'll go back now to what happened when Faddo was speakin' at my
uncle's bar.  Lancy Doane was standin' behind the settle, leanin' his
arms on it, and smokin' his pipe quiet.  He waited patient till Faddo had
done, then he comes round the settle, puts his pipe up in the rack
between the rafters, and steps in front of Faddo.  If ever the devil was
in a man's face, it looked out of Lancy Doane's that minute.  Faddo had
touched him on the raw when he fetched out that about Tom Doane.  All of
a sudden Lancy swings, and looks at the clock.

"'It's half-past ten, Jim Faddo,' said he, 'and aw've got an hour an' a
half to deal wi' you as a Lincolnshire lad.  At twelve o'clock aw'm the
Gover'ment's, but till then aw'm Lancy Doane, free to strike or free to
let alone; to swallow dirt or throw it; to take a lie or give it.  And
now list to me; aw'm not goin' to eat dirt, and aw'm goin' to give you
the lie, and aw'm goin' to break your neck, if I swing for it to-morrow,
Jim Faddo.  And here's another thing aw'll tell you.  When the clock
strikes twelve, on the best horse in the country aw'll ride to
Theddlethorpe, straight for the well that's dug you know where, to find
your smuggled stuff, and to run the irons round your wrists.  Aw'm
dealin' fair wi' you that never dealt fair by no man.  You never had an
open hand nor soft heart; and because you've made money, not out o'
smugglin' alone, but out o' poor devils of smugglers that didn't know
rightly to be rogues, you think to fling your dirt where you choose.
But aw'll have ye to-night as a man, and aw'll have ye to-night as
a King's officer, or aw'll go damned to hell.'

"Then he steps back a bit very shiny in the face, and his eyes like
torchlights, but cool and steady.  'Come on now,' he says, 'Jim Faddo,
away from the Book-in-Hand, and down to the beach under the sand-hills,
and we'll see man for man--though, come to think of it, y 'are no man,'
he said--'if ye'll have the right to say when aw'm a King's officer that
you could fling foul words in the face of Lancy Doane.  And a word more,'
he says; 'aw wouldn't trust ye if an Angel o' Heaven swore for ye.  Take
the knife from the belt behind your back there, and throw it on the
table, for you wouldn't bide by no fair rules o' fightin'.  Throw the
knife on the table,' he says, comin' a step forward.

"Faddo got on to his feet.  He was bigger built than Lancy, and a bit
taller, and we all knew he was devilish strong in his arms.  There was a
look in his face I couldn't understand.  One minute I thought it was
fear, and another I thought it was daze; and maybe it was both.  But all
on a sudden something horrible cunnin' come into it, and ugly too.

"'Go to the well, then, since ye've found out all about it,' he says,
'but aw've an hour and a half start o' ye, Lancy Doane.'

"'Ye've less than that,' says Lancy back to him, 'if ye go with me to the
sands first.'

"At that my uncle stepped in to say a word for peacemakin', but Lancy
would have none of it.  'Take the knife and throw it on the table,' he
said to Faddo once more, and Faddo took it out and threw it down.

"'Come on, then,' Faddo says, with a sneerin' laugh; 'we'll see by
daybreak who has the best o' this night's work,' and he steps towards the
door.

"'Wait a minute,' says Lancy, gettin' in front of him.  'Now take the
knife from your boot.  Take it,' he says again, 'or aw will.  That's like
a man, to go to a fist fight wi' knives.  Take it,' he said.  'Aw'll gi'
ye till aw count four, and if ye doan't take it, aw'll take it meself.
One!' he says steady and soft.  'Two!' Faddo never moved.  'Three!' The
silence made me sick, and the clock ticked like hammers.  'Four!' he
said, and then he sprang for the boot, but Faddo's hand went down like
lightnin' too.  I couldn't tell exactly how they clinched but once or
twice I saw the light flash on the steel.  Then they came down together,
Faddo under, and when I looked again Faddo was lying eyes starin' wide,
and mouth all white with fear, for Lancy was holding the knife-point at
his throat.  'Stir an inch,' says Lancy, 'and aw'll pin ye to the lid o'
hell.'

"Three minutes by the clock he knelt there on Faddo's chest, the knife-
point touching the bone in's throat.  Not one of us stirred, but just
stood lookin', and my own heart beat so hard it hurt me, and my uncle
steadyin' himself against the dresser.  At last Lancy threw the knife
away into the fire.

"'Coward!' he said.  'A man would ha' taken the knife.  Did you think aw
was goin' to gie my neck to the noose just to put your knife to proper
use?  But don't stir till aw gie you the word, or aw'll choke the breath
o' life out o' ye.'

"At that Faddo sprung to clinch Laney's arms, but Laney's fingers caught
him in the throat, and I thought surely Faddo was gone, for his tongue
stood out a finger-length, and he was black in the face.

"'For God's sake, Lancy,' said my uncle, steppin' forward, 'let him go.'

"At that Lancy said: 'He's right enough.  It's not the first time aw've
choked a coward.  Throw cold water on him and gi' 'im brandy.'

"Sure enough, he wasn't dead.  Lancy stood there watchin' us while we
fetched Faddo back, and I tell you, that was a narrow squeak for him.
When he got his senses again, and was sittin' there lookin' as if he'd
been hung and brought back to life, Lancy says to him: 'There, Jim Faddo,
aw've done wi' you as a man, and at twelve o'clock aw'll begin wi' you as
King's officer.'  And at that, with a good-night to my uncle and all of
us, he turns on his heels and leaves the Book-in-Hand.

"I tell you, Cousin Fanny, though I'd been ripe for quarrel wi' Lancy
Doane myself that night, I could ha' took his hand like a brother, for
I never saw a man deal fairer wi' a scoundrel than he did wi' Jim Faddo.
You see, it wasn't what Faddo said about himself that made Laney wild,
but that about his brother Tom; and a man doesn't like his brother spoken
ill of by dirt like Faddo, be it true or false.  And of Laney's brother
I'm goin' to write further on in this letter, for I doubt that you know
all I know about him, and the rest of what happened that night and
afterwards."



"DEAR COUSIN FANNY, I canna write all I set out to, for word come to me,
just as I wrote the last sentence above, that the ship was to leave port
three days sooner than was fixed for when I began.  I have been rare and
busy since then, and I have no time to write more.  And so 'twill be
another year before you get a word from me; but I hope that when this
letter comes you'll write one back to me by the ship that sails next
summer from London.  The summer's short and the winter's long here,
Cousin Fanny, and there's more snow than grass; and there's more flowers
in a week in Mablethorpe than in a whole year here.  But, lass, the sun
shines always, and my heart keeps warm in thinkin' of you, and I ask you
to forgive me for any harsh word I ever spoke, not forgettin' that last
night when I left you on the sands, and stole away like a thief across
the sea.  I'm going to tell you the whole truth in my next letter, but
I'd like you to forgive me before you know it all, for 'tis a right
lonely and distant land, this, and who can tell what may come to pass in
twice a twelve month!  Maybe a prayer on lips like mine doesn't seem in
place, for I've not lived as parson says man ought to live, but I think
the Lord will have no worse thought o' me when I say, God bless thee,
lass, and keep thee safe as any flower in His garden that He watereth
with His own hand.  Write to me, lass: I love thee still, I do love thee.

                                                  "DICK ORRY."




II

                                        THE BOOK-IN-HAND INN,
                                     MABLETHORPE, LINCOLNSHIRE.
                                           May-Day, 1749.

"DEAR COUSIN DICK,--I think I have not been so glad in many years as when
I got your letter last Guy Fawkes Day.  I was coming from the church
where the parson preached on plots and treasons, and obedience to the
King, when I saw the old postman coming down the road.  I made quickly to
him, I know not why, for I had not thought to hear from you, and before I
reached him he held up his hand, showing me the stout packet which
brought me news of you.  I hurried with it to the inn, and went straight
to my room and sat down by the window, where I used to watch for your
coming with the fishing fleet, down the sea from the Dogger Bank.  I was
only a girl, a young girl, then, and the Dogger Bank was, to my mind, as
far off as that place you call York Factory, in Hudson's Bay, is to me
now.  And yet I did not know how very far it was until our schoolmaster
showed me on a globe how few days' sail it is to the Dogger Bank, and how
many to York Factory.

"But I will tell you of my reading of your letter, and of what I thought.
But first I must go back a little.  When you went away that wild, dark
night, with bitter words on your lips to me, Cousin Dick, I thought I
should never feel the same again.  You did not know it, but I was bearing
the misery of your trouble and of another's also, and of my own as well;
and so I said over and over again, Oh, why will men be hard on women?
Why do they look for them to be iron like themselves, bearing double
burdens as most women do?  But afterwards I settled to a quietness which
I would not have you think was happiness, for I have given up thought
of that.  Nor would I have you think me bearing trouble sweetly, for
sometimes I was most hard and stubborn.  But I lived on in a sort of
stillness till that morning when, sitting by my window, I read all you
had written to me.  And first of all I must tell you how my heart was
touched at your words about our childhood together.  I had not thought it
lay so deep in your mind, Cousin Dick.  It always stays in mine; but
then, women have more memories than men.  The story of that night I knew;
but never fully as you have told it to me in your letter.  Of what
happened after Lancy Doane left the inn, of which you have not written,
but promised the writing in your next letter, I think I know as well as
yourself.  Nay, more, Cousin Dick.  There are some matters concerning
what followed that night and after, which I know, and you do not know.
But you have guessed there was something which I did not tell you, and so
there was.  And I will tell you of them now.  But I will take up the
thread of the story where you dropped it, and reel it out.

"You left the inn soon after Lancy Doane, and James Faddo went then too,
riding hard for Theddlethorpe, for he knew that in less than an hour the
coast-guards would be rifling the hiding places of his smuggled stuff.
You did not take a horse, but, getting a musket, you walked the sands
hard to Theddlethorpe.

"I know it all, though you did not tell me, Cousin Dick.  You had no
purpose in going, save to see the end of a wretched quarrel and a
smuggler's ill scheme.  You carried a musket for your own safety, not
with any purpose.  It was a day of weight in your own life, for on one
side you had an offer from the Earl Fitzwilliam to serve on his estate;
and on the other to take a share in a little fleet of fishing smacks,
of which my father was part owner.  I think you know to which side I
inclined, but that now is neither here nor there; and, though you did not
tell me, as you went along the shore you were more intent on handing
backwards and forwards in your mind your own affairs, than of what should
happen at Theddlethorpe.  And so you did not hurry as you went, and, as
things happened, you came to Faddo's house almost at the same moment with
Lancy Doane and two other mounted coast-guards.

"You stood in the shadow while they knocked at Faddo's door.  You were so
near, you could see the hateful look in his face.  You were surprised he
did not try to stand the coast-guards off.  You saw him, at their
bidding, take a lantern, and march with them to a shed standing off a
little from the house, nearer to the shore.  Going a roundabout swiftly,
you came to the shed first, and posted yourself at the little window on
the sea-side.  You saw them enter with the lantern, saw them shift a
cider press, uncover the floor, and there beneath, in a dry well, were
barrels upon barrels of spirits, and crouched among them was a man whom
you all knew at once--Laney's brother, Tom.  That, Cousin Dick, was Jim
Faddo's revenge.  Tom Doane had got refuge with him till he should reach
his brother, not knowing Lancy was to be coast-guard.  Faddo, coming back
from Mablethorpe, told Tom the coast-guards were to raid him that night;
and he made him hide in this safe place, as he called it, knowing that
Lancy would make for it.

"For a minute after Tom was found no man stirred.  Tom was quick of brain
and wit--would it had always been put, to good purposes!--and saw at once
Faddo's treachery.  Like winking he fired at the traitor, who was almost
as quick to return the fire.  What made you do it I know not, unless it
was you hated treachery; but, sliding in at the open door behind the
coast-guards, you snatched the lantern from the hands of one, threw it
out of the open door, and, thrusting them aside, called for Tom to follow
you.  He sprang towards you over Faddo's body, even as you threw the
lantern, and, catching his arm, you ran with him towards the dyke.

"'Ready for a great jump!' you said.  'Your life hangs on it.' He was
even longer of leg than you.  'Is it a dyke?' he whispered, as the shots
from three muskets rang after you.  'A dyke.  When I count three, jump,'
you answered.  I have read somewhere of the great leap that one Don
Alvarado, a Spaniard, made in Mexico, but surely never was a greater leap
than you two made that night, landing safely on the other side, and
making for the sea-shore.  None of the coast guardsmen, not even Lancy,
could make the leap, for he was sick and trembling, though he had fired
upon his own brother.  And so they made for the bridge some distance
above, just as the faint moon slipped behind a cloud and hid you from
their sight.

"That is no country to hide in, as you know well, no caves, or hills, or
mazy coombes, just a wide, flat, reedy place, broken by open woods.  The
only refuge for both now was the sea.  'Twas a wild run you two made,
side by side, down that shore, keeping close within the gloom of the
sand-hills, the coast-guards coming after, pressing you closer than they
thought at the time, for Tom Doane had been wounded in the leg.  But
Lancy sent one back for the horses, he and the other coming on; and so,
there you were, two and two.  'Twas a cruel task for Lancy that night,
enough to turn a man's hair grey.  But duty was duty, though those two
lads were more to each other than most men ever are.  You know how it
ended.  But I want to go all over it just to show you that I understand.
You were within a mile of Mablethorpe, when you saw a little fishing
smack come riding in, and you made straight for it.  Who should be in the
smack but Solby, the canting Baptist, who was no friend to you or my
uncle, or any of us.  You had no time for bargaining or coaxing, and so,
at the musket's mouth, you drove him from the boat, and pushed it out
just as Lancy and his men came riding up.  Your sail was up, and you
turned the lugger to the wind in as little time as could be, but the
coast-guardsmen rode after you, calling you to give in.  No man will ever
know the bitter trouble in Laney's heart when he gave the order to fire
on you, though he did not fire himself.  And you--do I not know, Cousin
Dick, what you did?  Tom Doane was not the man to fire at the three dark
figures riding you down, not knowing which was his brother.  But you, you
understood that; and you were in, you said to yourself, and you'd play
the game out, come what would.  You raised your musket and drew upon a
figure.  At that moment a coast-guard's musket blazed, and you saw the
man you had drawn on was Lancy Doane.  You lowered your musket, and as
you did a ball struck you on the wrist.

"Oh, I have thanked God a hundred times, dear Cousin Dick, that you fired
no shot that night, but only helped a hunted, miserable man away, for you
did get free.  Just in the nick of time your sail caught the wind, and
you steered for the open sea.  Three days from that, Tom Doane was safe
in the Low Country, and you were on your way back to Lincolnshire.  You
came by a fishing boat to Saltfleet Haven, and made your way down the
coast towards Mablethorpe.  Passing Theddlethorpe, you went up to Faddo's
house, and, looking through the window, you saw Faddo, not dead, but
being cared for by his wife.  Then you came on to Mablethorpe, and
standing under my window, at the very moment when I was on my knees
praying for the safety of those who travelled by sea, you whistled like a
quail from the garden below--the old signal.  Oh, how my heart stood
still a moment and then leaped, for I knew it was you!  I went down to
the garden, and there you were.  Oh, but I was glad to see you, Cousin
Dick!

"You remember how I let you take me in your arms for an instant, and then
I asked if he was safe.  And when you told me that he was, I burst into
tears, and I asked you many questions about him.  And you answered them
quickly, and then would have taken me in your arms again.  But I would
not let you, for then I knew--I knew that you loved me, and, oh, a
dreadful feeling came into my heart, and I drew back, and could have sunk
upon the ground in misery, but that there came a thought of your safety!
He was safe, but you--you were here, where reward was posted for you.  I
begged you to come into the house, that I might hide you there, but you
would not.  You had come for one thing, you said, and only one.  An hour
or two, and then you must be gone for London.  And so you urged me to the
beach.  I was afraid we might be seen, but you led me away from the
cottages near to the little bridge which crosses the dyke.  By that way
we came to the sands, as we thought unnoted.  But no, who should it be to
see us but that canting Baptist, Solby!  And so the alarm was given.  You
had come, dear Cousin Dick, to ask me one thing--if I loved you?  and if,
should you ever be free to come back, I would be your wife?  I did not
answer you; I could not answer you; and, when you pressed me, I begged
you to have pity on me and not to speak of it.  You thought I was not
brave enough to love a man open to the law.  As if--as if I knew not that
what you did came out of a generous, reckless heart.  And on my knees--
oh, on my knees--I ought to have thanked you for it!  But I knew not what
to say; my lips were closed.  And just then shots were fired, and we saw
the coast-guards' lights.  Then came Lancy Doane stumbling down the
banks, and our parting--our parting.  Your bitter laugh as you left me
has rung in my ears ever since.

"Do not think we have been idle here in your cause, for I myself went to
Earl Fitzwilliam and told him the whole story, and how you had come to
help Tom Doane that night.  How do I know of it all?  Because I have seen
a letter from Tom Doane.  Well, the Earl promised to lay your case before
the King himself, and to speak for you with good eager entreaty.  And so,
it may be, by next time I write, there will go good news to you, and--
will you then come back, dear Cousin Dick?

"And now I want to tell you what I know, and what you do not know.
Tom Doane had a wife in Mablethorpe.  He married her when she was but
sixteen--a child.  But she was afraid of her father's anger, and her
husband soon after went abroad, became one of Prince Charlie's men, and
she's never seen him since.  She never really loved him, but she never
forgot that she was his wife; and she always dreaded his coming back; as
well she might, for you see what happened when he did come.  I pitied
her, dear Cousin Dick, with all my heart; and when Tom Doane died on the
field of battle in Holland last year, I wept with her and prayed for her.
And you would have wept too, man though you are, if you had seen how
grateful she was that he died in honourable fighting and not in a
smuggler's cave at Theddlethorpe.  She blessed you for that, and she
never ceases to work with me for the King's pardon for you.

"There is no more to say now, dear Cousin Dick, save that I would have
you know I think of you with great desire of heart for your well-being,
and I pray God for your safe return some day to the good country which,
pardoning you, will cast you out no more.

                    "I am, dear Cousin Dick,

                         "Thy most affectionate Cousin,

                                   "FANNY."

"Afterword--Dear Dick, my heart bursts for joy.  Enclosed here is thy
pardon, sent by the good Earl Fitzwilliam last night.  I could serve him
on my knees for ever.  Dick, she that was Tom Doane's wife, she loves
thee.  Wilt thou not come back to her?

"In truth, she always loved thee.  She was thy cousin; she is thy Fanny.
Now thou knowest all."






DONOVAN PASHA AND SOME PEOPLE OF EGYPT, Complete

By Gilbert Parker



CONTENTS

Volume 1.
WHILE THE LAMP HOLDS OUT TO BURN
THE PRICE OF THE GRINDSTONE-AND THE DRUM
THE DESERTION OF MAHOMMED SELIMON
THE REEF OF NORMAN'S WOE

Volume 2.
FIELDING HAD AN ORDERLY
THE EYE OF THE NEEDLE
A TREATY OF PEACE
AT THE MERCY OF TIBERIUS
ALL THE WORLD'S MAD

Volume 3.
THE MAN AT THE WHEEL
A TYRANT AND A LADY

Volume 4.
A YOUNG LION OF DEDAN
HE WOULD NOT BE DENIED
THE FLOWER OF THE FLOCK
THE LIGHT OF OTHER DAYS



INTRODUCTION

To the FOREWORD of this book I have practically nothing to add.  It
describes how the book was planned, and how at last it came to be
written.  The novel--'The Weavers'--of which it was the herald, as one
might say, was published in 1907.  The reception of Donovan Pasha
convinced me beyond peradventure, that the step I took in enlarging my
field of work was as wise in relation to my art as in its effect upon my
mind, temperament and faculty for writing.  I knew Egypt by study quite
as well as I knew the Dominion of Canada, the difference being, of
course, that the instinct for the life of Canada was part of my very
being itself; but there are great numbers of people who live their lives
for fifty or seventy or eighty years in a country, and have no real
instinct for understanding.  There are numberless Canadians who do not
understand Canada, Englishmen who know nothing of England, and Americans
who do not understand the United States.  If it is so that I have some
instinct for the life of Canada, and have expressed it to the world
with some accuracy and fidelity, it is apparent that the capacity for
understanding could not be limited absolutely to one environment.  That I
understood Canada could not be established by the fact that I had spent
my boyhood there, but only by the fact that some inner vision permitted
me to see it as it really was.  That inner vision, however, if it was
anything at all was not in blinders, seeing only one section of the life
of the world.  Relatively it might see more deeply, more intimately in
that place where habit of life had made the man familiar with all its
detail, but the same vision turned elsewhere to fields where study and
sympathy played a devoted part, could not fail to see; though the
workman's craft, which made material the vision, might fail.

The reception given Donovan Pasha convinced me that neither the vision
nor the craftsmanship had wholly failed, whatever the degree of success
which had been reached.  Anglo-Egyptians approved the book.  Its pages
passed through the hands of an Englishman who had done over twenty years'
service in the British army in Egypt and in official positions in the
Egyptian administration, and I do not think that he made six corrections
in the whole three hundred pages.  He had himself a great gift for both
music and painting; he was essentially exacting where any literature
touching Egypt was concerned; but I am glad to think that, whatever he
thought of the book as fiction, he did not find it necessary to grant
absolution as to the facts and the details of incidents in character and
life pourtrayed in Donovan Pasha.

Who the original of 'Donovan Pasha' was I shall never say, but he was
real.  There is, however, in the House of Commons today a young and
active politician once in the Egyptian service, and who bears a most
striking resemblance to the purely imaginary portrait which Mr. Talbot
Kelly, the artist, drew of the Dicky Donovan of the book.  This young
politician, with his experience in the diplomatic service, is in manner,
disposition, capacity, and in his neat, fine, and alert physical frame,
the very image of Dicky Donovan, as in my mind I perceived him; and when
I first saw him I was almost thunderstruck, because he was to me Dicky
Donovan come to life.  There was nothing Dicky Donovan did or said or saw
or heard which had not its counterpart in actual things in Egypt.  The
germ of most of the stories was got from things told me, or things that I
saw, heard of, or experienced in Egypt itself.  The first story of the
book--'While the Lamp Holds out to Burn'--was suggested to me by an
incident which I saw at a certain village on the Nile, which I will not
name.  Suffice it to say that the story in the main was true.  Also the
chief incident of the story, called 'The Price of the Grindstone--and the
Drum', is true.  The Mahommed Seti of that story was the servant of a
friend of mine, and he did in life what I made him do in the tale.
'On the Reef of Norman's Woe', which more than one journal singled out as
showing what extraordinary work was being done in Egypt by a handful of
British officials, had its origin in something told me by my friend Sir
John Rogers, who at one time was at the head of the Sanitary Department
of the Government of Egypt.

I could take the stories one by one, and show the seeds from which this
little plantation of fiction sprang, but I will not go further than to
refer to a story called 'Fielding Had an Orderly', the idea of which was
contained in the experience of a British official whose courage was as
cool as his wit, and both were extremely dangerous weapons, used at times
against those who were opposed to him.  When I read a book like 'Said the
Fisherman', however, with its wonderfully intimate knowledge of Oriental
life and the thousand nuances which only the born Orientalist can give,
I look with tempered pride upon Donovan Pasha.  Still I think that it
caught and held some phases of Egyptian life which the author of 'Said
the Fisherman' might perhaps miss, since the observation of every artist
has its own idiosyncrasy, and what strikes one observer will not strike
another.




A FOREWORD

It is now twelve years since I began giving to the public tales of life
in lands well known to me.  The first of them were drawn from Australia
and the Islands of the Southern Pacific, where I had lived and roamed in
the middle and late Eighties.  They appeared in various English
magazines, and were written in London far from the scenes which suggested
them.  None of them were written on the spot, as it were.  I did not
think then, and I do not think now, that this was perilous to their
truthfulness.  After many years of travel and home-staying observation
I have found that all worth remembrance, the salient things and scenes,
emerge clearly out of myriad impressions, and become permanent in mind
and memory.  Things so emerging are typical at least, and probably true.

Those tales of the Far South were given out with some prodigality.  They
did not appear in book form, however; for, at the time I was sending out
these Antipodean sketches, I was also writing--far from the scenes where
they were laid--a series of Canadian tales, many of which appeared in the
'Independent' of New York, in the 'National Observer', edited by Mr.
Henley, and in the 'Illustrated London News'.  By accident, and on the
suggestion of my friend Mr. Henley, the Canadian tales 'Pierre and his
People' were published first; with the result that the stories of the
Southern Hemisphere were withheld from publication, though they have been
privately printed and duly copyrighted.  Some day I may send them forth,
but meanwhile I am content to keep them in my own care.

Moved always by deep interest in the varied manifestations of life in
different portions of the Empire, five or six years ago I was attracted
to the Island of Jersey, in the Channel Sea, by the likeness of the
origin of her people with that of the French-Canadians.  I went to live
at St. Heliers for a time, and there wrote a novel called 'The Battle of
the Strong'.

Nor would it be thought strange that, having visited another and newer
sphere of England's influence, Egypt to wit, in 1889, I should then
determine that, when I could study the country at leisure, I should try
to write of the life there, so full of splendour and of primitive
simplicity; of mystery and guilt; of cruel indolence and beautiful
industry; of tyranny and devoted slavery; of the high elements of a true
democracy and the shameful practices of a false autocracy; all touched
off by the majesty of an ancient charm, the nobility of the remotest
history.

The years went by, and, four times visiting Egypt, at last I began to
write of her.  That is now five years ago.  From time to time the stories
which I offer to the public in this volume were given forth.  It is
likely that the old Anglo-Egyptian and the historical student may find
some anachronisms and other things to criticise; but the anachronisms are
deliberate, and even as in writing of Canada and Australia, which I know
very well, I have here, perhaps, sacrificed superficial exactness while
trying to give the more intimate meaning and spirit.  I have never
thought it necessary to apologise for this disregard of photographic
accuracy,--that may be found in my note-books,--and I shall not begin to
do so now.  I shall be sufficiently grateful if this series of tales does
no more than make ready the way for the novel of Egyptian life on which I
have been working for some years.  It is an avant courier.  I hope,
however, that it may be welcomed for its own sake.
                                                       G.  P.


NOTE: A Glossary will be found at the end of the volume.




WHILE THE LAMP HOLDS OUT TO BURN

There is a town on the Nile which Fielding Bey called Hasha, meaning
"Heaven Forbid!"  He loathed inspecting it.  Going up the Nile, he would
put off visiting it till he came down; coming down, he thanked his fates
if accident carried him beyond it.  Convenient accidents sometimes did
occur: a murder at one of the villages below it, asking his immediate
presence; a telegram from his Minister at Cairo, requiring his return;
or a very low Nile, when Hasha suddenly found itself a mile away from the
channel and there was no good place to land.  So it was that Hasha, with
little inspection, was the least reputable and almost the dirtiest town
on the Nile; for even in those far-off days the official Englishman had
his influence, especially when Kubar Pasha was behind him.  Kubar had his
good points.

There were certain definite reasons, however, why Fielding Bey shrank
from visiting Hasha.  Donovan Pasha saw something was wrong from the
first moment Hasha was mentioned.

On a particular day they were lying below at another village, on the
Amenhotep.  Hasha was the next place marked red on the map, and that
meant inspection.  When Dicky Donovan mentioned Hasha, Fielding Bey
twisted a shoulder and walked nervously up and down the deck.  He stayed
here for hours: to wait for the next post, he said-serious matters
expected from head quarters.  He appeared not to realise that letters
would get to Hasha by rail as quickly as by the Amenhotep.

Every man has a weak spot in his character, a sub-rosa, as it were, in
his business of life; and Dicky fancied he had found Fielding Bey's.
While they waited, Fielding made a pretence of working hard--for he
really was conscientious--sending his orderly for the mamour--
[magistrate]--and the omdah--[head of a village]--, and holding fatuous
conferences; turning the hose on the local dairymen and butchers and
dategrowers, who came with backsheesh in kind; burying his nose in
official papers; or sending for Holgate, the Yorkshire engineer, to find
out what the run would be to the next stopping-place beyond Hasha.  Twice
he did this; which was very little like Fielding Bey.  The second time,
when Holgate came below to his engine, Dicky was there playing with a
Farshoot dog.

"We don't stop at Hasha, then?" Dicky asked, and let the Farshoot fasten
on his leggings.

Holgate swung round and eyed Dicky curiously, a queer smile at his lips.

"Not if Goovnur can 'elp, aw give ye ma woord, sir," answered Holgate.

Fielding was affectionately called "the Governor" by his subordinates and
friends.

"We all have our likes and dislikes," rejoined Dicky casually, and blew
smoke in the eyes of the Farshoot.  "Aye, aw've seen places that bad!
but Hasha has taaste of its own in Goovnur's mouth, ma life on't!"
"Never can tell when a thing'll pall on the taste.  Hasha's turn with the
Governor now, eh?" rejoined Dicky.

Dicky's way of getting information seemed guileless, and Holgate opened
his basket as wide as he knew.  "Toorn, didst tha sway" (Holgate talked
broadly to Dicky always, for Dicky had told him of his aunt, Lady
Carmichael, who lived near Halifax in Yorkshire), "toorn, aw warrant!
It be reg'lar as kitchen-fire, this Hasha business, for three years, ever
sin' aw been scrapin' mud o' Nile River."

"That was a nasty row they had over the cemetery three years ago, the
Governor against the lot, from mamour to wekeel!"

Holgate's eyes flashed, and he looked almost angrily down at Dicky, whose
hand was between the teeth of the playful Farshoot.

"Doost think--noa, tha canst not think that Goovnur be 'feared o' Hasha
fook.  Thinks't tha, a man that told 'em all--a thousand therr--that he'd
hang on nearest tree the foorst that disobeyed him, thinks't tha that
Goovnur's lost his nerve by that?"

"The Governor never loses his nerve, Holgate," said Dicky, smiling and
offering a cigar.  "There's such a thing as a man being afraid to trust
himself where he's been in a mess, lest he hit out, and doesn't want to."

Holgate, being excited, was in a fit state to tell the truth, if he knew
it; which was what Dicky had worked for; but Holgate only said:

"It bean't fear, and it bean't milk o' human kindness.  It be soort o'
thing a man gets.  Aw had it once i' Bradford, in Little Cornish Street.
Aw saw a faace look out o' window o' hoose by tinsmith's shop, an' that
faace was like hell's picture-aye, 'twas a killiagous faace that!  Aw
never again could pass that house.  'Twas a woman's faace.  Horrible
'twas, an' sore sad an' flootered aw were, for t' faace was like a lass
aw loved when aw wur a lad."

"I should think it was something like that," answered Dicky, his eyes
wandering over the peninsula beyond which lay Hasha.

"Summat, aw be sure," answered Holgate, "an' ma woord on't .  .  .  ah,
yon coomes orderly wi' post for Goovnur.  Now it be Hasha, or it be not
Hasha, it be time for steam oop."

Holgate turned to his engine as Dicky mounted the stairs and went to
Fielding's cabin, where the orderly was untying a handkerchief
overflowing with letters.

As Fielding read his official letters his face fell more and more.  When
he had read the last, he sat for a minute without speaking, his brow very
black.  There was no excuse for pushing past Hasha.  He had not been
there for over a year.  It was his duty to inspect the place: he had a
conscience; there was time to get to Hasha that afternoon.  With an
effort he rose, hurried along the deck, and called down to Holgate:
"Full-steam to Hasha!"

Then, with a quick command to the reis, who was already at the wheel, he
lighted a cigar, and, joining Dicky Donovan, began to smoke and talk
furiously.  But he did not talk of Hasha.

At sunset the Amenhotep drew in to the bank by Hasha, and, from the deck,
Fielding Bey saluted the mamour, the omdah and his own subordinates, who,
buttoning up their coats as they came, hurried to the bank to make
salaams to him.  Behind them, at a distance, came villagers, a dozen
ghaffirs armed with naboots of dom-wood, and a brace of well-mounted,
badly-dressed policemen, with seats like a monkey on a stick.  The
conferences with the mamour and omdah were short, in keeping with the
temper of "Fielding Saadat"; and long into the night Dicky lay and looked
out of his cabin window to the fires on the banks, where sat Mahommed
Seti the servant, the orderly, and some attendant ghaffirs, who, feasting
on the remains of the effendi's supper, kept watch.  For Hasha was noted
for its robbers.  It was even rumoured that the egregious Selamlik Pasha,
with the sugar plantation near by--"Trousers," Dicky called him when he
saw him on the morrow, because of the elephantine breeks he wore--was not
averse to sending his Abyssinian slaves through the sugar-cane to waylay
and rob, and worse, maybe.

By five o'clock next day the inspection was over.  The streets had been
swept for the Excellency--which is to say Saadat--the first time in a
year.  The prison had been cleaned of visible horrors, the first time in
a month.  The last time it was ordered there had been a riot among the
starving, infested prisoners; earth had been thrown over the protruding
bones of the dear lamented dead in the cemetery; the water of the
ablution places in the mosque had been changed; the ragged policemen had
new putties; the kourbashes of the tax-gatherers were hid in their
yeleks; the egregious Pasha wore a greasy smile, and the submudir, as he
conducted Fielding--"whom God preserve and honour!"--through the prison
and through the hospital, where goat's milk had been laid on for this
especial day, smirked gently through the bazaar above his Parisian
waistcoat.

But Fielding, as he rode on Selamlik Pasha's gorgeous black donkey from
Assiout, with its crimson trappings, knew what proportion of improvement
this "hankypanky," as Dicky called it, bore to the condition of things at
the last inspection.  He had spoken little all day, and Dicky had noticed
that his eye was constantly turning here and there, as though looking for
an unwelcome something or somebody.

At last the thing was over, and they were just crossing the canal, the
old Bahr-el-Yusef, which cuts the town in twain as the river Abana does
Damascus, when Dicky saw nearing them a heavily-laden boat, a cross
between a Thames house-boat and an Italian gondola, being drawn by one
poor raw-bone--raw-bone in truth, for there was on each shoulder a round
red place, made raw by the unsheathed ropes used as harness.  The beast's
sides were scraped as a tree is barked, and the hind quarters gored as
though by a harrow.  Dicky was riding with the mamour of the district,
Fielding was a distance behind with Trousers and the Mudir.  Dicky pulled
up his donkey, got off and ran towards the horse, pale with fury; for he
loved animals better than men, and had wasted his strength beating
donkey-boys with the sticks they used on their victims.  The boat had now
reached a point opposite the mudirieh, its stopping-place; and the raw-
bone, reeking with sweat and blood, stood still and trembled, its knees
shaking with the strain just taken off them, its head sunk nearly to the
ground.

Dicky had hardly reached the spot when a figure came running to the poor
waler with a quick stumbling motion.  Dicky drew back in wonder, for
never had he seen eyes so painful as these that glanced from the tortured
beast to himself--staring, bulbous, bloodshot, hunted eyes; but they were
blue, a sickly, faded blue; and they were English!  Dicky's hand was, on
his pistol, for his first impulse had been to shoot the rawbone; but it
dropped away in sheer astonishment at the sight of this strange figure in
threadbare dirty clothes and riding-breeches made by shearing the legs of
a long pair--cut with an unsteady hand, for the edges were jagged and
uneven, and the man's bare leg showed above the cast-off putties of a
policeman.  The coat was an old khaki jacket of a Gippy soldier, and,
being scant of buttons, doubtful linen showed beneath.  Above the hook-
nose, once aristocratic, now vulture-like and shrunken like that of
Rameses in his glass case at Ghizeh, was a tarboosh tilting forward over
the eyes, nearly covering the forehead.  The figure must have been very
tall once, but it was stooped now, though the height was still well above
medium.  Hunted, haunted, ravaged and lost, was the face, and the long
grey moustache, covering the chin almost, seemed to cover an immeasurable
depravity.

Dicky took it all in at a glance, and wondered with a bitter wonder; for
this was an Englishman, and behind him and around him, though not very
near him, were Arabs, Soudanese, and Fellaheen, with sneering yet
apprehensive faces.

As Dicky's hand dropped away from his pistol, the other shot out
trembling, graceful, eager fingers, the one inexpressibly gentlemanly
thing about him.

"Give it to me--quick!" he said, and he threw a backward glance towards
the approaching group--Fielding, the egregious Pasha, and the rest.

Dicky did not hesitate; he passed the pistol over.  The Lost One took the
pistol, cocked it, and held it to the head of the waler, which feebly
turned to him in recognition.

"Good-bye, old man!" he said, and fired.

The horse dropped, kicked, struggled once or twice, and was gone.

"If you know the right spot, there's hardly a kick," said the Lost One,
and turned to face the Pasha, who had whipped his donkey forward on them,
and sat now livid with rage, before the two.  He stood speechless for a
moment, for his anger had forced the fat of his neck up into his throat.

But Dicky did not notice the Pasha.  His eye was fixed on Fielding Bey,
and the eye of Fielding Bey was on the Lost One.  All at once Dicky
understood why it was that Fielding Bey had shrunk from coming to Hasha.
Fielding might have offered many reasons, but this figure before them was
the true one.  Trouble, pity, anxiety, pride, all were in Fielding's
face.  Because the Lost One was an Englishman, and the race was shamed
and injured by this outcast?  Not that alone.  Fielding had the natural
pride of his race, but this look was personal.  He glanced at the dead
horse, at the scarred sides, the raw shoulders, the corrugated haunches,
he saw the pistol in the Lost One's hand, and then, as a thread of light
steals between the black trees of a jungle, a light stole across
Fielding's face for a moment.  He saw the Lost One hand the pistol back
to Dicky and fix his debauched blue eyes on the Pasha.  These blue eyes
did not once look at Fielding, though they were aware of his presence.

"Son of a dog!" said the Pasha, and his fat forefinger convulsively
pointed to the horse.

The Lost One's eyes wavered a second, as though their owner had not the
courage to abide the effect of his action, then they quickened to a point
of steadiness, as a lash suddenly knots for a crack in the hand of a
postilion.

"Swine!" said the Lost One into the Pasha's face, and his round
shoulders drew up a little farther, so that he seemed more like a man
among men.  His hands fell on his hips as, in his mess, an officer with
no pockets drops his knuckles on his waist-line for a stand-at-ease.

The egregious Selamlik Pasha stood high in favour with the Khedive: was
it not he who had suggested a tax on the earnings of the dancing girls,
the Ghazeeyehs, and did he not himself act as the first tax-gatherer?
Was it not Selamlik Pasha also who whispered into the ear of the
Mouffetish that a birth-tax and a burial-tax should be instituted?
And had he not seen them carried out in the mudiriehs under his own
supervision?  Had he not himself made the Fellaheen pay thrice over for
water for their onion-fields?  Had he not flogged an Arab to death with
his own hand, the day before Fielding's and Dicky's arrival, and had he
not tried to get this same Arab's daughter into his harem--this Selamlik
Pasha!

The voice of the Lost One suddenly rose shrill and excited, and he
shouted at the Pasha.  "Swine! swine! swine!  .  .  .  Kill your slaves
with a kourbash if you like, but a bullet's the thing for a waler!--Swine
of a leper!"

The whole frame of the Lost One was still, but the voice was shaking,
querulous, half hysterical; the eyes were lighted with a terrible
excitement, the lips under the grey moustache twitched; the nervous
slipshod dignity of carriage was in curious contrast to the disordered
patchwork dress.

The trouble on Fielding's face glimmered with a little ray of hope now.
Dicky came over to him, and was about to speak, but a motion of
Fielding's hand stopped him.  The hand said: "Let them fight it out."

In a paroxysm of passion Selamlik Pasha called two Abyssinian slaves
standing behind.  "This brother of a toad to prison!" he said.

The Lost One's eyes sought Dicky like a flash.  Without a word, and as
quick as the tick of a clock, Dicky tossed over his pistol to the Lost
One, who caught it smoothly, turned it in his hand, and levelled it at
the Abyssinians.

"No more of this damned nonsense, Pasha," said Fielding suddenly.  "He
doesn't put a high price on his life, and you do on yours.  I'd be
careful!"

"Steady, Trousers!" said Dicky in a soft voice, and smiled his girlish
smile.

Selamlik Pasha stared for a moment in black anger, then stuttered forth:
"Will you speak for a dog of a slave that his own country vomits out?"

"Your mother was a slave of Darfur, Pasha," answered Fielding, in a low
voice; "your father lost his life stealing slaves.  Let's have no airs
and graces."

Dicky's eyes had been fixed on the Lost One, and his voice now said in
its quaint treble: "Don't get into a perspiration.  He's from where we
get our bad manners, and he messes with us to-night, Pasha."

The effect of these words was curious.  Fielding's face was a blank
surprise, and his mouth opened to say no, but he caught Dicky's look and
the word was not uttered.  The Pasha's face showed curious incredulity;
under the pallor of the Lost One's a purplish flush crept, stayed a
moment, then faded away, and left it paler than before.

"We've no more business, I think, Pasha," said Fielding brusquely, and
turned his donkey towards the river.  The Pasha salaamed without a word,
his Abyssinian slaves helped him on his great white donkey, and he
trotted away towards the palace, the trousers flapping about his huge
legs.  The Lost One stood fingering the revolver.  Presently he looked up
at Dicky, and, standing still, held out the pistol.

"Better keep it," said Dicky; "I'll give you some peas for it to-night.
Speak to the poor devil, Fielding," he added quickly, in a low tone.

Fielding turned in his saddle.  "Seven's the hour," he said, and rode on.

"Thanks, you fellows," said the Lost One, and walked swiftly away.

As they rode to the Amenhotep Dicky did not speak, but once he turned
round to look after the outcast, who was shambling along the bank of the
canal.

When Fielding and Dicky reached the deck of the Amenhotep, and Mahommed
Seti had brought refreshment, Dicky said: "What did he do?"

Fielding's voice was constrained and hard: "Cheated at cards."

Dicky's lips tightened.  "Where?"

"At Hong Kong."

"Officer?"

"In the Buffs."

Dicky drew a long breath.  "He's paid the piper."

"Naturally.  He cheated twice."

"Cheated twice--at cards!"  Dicky's voice was hard now.  "Who was he?"

"Heatherby--Bob Heatherby!"

"Bob Heatherby--gad!  Fielding, I'm sorry--I couldn't have guessed, old
man.  Mrs. Henshaw's brother!"

Fielding nodded.  Dicky turned his head away; for Fielding was in love
with Mrs. Henshaw, the widow of Henshaw of the Buffs.  He realised now
why Fielding loathed Hasha so.

"Forgive me for asking him to mess, guv'nor."

Fielding laughed a little uneasily.  "Never mind.  You see, it isn't the
old scores only that bar him.  He's been a sweep out here.  Nothing he
hasn't done.  Gone lower and lower and lower.  Tax-gatherer with a
kourbash for old Selamlik the beast.  Panderer for the same.  Sweep of
the lowest sort!"

Dicky's eyes flashed.  "I say, Fielding, it would be rather strange if he
hadn't gone down, down, down.  A man that's cheated at cards never finds
anybody to help him up, up, up.  The chances are dead against him.  But
he stood up well to-day, eh?"

"I suppose blood will tell at last in the very worst."

             "'And while the lamp holds out to burn
               The vilest sinner may return--'"

hummed Dicky musingly.  Then he added slowly: "Fielding, fellows of that
kind always flare up a bit according to Cavendish, just before the end.
I've seen it once or twice before.  It's the last clutch at the grass as
they go slip--slip--slipping down.  Take my word for it, Heatherby's near
the finish."

"I shouldn't wonder.  Selamlik, the old leper, 'll lay in wait for him.
He'll get lost in the sugar-cane one of these evenings soon."

"Couldn't we .  .  ." Dicky paused.

Fielding started, looked at Dicky intently, and then shook his head
sadly.  "It's no good, Dicky.  It never is."

"'While the lamp holds out to burn .  .  .'" said Dicky, and lighted
another cigarette.

Precisely at seven o'clock Heatherby appeared.  He had on a dress-suit,
brown and rusty, a white tie made of a handkerchief torn in two, and a
pair of patent leather shoes, scraggy and cracked.

Fielding behaved well, Dicky was amiable and attentive, and the dinner
being ready to the instant, there was no waiting, there were no awkward
pauses.  No names of English people were mentioned, England was not
named; nor Cairo, nor anything that English people abroad love to
discuss.  The fellah, the pasha, the Soudan were the only topics.  Under
Fielding's courtesy and Dicky's acute suggestions, Heatherby's weakened
brain awaked, and he talked intelligently, till the moment coffee was
brought in.  Then, as Mahommed Seti retired, Heatherby suddenly threw
himself forward, his arms on the table, and burst into sobs.

"Oh, you fellows, you fellows!" he said.  There was silence for a
minute, then he sobbed out again: "It's the first time I've been treated
like a gentleman by men that knew me, these fifteen years.  It--it gets
me in the throat!"

His body shook with sobs.  Fielding and Dicky were uncomfortable, for
these were not the sobs of a driveller or a drunkard.  Behind them was
the blank failure of a life--fifteen years of miserable torture, of
degradation, of a daily descent lower into the pit, of the servitude of
shame.  When at last he raised his streaming eyes, Fielding and Dicky
could see the haunting terror of the soul, at whose elbow, as it were,
every man cried: "You are without the pale!"  That look told them how
Heatherby of the Buffs had gone from table d'hote to table d'hote of
Europe, from town to town, from village to village, to make acquaintances
who repulsed him when they discovered who he really was.

Shady Heatherby, who cheated at cards!

Once Fielding made as if to put a hand on his shoulder and speak to him,
but Dicky intervened with a look.  The two drank their coffee, Fielding
a little uneasily; but yet in his face there was a new look: of inquiry,
of kindness, even of hope.

Presently Dicky flashed a look and nodded towards the door, and Fielding
dropped his cigar and went on deck, and called down to Holgate the
engineer:

"Get up steam, and make for Luxor.  It's moonlight, and we're safe enough
in this high Nile, eh, Holgate?"

"Safe enough, or aw'm a Dootchman," said Holgate.  Then they talked in a
low voice together.  Down in the saloon, Dicky sat watching Heatherby.
At last the Lost One raised his head again.

"It's worth more to me, this night, than you fellows know," he said
brokenly.

"That's all right," said Dicky.  "Have a cigar?"

He shook his head.  "It's come at the right time.  I wanted to be treated
like an Englishman once more--just once more."

"Don't worry.  Take in a reef and go steady for a bit.  The milk's spilt,
but there are other meadows.  .  .  ."  Dicky waved an arm up the river,
up towards the Soudan!

The Lost One nodded, then his eyes blazed up and took on a hungry look.
His voice suddenly came in a whisper.

"Gordon was a white man.  Gordon said to me three years ago: 'Come with
me, I'll help you on.  You don't need to live, if you don't want to.
Most of us will get knocked out up there in the Soudan.'  Gordon said
that to me.  But there was another fellow with Gordon who knew me,
and I couldn't face it.  So I stayed behind here.  I've been everything,
anything, to that swine, Selamlik Pasha; but when he told me yesterday to
bring him the daughter of the Arab he killed with his kourbash, I jibbed.
I couldn't stand that.  Her father had fed me more than once.  I jibbed
--by God, I jibbed!  I said I was an Englishman, and I'd see him damned
first.  I said it, and I shot the horse, and I'd have shot him--what's
that?"

There was a churning below.  The Amenhotep was moving from the bank.

"She's going--the boat's going," said the Lost One, trembling to his
feet.

"Sit down," said Dicky, and gripped him by the arm.  "Where are you
taking me?" asked Heatherby, a strange, excited look in his face.

"Up the river."

He seemed to read Dicky's thoughts--the clairvoyance of an overwrought
mind: "To--to Assouan?"  The voice had a curious far-away sound.

"You shall go beyond Assouan," said Dicky.  "To--to Gordon?"  Heatherby's
voice was husky and indistinct.

"Yes, here's Fielding; he'll give you the tip.  Sit down."  Dicky gently
forced him down into a chair.  Six months later, a letter came to Dicky
from an Egyptian officer, saying that Heatherby of the Buffs had died
gallantly fighting in a sortie sent by Gordon into the desert.

"He had a lot of luck," mused Dicky as he read.  "They don't end that way
as a rule."

Then he went to Fielding, humming a certain stave from one of Watts's
hymns.






THE PRICE OF THE GRINDSTONE--AND THE DRUM

He lived in the days of Ismail the Khedive, and was familiarly known as
the Murderer.  He had earned his name, and he had no repentance.  From
the roof of a hut in his native village of Manfaloot he had dropped a
grindstone on the head of Ebn Haroun, who contended with him for the
affections of Ahassa, the daughter of Haleel the barber, and Ebn Haroun's
head was flattened like the cover of a pie.  Then he had broken a cake of
dourha bread on the roof for the pigeons above him, and had come down
grinning to the street, where a hesitating mounted policeman fumbled with
his weapon, and four ghaffirs waited for him with their naboots.

Seti then had weighed his chances, had seen the avenging friends of Ebn
Haroun behind the ghaffirs, and therefore permitted himself to be marched
off to the mudirieh.  There the Mudir glared at him and had him loaded
with chains and flung into the prison, where two hundred convicts arrayed
themselves against myriad tribes which, killed individually, made a spot
on the wall no bigger than a threepenny-bit!  The carnage was great, and
though Seti was sleepless night after night it was not because of his
crime.  He found some solace, however, in provoking his fellow-prisoners
to assaults upon each other; and every morning he grinned as he saw the
dead and wounded dragged out into the clear sunshine.

The end to this came when the father of Seti, Abou Seti, went at night to
the Mudir and said deceitfully: "Effendi, by the mercy of Heaven I have
been spared even to this day; for is it not written in the Koran that a
man shall render to his neighbour what is his neighbour's?  What should
Abou Seti do with ten feddans of land, while the servant of Allah, the
Effendi Insagi, lives?  What is honestly mine is eight feddans, and the
rest, by the grace of God, is thine, O effendi."

Every feddan he had he had honestly earned, but this was his way of
offering backsheesh.

And the Mudir had due anger and said: "No better are ye than a Frank to
have hidden the truth so long and waxed fat as the Nile rises and falls.
The two feddans, as thou sayest, are mine."

Abou Seti bowed low, and rejoined, "Now shall I sleep in peace, by the
grace of Heaven, and all my people under my date-trees--and all my
people?" he added, with an upward look at the Mudir.

"But the rentals of the two feddans of land these ten years--thou hast
eased thy soul by bringing the rentals thereof?"

Abou Seti's glance fell and his hands twitched.  His fingers fumbled with
his robe of striped silk.  He cursed the Mudir in his heart for his
bitter humour; but was not his son in prison, and did it not lie with the
Mudir whether he lived or died?  So he answered:

"All-seeing and all-knowing art thou, O effendi, and I have reckoned the
rentals even to this hour for the ten years--fifty piastres for each
feddan--"

"A hundred for the five years of high Nile," interposed the Mudir.

"Fifty for the five lean years, and a hundred for the five fat years,"
said Abou Seti, and wished that his words were poisoned arrows, that they
might give the Mudir many deaths at once.  "And may Allah give thee
greatness upon thy greatness!"

"God prosper thee also, Abou Seti, and see that thou keep only what is
thine own henceforth.  Get thee gone in peace."

"At what hour shall I see the face of my son alive?" asked Abou Seti in
a low voice, placing his hand upon his turban in humility.

"To-morrow at even, when the Muezzin calls from the mosque of El Hassan,
be thou at the west wall of the prison by the Gate of the Prophet's
Sorrow, with thy fastest camel.  Your son shall ride for me through the
desert even to Farafreh, and bear a letter to the bimbashi there.  If he
bear it safely, his life is his own; if he fail, look to thy feddans of
land!"

"God is merciful, and Seti is bone of my bone," said Abou Seti, and laid
his hand again upon his turban.  That was how Mahommed Seti did not at
once pay the price of the grindstone, but rode into the desert bearing
the message of the Mudir and returned safely with the answer, and was
again seen in the cafes of Manfaloot.  And none of Ebn Haroun's friends
did aught, for the world knew through whom it was that Seti lived--and
land was hard to keep in Manfaloot and the prison near.

But one day a kavass of the Khedive swooped down on Manfaloot, and twenty
young men were carried off in conscription.  Among them was Seti, now
married to Ahassa, the fellah maid for whom the grindstone had fallen on
Ebn Haroun's head.  When the fatal number fell to him and it was ordained
that he must go to Dongola to serve in the Khedive's legions, he went to
his father, with Ahassa wailing behind him.

"Save thyself," said the old man with a frown.

"I have done what I could--I have sold my wife's jewels," answered Seti.

"Ten piastres!" said old Abou Seti grimly.  "Twelve," said Seti, grinning
from ear to ear.  Thou wilt add four feddans of land to that I will
answer for the Mudir."

"Thy life only cost me two feddans.  Shall I pay four to free thee of
serving thy master the Khedive?  Get thee gone into the Soudan.  I do not
fear for thee: thou wilt live on.  Allah is thy friend.  Peace be with
thee!"



II

So it was that the broad-shouldered Seti went to be a soldier, with all
the women of the village wailing behind him, and Ahassa his wife covering
her head with dust and weeping by his side as he stepped out towards
Dongola.  For himself, Seti was a philosopher; that is to say, he was a
true Egyptian.  Whatever was, was to be; and Seti had a good digestion,
which is a great thing in the desert.  Moreover, he had a capacity for
foraging--or foray.  The calmness with which he risked his life for an
onion or a water-bag would have done credit to a prince of buccaneers.
He was never flustered.  He had dropped a grindstone on the head of his
rival, but the smile that he smiled then was the same smile with which he
suffered and forayed and fought and filched in the desert.  With a back
like a door, and arms as long and strong as a gorilla's, with no moral
character to speak of, and an imperturbable selfishness, even an ignorant
Arab like Seti may go far.  More than once his bimbashi drew a sword to
cut him down for the peaceful insolent grin with which he heard himself
suddenly charged with very original crimes; but even the officer put his
sword up again, because he remembered that though Seti was the curse of
the regiment on the march, there was no man like him in the day of
battle.  Covered with desert sand and blood, and fighting and raging
after the manner of a Sikh, he could hold ten companies together like a
wall against a charge of Dervishes.  The bimbashi rejoiced at this, for
he was a coward; likewise his captain was a coward, and so was his
lieutenant: for they were half Turks, half Gippies, who had seen Paris
and had not the decency to die there.  Also it had been discovered that
no man made so good a spy or envoy as Seti.  His gift for lying was
inexpressible: confusion never touched him; for the flattest
contradictions in the matter of levying backsheesh he always found an
excuse.  Where the bimbashi and his officers were afraid to go lest the
bald-headed eagle and the vulture should carry away their heads as tit-
bits to the Libyan hills, Seti was sent.  In more than one way he always
kept his head.  He was at once the curse and the pride of the regiment.
For his sins he could not be punished, and his virtues were of value only
to save his life.

In this fashion, while his regiment thinned out by disease, famine,
fighting, and the midnight knife, Seti came on to Dongola, to Berber, to
Khartoum; and he grinned with satisfaction when he heard that they would
make even for Kordofan.  He had outlived all the officers who left
Manfaloot with the regiment save the bimbashi, and the bimbashi was
superstitious and believed that while Seti lived he would live.
Therefore, no clansman ever watched his standard flying in the van as the
bimbashi--from behind--watched the long arm of Seti slaying, and heard
his voice like a brass horn above all others shouting his war-cry.

But at Khartoum came Seti's fall.  Many sorts of original sin had been
his, with profit and prodigious pleasure, but when, by the supposed
orders of the bimbashi, he went through Khartoum levying a tax upon every
dancing-girl in the place and making her pay upon the spot at the point
of a merciless tongue, he went one step too far.  For his genius had
preceded that of Selamlik Pasha, the friend of the Mouffetish at Cairo,
by one day only.  Selamlik himself had collected taxes on dancing-girls
all the way from Cairo to Khartoum; and to be hoist by an Arab in a foot
regiment having no authority and only a limitless insolence, was more
than the Excellency could bear.

To Selamlik Pasha the bimbashi hastily disowned all knowledge of Seti's
perfidy, but both were brought out to have their hands and feet and heads
cut off in the Beit-el-Mal, in the presence of the dancing-girls and the
populace.  In the appointed place, when Seti saw how the bimbashi wept--
for he had been to Paris and had no Arab blood in him; how he wrung his
hands--for had not absinthe weakened his nerves in the cafes of St.
Michel?--when Seti saw that he was no Arab and was afraid to die, then he
told the truth to Selamlik Pasha.  He even boldly offered to tell the
pasha where half his own ill-gotten gains were hid, if he would let the
bimbashi go.  Now, Selamlik Pasha was an Egyptian, and is it not written
in the Book of Egypt that no man without the most dangerous reason may
refuse backsheesh?  So it was that Selamlik talked to the Ulema, the holy
men, who were there, and they urged him to clemency, as holy men will,
even in Egypt--at a price.

So it was also that the bimbashi went back to his regiment with all his
limbs intact.  Seti and the other half of his ill-gotten gains were left.
His hands were about to be struck off, when he realised of how little
account his gold would be without them; so he offered it to Selamlik
Pasha for their sake.  The pasha promised, and then, having found the
money, serenely prepared the execution.  For his anger was great.  Was
not the idea of taxing the dancing-girls his very own, the most original
tax ever levied in Egypt?  And to have the honour of it filched from him
by a soldier of Manfaloot--no, Mahommed Seti should be crucified!

And Seti, the pride and the curse of his regiment, would have been
crucified between two palms on the banks of the river had it not been for
Fielding Bey, the Englishman--Fielding of St. Bartholomew's--who had
burned gloriously to reform Egypt root and branch, and had seen the fire
of his desires die down.  Fielding Bey saved Seti, but not with
backsheesh.

Fielding intervened.  He knew Selamlik Pasha well, and the secret of his
influence over him is for telling elsewhere.  But whatever its source, it
gave Mahommed Seti his life.  It gave him much more, for it expelled him
from the Khedive's army.  Now soldiers without number, gladly risking
death, had deserted from the army of the Khedive; they had bought
themselves out with enormous backsheesh, they had been thieves,
murderers, panderers, that they might be freed from service by some
corrupt pasha or bimbashi; but no one in the knowledge of the world had
ever been expelled from the army of the Khedive.

There was a satanic humour in the situation pleasant to the soul of
Mahommed Seti, if soul his subconsciousness might be called.  In the
presence of his regiment, drawn up in the Beit-el-Mal, before his
trembling bimbashi, whose lips were now pale with terror at the loss of
his mascot, Mahommed Seti was drummed out of line, out of his regiment,
out of the Beit-el-Mal.  It was opera boufe, and though Seti could not
know what opera boufe was, he did know that it was a ridiculous fantasia,
and he grinned his insolent grin all the way, even to the corner of the
camel-market, where the drummer and the sergeant and his squad turned
back from ministering a disgrace they would gladly have shared.

Left at the corner of the camel-market, Mahommed Seti planned his future.
At first it was to steal a camel and take the desert for Berber.  Then he
thought of the English hakim, Fielding Bey, who had saved his life.  Now,
a man who has saved your life once may do it again; one favour is always
the promise of another.  So Seti, with a sudden inspiration, went
straight to the house of Fielding Bey and sat down before it on his mat.

With the setting of the sun came a clatter of tins and a savoury odour
throughout Khartoum to its farthest precincts, for it was Ramadan, and no
man ate till sunset.  Seti smiled an avid smile, and waited.  At last he
got up, turned his face towards Mecca, and said his prayers.  Then he
lifted the latch of Fielding's hut, entered, eyed the medicine bottles
and the surgical case with childish apprehension, and made his way to the
kitchen.  There he foraged.  He built a fire; his courage grew; he ran to
the bazaar, and came back with an armful of meats and vegetables.

So it was that when Fielding returned he found Mahommed Seti and a
savoury mess awaiting him.  Also there was coffee and a bottle of brandy
which Seti had looted in the bazaar.  In one doorway stood Fielding; in
another stood Mahommed Seti, with the same grin which had served his
purpose all the way from Cairo, his ugly face behind it, and his
prodigious shoulders below it, and the huge chest from which came forth,
like the voice of a dove:

"God give thee long life, saadat el bey!"

Now an M.D. degree and a course in St. Bartholomew's Hospital do not
necessarily give a knowledge of the human soul, though the outlying lands
of the earth have been fattened by those who thought there was knowledge
and salvation in a conquered curriculum.  Fielding Bey, however, had
never made pretence of understanding the Oriental mind, so he discreetly
took his seat and made no remarks.  From sheer instinct, however, when he
came to the coffee he threw a boot which caught Mahommed Seti in the
middle of the chest, and said roughly: "French, not Turkish, idiot!"

Then Mahommed Seti grinned, and he knew that he was happy; for it was
deep in his mind that that was the Inglesi's way of offering a long
engagement.  In any case Seti had come to stay.  Three times he made
French coffee that night before it suited, and the language of Fielding
was appropriate in each case.  At last a boot, a native drum, and a wood
sculpture of Pabst the lion-headed goddess, established perfect relations
between them.  They fell into their places of master and man as
accurately as though the one had smitten and the other served
for twenty years.

The only acute differences they had were upon two points--the cleaning of
the medicine bottles and surgical instruments, and the looting.  But it
was wonderful to see how Mahommed Seti took the kourbash at the hands of
Fielding, when he shied from the medicine bottles.  He could have broken,
or bent double with one twist, the weedy, thin-chested Fielding.  But
though he saw a deadly magic and the evil eye in every stopper, and
though to him the surgical instruments were torturing steels which the
devil had forged for his purposes, he conquered his own prejudices so far
as to assist in certain bad cases which came in Fielding's way on the
journey down the Nile.

The looting was a different matter.  Had not Mahommed Seti looted all his
life--looted from his native village to the borders of Kordofan?  Did he
not take to foray as a wild ass to bersim?  Moreover, as little Dicky
Donovan said humorously yet shamelessly when he joined them at Korosko:
"What should a native do but loot who came from Manfaloot?"

Dicky had a prejudice against the Murderer, because he was a murderer;
and Mahommed Seti viewed with scorn any white man who was not Fielding;
much more so one who was only five feet and a trifle over.  So for a time
there was no sympathy between the two.  But each conquered the other in
the end.  Seti was conquered first.

One day Dicky, with a sudden burst of generosity--for he had a button to
his pocket--gave Mahommed Seti a handful of cigarettes.  The next day
Seti said to Fielding: "Behold, God has given thee strong men for
friends.  Thou hast Mahommed Seti"--his chest blew out like a bellows--
"and thou hast Donovan Pasha."

Fielding grunted.  He was not a fluent man, save in forbidden language,
and Seti added:

"Behold thou, saadat el bey, who opens a man's body and turns over his
heart with a sword-point, and sewing him up with silken cords bids him
live again, greatness is in thy house!  Last night thy friend, Donovan
Pasha, gave into my hands a score of those cigarettes which are like the
smell of a camel-yard.  In the evening, having broken bread and prayed,
I sat down at the door of the barber in peace to smoke, as becomes a man
who loves God and His benefits.  Five times I puffed, and then I stayed
my lips, for why should a man die of smoke when he can die by the sword?
But there are many men in Korosko whose lives are not as clean linen.
These I did not love.  I placed in their hands one by one the cigarettes,
and with their blessings following me I lost myself in the dusk and
waited."

Mahommed Seti paused.  On his face was a smile of sardonic retrospection.

"Go on, you fool!" grunted Fielding.

"Nineteen sick men, unworthy followers of the Prophet, thanked Allah in
the mosque to-day that their lives were spared.  Donovan Pasha is a great
man and a strong, effendi!  We be three strong men together."

Dicky Donovan's conversion to a lasting belief in Mahommed Seti came a
year later.

The thing happened at a little sortie from the Nile.  Fielding was chief
medical officer, and Dicky, for the moment, was unattached.  When the
time came for starting, Mahommed Seti brought round Fielding's horse and
also Dicky Donovan's.  Now, Mahommed Seti loved a horse as well as a
Bagarra Arab, and he had come to love Fielding's waler Bashi-Bazouk as a
Farshoot dog loves his master.  And Bashi-Bazouk was worthy of Seti's
love.  The sand of the desert, Seti's breath and the tail of his yelek
made the coat of Bashi-Bazouk like silk.  It was the joy of the regiment,
and the regiment knew that Seti had added a new chapter to the Koran
concerning horses, in keeping with Mahomet's own famous passage

                   "By the CHARGERS that pant,
                    And the hoofs that strike fire,
                    And the scourers at dawn,
                    Who stir up the dust with it,
                    And cleave through a host with it!"

But Mahomet's phrases were recited in the mosque, and Seti's, as he
rubbed Bashi-Bazouk with the tail of his yelek.

There was one thing, however, that Seti loved more than horses, or at
least as much.  Life to him was one long possible Donnybrook Fair.  That
was why, although he was no longer in the army, when Fielding and Dicky
mounted for the sortie he said to Fielding:

"Oh, brother of Joshua and all the fighters of Israel, I have a bobtailed
Arab.  Permit me to ride with thee."  And Fielding replied: "You will
fight the barn-yard fowl for dinner; get back to your stew-pots."

But Seti was not to be fobbed off.  "It is written that the Lord, the
Great One, is compassionate and merciful.  Wilt thou then, O saadat."

Fielding interrupted: "Go, harry the onion-field for dinner.  You're a
dog of a slave, and a murderer too: you must pay the price of that
grindstone!"

But Seti hung by the skin of his teeth to the fringe of Fielding's good-
nature--Fielding's words only were sour and wrathful.  So Seti grinned
and said: "For the grindstone, behold it sent Ebn Haroun to the mercy of
God.  Let him rest, praise be to God!"

"You were drummed out of the army.  You can't fight," said Fielding
again; but he was smiling under his long moustache.

"Is not a bobtailed nag sufficient shame?  Let thy friend ride the
bobtailed nag and pay the price of the grindstone and the drum," said
Seti.

"Fall in!" rang the colonel's command, and Fielding, giving Seti a
friendly kick in the ribs, galloped away to the troop.

Seti turned to the little onion-garden.  His eye harried it for a moment,
and he grinned.  He turned to the doorway where a stew-pot rested, and
his mind dwelt cheerfully on the lamb he had looted for Fielding's
dinner.  But last of all his eye rested upon his bobtailed Arab, the
shameless thing in an Arab country, where every horse rears his tail as a
peacock spreads his feathers, as a marching Albanian lifts his foot.  The
bobtailed Arab's nose was up, his stump was high.  A hundred times he had
been in battle; he was welted and scarred like a shoe-maker's apron.  He
snorted his cry towards the dust rising like a surf behind the heels of
the colonel's troop.

Suddenly Seti answered the cry--he answered the cry and sprang forward.

That was how in the midst of a desperate melee twenty miles away on the
road to Dongola little Dicky Donovan saw Seti riding into the thick of
the fight armed only with a naboot of domwood, his call, "Allala-Akbar!"
rising like a hoarse-throated bugle, as it had risen many a time in the
old days on the road from Manfaloot.  Seti and his bobtailed Arab, two
shameless ones, worked their way to the front.  Not Seti's strong right
arm alone and his naboot were at work, but the bobtailed Arab, like an
iron-handed razor toothed shrew, struck and bit his way, his eyes
bloodred like Seti's.  The superstitious Dervishes fell back before this
pair of demons; for their madness was like the madness of those who at
the Dosah throw themselves beneath the feet of the Sheikh's horse by the
mosque of El Hassan in Cairo.  The bobtailed Arab's lips were drawn back
over his assaulting teeth in a horrible grin.  Seti grinned too, the grin
of fury and of death.

Fielding did not know how it was that, falling wounded from his horse,
he was caught by strong arms, as Bashi-Bazouk cleared him at a bound and
broke into the desert.  But Dicky Donovan, with his own horse lanced
under him, knew that Seti made him mount the bobtailed Arab with Fielding
in front of him, and that a moment later they had joined the little band
retreating to Korosko, having left sixty of their own dead on the field,
and six times that number of Dervishes.

It was Dicky Donovan who cooked Fielding's supper that night, having
harried the onion-field and fought the barn-yard fowl, as Fielding had
commanded Seti.

But next evening at sunset Mahommed Seti came into the fort, slashed and
bleeding, with Bashi-Bazouk limping heavily after him.

Fielding said that Seti's was the good old game for which V.C.'s were the
reward--to run terrible risks to save a life in the face of the enemy;
but, heretofore, it had always been the life of a man, not of a horse.
To this day the Gippies of that regiment still alive do not understand
why Seti should have stayed behind and risked his life to save a horse
and bring him wounded back to his master.  But little Dicky Donovan
understood, and Fielding understood; and Fielding never afterwards
mounted Bashi-Bazouk but he remembered.  It was Mahommed Seti who taught
him the cry of Mahomet:

                   "By the CHARGERS that pant,
                    And the hoofs that strike fire,
                    And the scourers at dawn,
                    Who stir up the dust with it,
                    And cleave through a host with it!"

And in the course of time Mahommed Seti managed to pay the price of the
grindstone and also of the drum.






THE DESERTION OF MAHOMMED SELIM

The business began during Ramadan; how it ended and where was in the
mouth of every soldier between Beni Souef and Dongola, and there was not
a mud hut or a mosque within thirty miles of Mahommed Selim's home, not a
khiassa or felucca dropping anchor for gossip and garlic below the
mudirieh, but knew the story of Soada, the daughter of Wassef the camel-
driver.

Soada was pretty and upright, with a full round breast and a slim figure.
She carried a balass of water on her head as gracefully as a princess a
tiara.  This was remarked by occasional inspectors making their official
rounds, and by more than one khowagah putting in with his dahabeah where
the village maidens came to fill their water-jars.  Soada's trinkets and
bracelets were perhaps no better than those of her companions, but her
one garment was of the linen of Beni Mazar, as good as that worn by the
Sheikh-Elbeled himself.

Wassef the camel-driver, being proud of Soada, gave her the advantage of
his frequent good fortune in desert loot and Nile backsheesh.  But Wassef
was a hard man for all that, and he grew bitter and morose at last,
because he saw that camel-driving must suffer by the coming of the
railway.  Besides, as a man gets older he likes the season of Ramadan
less, for he must fast from sunrise to sunset, though his work goes on;
and, with broken sleep, having his meals at night, it is ten to one but
he gets irritable.

So it happened that one evening just at sunset, Wassef came to his hut,
with the sun like the red rim of a huge thumb-nail in the sky behind him,
ready beyond telling for his breakfast, and found nothing.  On his way
home he had seen before the houses and cafes silent Mussulmans with
cigarettes and matches in their fingers, cooks with their hands on the
lids of the cooking pots, where the dourha and onions boiled; but here
outside his own doorway there was no odour, and there was silence within.

"Now, by the beard of the Prophet," he muttered, "is it for this I have
fed the girl and clothed her with linen from Beni Mazar all these years!"
And he turned upon his heel, and kicked a yellow cur in the ribs; then he
went to the nearest cafe, and making huge rolls of forcemeat with his
fingers crammed them into his mouth, grunting like a Berkshire boar.  Nor
did his anger cease thereafter, for this meal of meat had cost him five
piastres--the second meal of meat in a week.

As Wassef sat on the mastaba of the cafe sullen and angry, the village
barber whispered in his ear that Mahommed Selim and Soada had been
hunting jackals in the desert all afternoon.  Hardly had the barber fled
from the anger of Wassef, when a glittering kavass of the Mouffetish at
Cairo passed by on a black errand of conscription.  With a curse Wassef
felt in his vest for his purse, and called to the kavass--the being more
dreaded in Egypt than the plague.

That very night the conscription descended upon Mahommed Selim, and by
sunrise he was standing in front of the house of the Mamour with twelve
others, to begin the march to Dongola.  Though the young man's father
went secretly to the Mamour, and offered him backsheesh, even to the tune
of a feddan of land, the Mamour refused to accept it.  That was a very
peculiar thing, because every Egyptian official, from the Khedive down to
the ghafhr of the cane-fields, took backsheesh in the name of Allah.

Wassef the camel-driver was the cause.  He was a deep man and a strong;
and it was through him the conscription descended upon Mahommed Selim--
"son of a burnt father," as he called him--who had gone shooting jackals
in the desert with his daughter, and had lost him his breakfast.
Wassef's rage was quiet but effective, for he had whispered to some
purpose in the ear of the Mamour as well as in that of the dreaded kavass
of conscription.  Afterwards, he had gone home and smiled at Soada his
daughter when she lied to him about the sunset breakfast.

With a placid smile and lips that murmured, "Praise be to God," the
malignant camel-driver watched the shrieking women of the village
throwing dust on their heads and lamenting loudly for the thirteen young
men of Beni Souef who were going forth never to return--or so it seemed
to them; for of all the herd of human kine driven into the desert before
whips and swords, but a moiety ever returned, and that moiety so battered
that their mothers did not know them.  Therefore, at Beni Souef that
morning women wept, and men looked sullenly upon the ground--all but
Wassef the camel-driver.

It troubled the mind of Wassef that Mahommed Selim made no outcry at his
fate.  He was still more puzzled when the Mamour whispered to him that
Mahommed Selim had told the kavass and his own father that since it was
the will of God, then the will of God was his will, and he would go.
Wassef replied that the Mamour did well not to accept the backsheesh of
Mahommed Selim's father, for the Mouffetish at the palace of Ismail would
have heard of it, and there would have been an end to the Mamour.  It was
quite a different matter when it was backsheesh for sending Mahommed
Selim to the Soudan.

With a shameless delight Wassef went to the door of his own home, and,
calling to Soada, told her that Mahommed Selim was among the conscripts.
He also told her that the young man was willing to go, and that the
Mamour would take no backsheesh from his father.  He looked to see her
burst into tears and wailing, but she only stood and looked at him like
one stricken blind.  Wassef laughed, and turned on his heel; and went
out: for what should he know of the look in a woman's face--he to whom
most women were alike, he who had taken dancing-girls with his camels
into the desert many a time?  What should he know of that love which
springs once in every woman's heart, be she fellah or Pharaoh's daughter?

When he had gone, Soada groped her way blindly to the door and out into
the roadway.  Her lips moved, but she only said: "Mahommed--Mahommed
Selim!"  Her father's words knelled in her ear that her lover was willing
to go, and she kept saying brokenly: "Mahommed--Mahommed Selim!"  As the
mist left her eyes she saw the conscripts go by, and Mahommed Selim was
in the rear rank.  He saw her also, but he kept his head turned away,
taking a cigarette from young Yusef, the drunken ghaffir, as they passed
on.

Unlike the manner of her people, Soada turned and went back into her
house, and threw herself upon the mud floor, and put the folds of her
garment in her mouth lest she should cry out in her agony.  A whole day
she lay there and did not stir,