 of God manifest in the flesh. If we have nothing more to
say about Jesus than that He lived upon earth and did works of goodness
and of beauty for a few short years, and then died, and there an end,
it seems to me that the story of the Death of Christ is the most
despairing page in the whole history of humanity, and that it
accentuates and makes still more dreadful the dreadful old puzzle of
how it comes that, in a world with a God in it, evil seems to be so
riotously preponderant and good seems to be ever trodden under foot.
Either the Death of Christ, if He died and did not rise again, is the
strongest argument in the history of mankind for rank atheism, or
else it is true that He rose, the King of humanity, glorified and
exalted by the vain attempts of His foes.

And now notice that this high-water mark, as I have called it, or
climax of human sin, was reached through very common and ordinary
transgressions. Judas betrayed Christ because he had always felt
uncomfortable with his earthly tendencies beside that pure spirit,
and also because he wanted to jingle the thirty pieces of silver in
his pocket. The priests did Him to death because He claimed the
Messiahship and to be the Son of God, and their formalism rose
against Him, and their blindness to all spiritual elevation made
them hate Him. Pilate sent Him to the Cross because he was a coward,
and thought that the life of a Jewish peasant was a small thing to
give in order to secure his position. And the mob howled at His
heels, and wagged their heads as they passed by, oblivious of His
miracles and His benevolence, simply because of the vulgar hatred of
anything that is lofty, and because they were so absorbed in
material things that they had no eyes for that radiant beauty. In
the whole list of these motives there is not a sin that you and I do
not commit, nor is there any one of them which may not be
reproduced, and as a matter of fact, is reproduced, by hundreds and
thousands in this professedly Christian land.

Oh, brethren! the actual murderers are not the worst criminals,
though their deed be the worst, considered in itself. Those Roman
soldiers who nailed His hands to the Cross, and went back to their
barracks that night, quite comfortable and unconscious that they had
been doing anything beyond their routine military duty, were
innocent and white-handed compared with the men and women among us,
who, with the additional evidence of the Cross, and the empty grave,
and the throne in the heavens, and the Christian Church, still stand
aloof and say, 'We see no beauty in Him that we should desire Him.'
Take care lest your attitude to Jesus Christ bring the level of your
criminality close up to that high-water mark, or carry it even
beyond it, for it is possible to 'crucify the Son of God afresh,'
and they who do so have the greater guilt.

III. Now, lastly, my text suggests that the temporary triumph of the
darkness is the eternal victory of the light.

'_This_ is your hour'--not the next. 'This is your
_hour_.' Sixty minutes tick, and it will be gone. When Christ
was beaten He was Conqueror, and as He looked upon His Cross He
said, 'I have overcome the world.' The eclipse which hung over the
little hill and the land of Palestine, during the long hours of that
slowly passing day, ended before He died. And His death was but the
passing for a brief moment of the shadow of death across the bright
luminary which, when the shadow has passed, shines out and 'with new
spangled beams, flames in the forehead of the morning sky.' The
darkness triumphed, and in its triumph it was overcome.

He, by dying, is the death of death. This Jonah inflicted a mortal
wound on the loathly monster in whose maw He lay for three days. He,
by bearing the penalty of sin, takes away the penalty of it for us
all. He, in the quenching of the light of His life in the night of
death, reveals God more than even He did in His life, and is never
more truly the Illuminator of mankind than when He lies in the
darkness of the grave and brings immortality to light. He, by His
death, delivers men from the kingdom of darkness, and translates
them into His own kingdom; giving them new powers for holiness, new
hopes, inspiriting them to rebellion against the tyrants that have
dominion over them; and thus conquering when He falls. The power of
the darkness is broken like a crested wave, toppling over at its
highest and dissolving in ineffectual spray.

So we have encouragement for all momentary checks and defeats, if
there be such in our experience, when we are doing Christ's work.
The history of the Church repeats in all ages, generation after
generation, the same law to which the Master submitted: 'Except a
corn of wheat fall into the ground and die it abideth alone; but if
it die it bringeth forth much fruit.' We conquer when we are
overcome; Christ conquered so, and His servants after Him.

And now apply all these principles which I have so imperfectly
stated to your own personal lives. Men and the kingdom of darkness
over-reached and outwitted themselves when they slew Jesus Christ.
And so all antagonism to Him, whether it be theoretical or whether
it be practical, and alienation of heart only, is suicidal folly.
When it most succeeds it is nearest the breaking point of utter
failure, like a man sawing off the branch on which he sits. Every
man that sets himself against God in Christ, either to argue Him
down and talk Him out of existence, or to 'break His bands asunder
and cast away His cords,' has begun a Sisyphean task which will
never come to any good. All sin is essentially irrational and
opposed to the whole motion of the universe, and must necessarily be
annihilated and come to nothing. The coarse title of one of our old
English plays carries a great truth in it; 'The Devil is an Ass,'
and for the man that obeys the kingdom of darkness the right epitaph
is 'Thou fool! Oh, brothers! do not fling yourselves into that
hopeless struggle. Put yourselves on the right side in this age-long
conflict, of which the issue was determined before evil was, and was
accomplished when Christ died. For be sure of this, that as
certainly as 'The darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth,'
so certainly all they that fight against the light--and all men
fight against it who shut their eyes to it--are engaged in a
conflict of which only one issue is possible, and that is defeat,
bitter, complete, absolute. Rather let us all, though we be evil,
and though there be a bad self in us that knows itself to be evil
and hates the Light--let us all go to it. It may pain the eye, but
it is the only cure for the ophthalmia. Let us go to it, spread
ourselves out before it, and say, 'Search me, O Christ, and try me,
and see if there be any wicked way in me. Lead me, a blind man, into
the light.' And His answer will come: 'I am the Light of the world;
he that followeth Me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of life.'




IN THE HIGH PRIEST'S PALACE


    'Then took they Him, and led Him, and brought Him into
    the high priest's house. And Peter followed afar off.
    55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of
    the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down
    among them. 56. But a certain maid beheld him as he
    sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and
    said, This man was also with Him. 57. And he denied
    Him, saying, Woman, I know Him not. 58. And, after a
    little while, another saw him, and said, Thou art also
    of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not. 59. And about
    the space of one hour after another confidently
    affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with
    Him; for he is a Galilean. 60. And Peter said, Man, I
    know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he
    yet spake, the cock crew. 61. And the Lord turned, and
    looked upon Peter: and Peter remembered the word of
    the Lord, how He had said unto him, Before the cock
    crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice. 62. And Peter went
    out, and wept bitterly. 63. And the men that held
    Jesus mocked Him and smote Him. 64. And when they had
    blindfolded Him, they struck Him on the face, and
    asked Him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote
    Thee? 65. And many other things blasphemously spake
    they against Him. 66. And as soon as it was day, the
    elders of the people, and the chief priests, and the
    scribes, came together, and led Him into their
    council, 67. Saying, Art Thou the Christ? tell us. And
    He said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe:
    68. And If I also ask you, ye will not answer Me, nor
    let Me go. 69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on
    the right hand of the power of God. 70. Then said they
    all, Art Thou then the Son of God? And He said unto
    them, Ye say that I am. 71. And they said, What need
    we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of
    His own mouth.'--LUKE xxii. 54-71.

The present passage deals with three incidents, each of which may be
regarded either as an element in our Lord's sufferings or as a
revelation of man's sin. He is denied, mocked, and formally rejected
and condemned. A trusted friend proves faithless, the underlings of
the rulers brutally ridicule His prophetic claims, and their masters
vote Him a blasphemer for assenting His divinity and Messiahship.

I. We have the failure of loyalty and love in Peter's denials. I may
observe that Luke puts all Peter's denials before the hearing by the
council, from which it is clear that the latter was later than the
hearing recorded by Matthew and John. The first denial probably took
place in the great hall of the high priest's official residence, at
the upper end of which the prisoner was being examined, while the
hangers--on huddled round the fire, idly waiting the event.

The morning air bit sharply, and Peter, exhausted, sleepy, sad, and
shivering, was glad to creep near the blaze. Its glinting on his
face betrayed him to a woman's sharp eye, and her gossiping tongue
could not help blurting out her discovery. Curiosity, not malice,
moved her; and there is no reason to suppose that any harm would
have come to Peter, if he had said, as he should have done, 'Yes, I
am His disciple.' The day for persecuting the servants was not yet
come, but for the present it was Jesus only who was aimed at.

No doubt, cowardice had a share in the denials, but there was more
than that in them. Peter was worn out with fatigue, excitement, and
sorrow. His susceptible nature would be strongly affected by the
trying scenes of the last day, and all the springs of life would be
low. He was always easily influenced by surroundings, and just as,
at a later date, he was 'carried away' by the presence at Antioch of
the Judaisers, and turned his back on the liberal principles which
he had professed, so now he could not resist the current of opinion,
and dreaded being unlike even the pack of menials among whom he sat.
He was ashamed of his Master and hid his colours, not so much for
fear of bodily harm as of ridicule. Was there not a deeper depth
still in his denials, even the beginnings of doubt whether, after
all, Jesus was what he had thought Him? Christ prayed that Peter's
'faith' should not 'fail' or be totally eclipsed, and that may
indicate that the assault was made on his 'faith' and that it
wavered, though it recovered steadfastness.

If he had been as sure of Christ's work and nature as when he made
his great confession, he could not have denied Him. But the sight of
Jesus bound, unresisting, and evidently at the mercy of the rulers,
might well make a firmer faith stagger. We have not to steel
ourselves to bear bodily harm if we confess Christ; but many of us
have to run counter to a strong current flowing around us, and to be
alone in the midst of unsympathising companions ready to laugh and
gibe, and some of us are tempted to waver in our convictions of
Christ's divinity and redeeming power, because He still seems to
stand at the bar of the wise men and leaders of opinion, and to be
treated by them as a pretender. It is a wretched thing to be
persecuted out of one's Christianity in the old-fashioned fire and
sword style; but it is worse to be laughed out of it or to lose it,
because we breathe an atmosphere of unbelief. Let the doctors at the
top of the hall and the lackeys round the fire who take their
opinions from them say what they like, but let them not make us
ashamed of Jesus.

Peter slipped away to the gateway, and there, apparently, was again
attacked, first by the porteress and then by others, which
occasioned the second denial, while the third took place in the same
place, about an hour afterwards. One sin makes many. The devil's
hounds hunt in packs. Consistency requires the denier to stick to
his lie. Once the tiniest wing tip is in the spider's web, before
long the whole body will be wrapped round by its filthy, sticky
threads.

If Peter had been less confident, he would have been more safe. If
he had said less about going to prison and death, he would have had
more reserve fidelity for the time of trial. What business had he
thrusting himself into the palace? Over-reliance on self leads
us to put ourselves in the way of temptations which it were wiser to
avoid. Had he forgotten Christ's warnings?  Apparently so. Christ
predicts the fall that it may not happen, and if we listen to Him,
we shall not fall.

The moment of recovery seems to have been while our Lord was passing
from the earlier to the later examination before the rulers. In the
very floodtide of Peter's oaths, the shrill cock-crow is heard, and
at the sound the half-finished denial sticks in his throat. At the
same moment he sees Jesus led past him, and that look, so full of
love, reproof, and pardon, brought him back to loyalty, and saved
him from despair. The assurance of Christ's knowledge of our sins
against Him melts the heart, when the assurance of His forgiveness
and tender love comes with it. Then tears, which are wholly humble
but not wholly grief, flow. They do not wash away the sin, but they
come from the assurance that Christ's love, like a flood, has swept
it away. They save from remorse, which has no healing in it.

II. We have the rude taunts of the servants. The mockery here comes
from Jews, and is directed against Christ's prophetic character,
while the later jeers of the Roman soldiers make a jest of His
kingship. Each set lays hold of what seems to it most ludicrous in
His pretensions, and these servants ape their masters on the
judgment seat, in laughing to scorn this Galilean peasant who
claimed to be the Teacher of them all. Rude natures have to take
rude ways of expression, and the vulgar mockery meant precisely the
same as more polite and covert scorn means from more polished
people; namely, rooted disbelief in Him. These mockers were
contented to take their opinions on trust from priests and rabbis.
How often, since then, have Christ's servants been objects of
popular odium at the suggestion of the same classes, and how often
have the ignorant people been misled by their trust in their
teachers to hate and persecute their true Master!

Jesus is silent under all the mockery, but then, as now, He knows
who strikes Him. His eyes are open behind the bandage, and see the
lifted hands and mocking lips. He will speak one day, and His speech
will be detection and condemnation. Then He was silent, as patiently
enduring shame and spitting for our sakes. Now He is silent, as
long-suffering and wooing us to repentance; but He keeps count and
record of men's revilings, and the day comes when He whose eyes are
as a flame of fire will say to every foe, 'I know thy works.'

III. We have the formal rejection and condemnation by the council.
The hearing recorded in verses 66 to  71 took place 'as soon as it
was day,' and was apparently a more formal official ratification of
the proceedings of the earlier examination described by Matthew and
John. The ruler's question was put simply in order to obtain
material for the condemnation already resolved on. Our Lord's answer
falls into two parts, in the first of which He in effect declines to
recognise the _bona fides_ of His judges and the competency of
the tribunal, and in the second goes beyond their question, and
claims participation in divine glory and power. 'If I tell you, ye
will not believe'; therefore He will not tell them.

Jesus will not unfold His claims to those who only seek to hear them
in order to reject, not to examine, them. Silence is His answer to
ingrained prejudice masquerading as honest inquiry. It is ever so.
There is small chance of truth at the goal if there be foregone
conclusions or biased questions at the starting-point. 'If I ask
you, ye will not answer.' They had taken refuge in judicious but
self-condemning silence when He had asked them the origin of John's
mission and the meaning of the One Hundred and Tenth Psalm, and
thereby showed that they were not seeking light. Jesus will gladly
speak with any who will be frank with Him, and let Him search their
hearts; but He will not unfold His mission to such as refuse to
answer His questions. But while thus He declines to submit Himself
to that tribunal, and in effect accuses them of obstinate blindness
and a fixed conclusion to reject the claims which they were
pretending to examine, He will not leave them without once more
asserting an even higher dignity than that of Messiah. As a prisoner
at their bar, He has nothing to say to them; but as their King and
future Judge, He has something. They desire to find materials for
sentence of death, and though He will not give these in the
character of a criminal before His judges, He also desires that the
sentence should pass, and He will declare His divine prerogatives
and fall possession of divine power in the hearing of the highest
court of the nation.

It was fitting that the representatives of Israel, however
prejudiced, should hear at that supreme moment the full assertion of
full deity. It was fitting that Israel should condemn itself, by
treating that claim as blasphemy. It was fitting that Jesus should
bring about His death by His twofold claim--that made to the
Sanhedrim, of being the Son of God, and that before Pilate, of being
the King of the Jews.

The whole scene teaches us the voluntary character of Christ's
Death, which is the direct result of this tremendous assertion. It
carries our thoughts forward to the time when the criminal of that
morning shall be the Judge, and the judges and we shall stand at His
bar. It raises the solemn question, Did Jesus claim truly when He
claimed divine power? If truly, do we worship Him? If falsely, what
was He? It mirrors the principles on which He deals with men
universally, answering 'him that cometh, according to the multitude
of his idols,' and meeting hypocritical pretences of seeking the
truth about Him with silence, but ever ready to open His heart and
the witness to His claims to the honest and docile spirits who are
ready to accept His words, and glad to open their inmost secrets to
Him.




CHRIST'S LOOK


    'And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.'
    --Luke xxii. 61.

All four Evangelists tell the story of Peter's threefold denial and
swift repentance, but we owe the knowledge of this look of Christ's
to Luke only. The other Evangelists connect the sudden change in the
denier with his hearing the cock crow only, but according to Luke
there were two causes co-operating to bring about that sudden
repentance, for, he says, 'Immediately, while he yet spake, the cock
crew. And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.' And we cannot
doubt that it was the Lord's look enforcing the fulfilment of His
prediction of the cock-crow that broke down the denier.

Now, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to weave a consecutive
whole out of the four versions of the story of Peter's triple
denial. But this at least is clear from them all, that Jesus was
away at the upper, probably the raised, end of the great hall, and
that if any of the three instances of denial took place within that
building, it was at such a distance that neither could the words be
heard, nor could a look from one end of it to the other have been
caught. I think that if we try to localise, and picture the whole
scene ourselves, we are obliged to suppose that that look, which
smote Peter into swift collapse of penitence, came as the Lord Jesus
was being led bound down the hall out through the porch, past the
fire, and into the gloomy archway, on His road to further suffering.
As He was thus brought for a moment close to him, 'the Lord turned
and looked upon Peter,' and then He passed from his sight for ever,
as he would fear.

I wish, then, to deal--although it must be very imperfectly and
inadequately--with that look that changed this man. And I desire to
consider two things about it: what it said, and what it did.

I. What it said.--It spoke of Christ's knowledge, of Christ's pain,
of Christ's love.

Of Christ's knowledge--I have already suggested that we cannot
suppose that the Prisoner at one end of the hall, intensely occupied
with the questionings and argumentation of the priests, and with the
false witnesses, could have heard the denial, given in tones subdued
by the place, at the other end. Still less could He have heard the
denials in louder tones, and accompanied with execrations, which
seemed to have been repeated in the porch without. But as He passed
the Apostle that look said: 'I heard them all--denials and oaths and
passion; I heard them all.' No wonder that after the Resurrection,
Peter, with that remembrance in his mind, fell at the Master's feet
and said, 'Lord! Thou knowest all things. Thou didst know what Thou
didst not hear, my muttered recreancy and treason, and my blurted
out oaths of denial. Thou knowest all things.' No wonder that when
he stood up amongst the Apostles after the Resurrection and the
Ascension, and was the mouthpiece of their prayers, remembering this
scene as well as other incidents, he began his prayer with 'Thou,
Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men.' But let us remember that
this--call it, if you like, supernatural--knowledge which Jesus
Christ had of the denial, is only one of a great body of facts in
His life, if we accept these Gospels, which show that, as one of the
Evangelists says, at almost the beginning of his history, 'He needed
not that any man should testify of man, for He knew what was in
man.' It is precisely on the same line, as His first words to Peter,
whom He greeted as he came to Him with 'Thou art Simon; thou shalt
be Cephas.' It is entirely on the same line as the words with which
He greeted another of this little group, 'When thou wast under the
fig-tree I saw thee.' It is on the same line as the words with which
He penetrated to the unspoken thoughts of His churlish entertainer
when He said, 'Simon! I have somewhat to say unto thee.' It
is on the lines on which we have to think of that Lord now as
knowing us all. He looks still from the judgment-seat, where He does
not stand as a criminal, but sits as the supreme and omniscient
Arbiter of our fates, and Judge of our actions. And He beholds us,
each of us, moment by moment, as we go about our work, and often, by
our cowardice, by our faithlessness, by our inconsistencies, 'deny
the Lord that bought' us. It is an awful thought, and therefore do
men put it away from them: 'Thou God seest me.' But it is stripped
of all its awfulness, while it retains all its purifying and
quickening power, when we think, as our old hymn has it:

  'Though now ascended up on high,
  He bends on earth a Brother's eye.'

And we have not only to feel that the eye that looks upon us is
cognisant of our denials, but that it is an eye that pities our
infirmities, and knowing us altogether, loves us better than we
know. Oh! if we believed in Christ's look, and that it was the look
of infinite love, life would be less solitary, less sad, and we
should feel that wherever His glance fell there His help was sure,
and there were illumination and blessedness. The look spoke of
Christ's knowledge.

Again, it spoke of Christ's pain. Peter had not thought that he was
hurting his Master by his denials; he only thought of saving
himself. And, perhaps, if it had come into his loving and impulsive
nature, which yielded to the temptation the more readily because of
the same impulsiveness which also led it to yield swiftly to good
influences, if he had thought that he was adding another pang to the
pains of his Lord whom he had loved through all his denial, even his
cowardice would have plucked up courage to 'confess, and deny not
but confess,' that he belonged to the Christ. But he did not
remember all that. And now there came into his mind--from that look,
the bitter thought, 'I have wrung His heart with yet another pang,
and at this supreme moment, when there is so much to rack and pain;
I have joined the tormentors.'

And so, do we not pain Jesus Christ? Mysterious as it is, yet it
seems as if, since it is true that we please Him when we are obeying
Him, it must be somehow true that we pain Him when we deny Him, and
some kind of shadow of grief may pass even over that glorified
nature when we sin against Him, and forget Him, and repay His love
with indifference, and reject His counsel. We know that in His
earthly life there was no bitterer pang inflicted upon Him than the
one which the Psalmist prophesied, 'He that ate bread with Me hath
lifted up his heel against Me.' And we know that in the measure in
which human nature is purified and perfected, in that measure does
it become more susceptible and sensitive to the pain of faithless
friends. Chilled love, rejected endeavours to help--which are,
perhaps, the deepest and the most spiritual of sorrows which men can
inflict upon one another, Jesus Christ experienced in full measure,
heaped up and running over. And we, even we today, may be 'grieving
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the day of
redemption.' Christ's knowledge of the Apostle's denials brought
pain to His heart.

Again, the look spoke of Christ's love. There was in it saddened
disapprobation, but there was not in it any spark of anger; nor
what, perhaps, would be worse, any ice of withdrawal or indifference.
But there even at that supreme moment, lied against by false witnesses,
insulted and spit upon by rude soldiers, rejected by the priests as
an impostor and a blasphemer, and on His road to the Cross, when, if
ever, He might have been absorbed in Himself, was His heart at leisure
from itself, and in divine and calm self-oblivion could think of helping
the poor denier that stood trembling there beneath His glance. That
is of a piece with the majestic, yet not repelling calm, which marks
the Lord in all His life, and which reaches its very climax in the
Passion and on the Cross. Just as, whilst nailed there, He had leisure
to think of the penitent thief, and of the weeping mother, and of the
disciple whose loss of his Lord would be compensated by the gaining
of her to take care of, so as He was being borne to Pilate's judgment,
He turned with a love that forgot itself, and poured itself into the
denier's heart. Is not that a divine and eternal revelation for us?
We speak of the love of a brother who, sinned against seventy times
seven, yet forgives. We bow in reverence before the love of a mother
who cannot forget, but must have compassion on the son of her womb. We
wonder at the love of a father who goes out to seek the prodigal. But
all these are less than that love which beamed lambent from the eye
of Christ, as it fell on the denier, and which therein, in that one
transitory glance, revealed for the faith and thankfulness of all
ages an eternal fact. That love is steadfast as the heavens, firm as
the foundations of the earth. 'Yea! the mountains may depart and the
hills be removed, but My loving kindness shall not depart, neither
shall the covenant of My peace be removed.' It cannot be frozen,
into indifference. It cannot be stirred into heat of anger. It
cannot be provoked to withdrawal. Repelled, it returns; sinned
against, it forgives; denied, it meekly beams on in self-revelation;
it hopeth all things, it beareth all things. And He who, as He
passed out to Pilate's bar, cast His look of love on the denier, is
looking upon each of us, if we would believe it, with the same look,
pitiful and patient, reproachful, and yet forgiving, which unveils
all His love, and would fain draw us in answering love, to cast
ourselves at His feet, and tell Him all our sin.

And now, let us turn to the second point that I suggested.

II. What the look did.

First, it tore away the veil that hid Peter's sin from himself. He
had not thought that he was doing anything wrong when he denied. He
had not thought about anything but saving his own skin. If he had
reflected for a moment no doubt he would have found excuses, as we
all can do. But when Christ stood there, what had become of the
excuses? As by a flash he saw the ugliness of the deed that he
himself had done. And there came, no doubt, into his mind in
aggravation of the denial, all that had passed from that very first
day when he had come to Christ's presence, all the confidences that
had been given to him, how his wife's mother had been healed, how he
himself had been cared for and educated, how he had been honoured
and distinguished, how he had boasted and vowed and hectored the day
before. And so he 'went out and wept bitterly.'

Now _our_ sin captures us by lying to us, by blinding our
consciences. You cannot hear the shouts of the men on the bank
warning you of your danger when you are in the midst of the rapids,
and so our sin deafens us to the still small voice of conscience.
But nothing so surely reveals to us the true moral character of any
of our actions, be they right or wrong, as bringing them under
Christ's eye, and thinking to ourselves. 'Durst I do that if He
stood there beside me and saw it?' Peter could deny Him when He was
at the far end of the hall. He could not have denied Him if he had
had Him by his side. And if we will take our actions, especially any
of them about which we are in doubt, into His presence, then it will
be wonderful how conscience will be enlightened and quickened, how
the fiend will start up in his own shape, and how poor and small the
motives which tempted so strongly to do wrong will come to look,
when we think of adducing them to Jesus. What did a maid-servant's
flippant tongue matter to Peter then? And how wretchedly inadequate
the reason for his denial looked when Christ's eye fell upon him.
The most recent surgical method of treating skin diseases is to
bring an electric light, ten times as strong as the brightest street
lights, to bear upon the diseased patch, and fifty minutes of that
search-light clears away the disease. Bring the beam from Christ's
eye to bear on your lives, and you will see a great deal of leprosy,
and scurf, and lupus, and all that you see will be cleared away. The
look tore down the veil.

What more did it do? It melted the denier's heart into sorrow. I can
quite understand a conscience being so enlightened as to be
convinced of the evil of a certain course, and yet there being none
of that melting into sorrow, which, as I believe, is absolutely
necessary for any permanent victory over sins. No man will ever
conquer his evil as long as he only shudderingly recoils from it. He
has to be broken down into the penitential mood before he will
secure the victory over his sin. You remember the profound words in
our Lord's pregnant parable of the seeds, how one class which
transitorily was Christian, had for its characteristic that
immediately with joy they received the word. Yes; a Christianity
that puts repentance into a parenthesis, and talks about faith only,
will never underlie a permanent and thorough moral reformation.
There is nothing that brings 'godly sorrow,' so surely as a glimpse
of Christ's love; and nothing that reveals the love so certainly as
the 'look.' You may hammer at a man's heart with law, principle, and
moral duty, and all the rest of it, and you may get him to feel that
he is a very poor creature, but unless the sunshine of Christ's love
shines down upon him, there will be no melting, and if there is no
melting there will be no permanent bettering.

And there was another thing that the look did. It tore away the veil
from the sin; it made rivers of water flow from the melted heart in
sorrow of true repentance; and it kept the sorrow from turning into
despair. Judas 'went out and hanged himself.' Peter 'went out and
wept bitterly.' What made the one the victim of remorse, and the
other the glad child of repentance? How was it that the one was
stiffened into despair that had no tears, and the other was saved
because he could weep? Because the one saw his sin in the lurid
light of an awakened conscience, and the other saw his sin in the
loving look of a pardoning Lord. And that is how you and I ought to
see our sins. Be sure, dear friend, that the same long-suffering,
patient love is looking down upon each of us, and that if we will,
like Peter, let the look melt us into penitent self-distrust and
heart-sorrow for our clinging sins, then Jesus will do for us, as He
did for that penitent denier on the Resurrection morning. He will
take us apart by ourselves and speak healing words of forgiveness
and reconciliation, so that we, like him, will dare in spite of our
faithlessness, to fall at His feet and say, 'Lord, Thou knowest all
things; Thou knowest that I, erst faithless and treacherous, love
Thee; and all the more because Thou hast forgiven the denial and
restored the denier.'




'THE RULERS TAKE COUNSEL TOGETHER'


    'And the whole multitude of them arose, and led Him
    unto Pilate. 2. And they began to accuse Him, saying,
    We found this fellow perverting the nation, and
    forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that He
    Himself is Christ a King. 3. And Pilate asked Him,
    saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And He answered
    him and said, Thou sayest it. 4. Then said Pilate to
    the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault
    in this man. 5. And they were the more fierce, saying,
    He stirreth up the people teaching throughout all
    Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place. 6. When
    Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were
    a Galilean. 7. And as soon as he knew that He belonged
    unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent Him to Herod, who
    himself also was at Jerusalem at that time. 8. And
    when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he
    was desirous to see Him of a long season, because he
    had heard many things of Him; and he hoped to have
    seen some miracle done by Him. 9. Then he questioned
    with Him in many words; but He answered him nothing.
    10. And the chief priests and scribes stood and
    vehemently accused Him. 11. And Herod with his men of
    war set Him at nought, and mocked Him, and arrayed Him
    in a gorgeous robe, and sent Him again to Pilate.
    12. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made
    friends together: for before they were at enmity
    between themselves.'--LUKE xxiii. 1-12.

Luke's canvas is all but filled by the persecutors, and gives only
glimpses of the silent Sufferer. But the silence of Jesus is
eloquent, and the prominence of the accusers and judges heightens
the impression of His passive endurance. We have in this passage the
Jewish rulers with their murderous hate; Pilate contemptuously
indifferent, but perplexed and wishing to shirk responsibility; and
Herod with his frivolous curiosity. They present three types of
unworthy relations to Jesus Christ.

I. We see first the haters of Jesus. So fierce is their hatred that
they swallow the bitter pill of going to Pilate for the execution of
their sentence. John tells us that they began by trying to get
Pilate to decree the crucifixion without knowing Jesus' crime; but
that was too flagrant injustice, and too blind confidence in them,
for Pilate to grant. So they have to manufacture a capital charge on
the spot, and they are equal to the occasion. By the help of two
lies, and one truth so twisted as to be a lie, they get up an
indictment, which they think will be grave enough to compel the
procurator to do as they wish.

Their accusation, if it had been ever so true, would have been
ludicrous on their lips; and we may be sure that, if it had been
true, they would have been Jesus' partisans, not His denouncers.'
The Gracchi complaining of sedition' are nothing to the Sanhedrim
accusing a Jew of rebellion against Rome. Every man in that crowd
was a rebel at heart, and would have liked nothing better than to
see the standard of revolt lifted in a strong hand. Pilate was not
so simple as to be taken in by such an accusation from such
accusers, and it fails. They return to the charge, and the 'more
urgent' character of the second attempt is found in its statement of
the widespread extent of Christ's teaching, but chiefly in the
cunning introduction of Galilee, notoriously a disaffected and
troublesome district.

What a hideous and tragic picture we have here of the ferocity of
the hatred, which turned the very fountains of justice and guardians
of a nation into lying plotters against innocence, and sent these
Jewish rulers cringing before Pilate, pretending loyalty and
acknowledging his authority! They were ready for any falsehood and
any humiliation, if only they could get Jesus crucified. And what
had excited their hatred? Chiefly His teachings, which brushed aside
the rubbish both of ceremonial observance and of Rabbinical
casuistry, and placed religion in love to God and consequent love to
man; then His attitude of opposition to them as an order; and
finally His claim, which they never deigned to examine, to be the
Son of God. That, they said, was blasphemy, as it was, unless it
were true,--an alternative which they did not look at. So blinded
may men be by prejudice, and so mastered by causeless hatred of Him
who loves them all!

These Jewish rulers were men like ourselves. Instead of shuddering
at their crime, as if it were something far outside of anything
possible for us, we do better if we learn from it the terrible
depths of hostility to Jesus, the tragic blindness to His character
and love, and the degradation of submission to usurpers, which must
accompany denial of His right to rule over us. 'They hated Me
without a cause,' said Christ; but He pointed to that hatred as sure
to be continued towards Him and His servants as long as 'the world'
continues the world.

II. We have Pilate, indifferent and perplexed. Luke's very brief
account should be supplemented by John's, which shows us how
important the conversation, so much abbreviated by Luke, was. Of
course Pilate knew the priests and rulers too well to believe for a
moment that the reason they gave for bringing Jesus to him was the
real one, and his taking Jesus apart to speak with Him shows a wish
to get at the bottom of the case. So far he was doing his duty, but
then come the faults. These may easily be exaggerated, and we should
remember that Pilate was the most ignorant, and therefore the least
guilty, of all the persons mentioned in this passage. He had
probably never heard the name of Jesus till that day, and saw
nothing but an ordinary Jewish peasant, whom his countrymen, like
the incomprehensible and troublesome people they were, wished, for
some fantastic reason, to get killed.

But that dialogue with his Prisoner should have sunk deeper into his
mind and heart. He was in long and close enough contact with Jesus
to have seen glimpses of the light, which, if followed, would have
led to clear recognition. His first sin was indifference, not
unmingled with scorn, and it blinded him. Christ's lofty and
wonderful explanation of the nature of His kingdom and His mission
to bear witness to the truth fell on entirely preoccupied ears,
which were quick enough to catch the faintest whispers of treason,
but dull towards 'truth.' When Jesus tried to reach his conscience
by telling him that every lover of truth would listen to His voice,
he only answered by the question, to which he waited not for an
answer, 'What is truth?'

That was not the question of a theoretical sceptic, but simply of a
man who prided himself on being 'practical,' and left all talk about
such abstractions to dreamers. The limitations of the Roman
intellect and its characteristic over-estimate of deeds and contempt
for pure thought, as well as the spirit of the governor, who would
let men think what they chose, as long as they did not rebel, spoke
in the question. Pilate is an instance of a man blinded to all lofty
truth and to the beauty and solemn significance of Christ's words,
by his absorption in outward life. He thinks of Jesus as a harmless
fanatic. Little did he know that the truth, which he thought
moonshine, would shatter the Empire, which he thought the one solid
reality. So called practical men commit the same mistake in every
generation. 'All flesh is as grass;... the word of the Lord endureth
for ever.'

Further, Pilate sinned in prostituting his office by not setting
free the prisoner when he was convinced of His innocence. 'I find no
fault in this man,' should have been followed by immediate release.
Every moment afterwards, in which He was kept captive, was the
condemnation of the unjust judge. He was clearly anxious to keep his
troublesome subjects in good humour, and thought that the judicial
murder of one Jew was a small price to pay for popularity. Still he
would have been glad to have escaped from what his official training
had taught him to recoil from, and what some faint impression, made
by his patient prisoner, gave him a strange dread of. So he grasps
at the mention of Galilee, and tries to gain two good ends at once
by handing Jesus over to Herod.

The relations between Antipas and him were necessarily delicate,
like those between the English officials and the rajahs of native
states in India; and there had been some friction, perhaps about
'the Galileans, whose blood' he 'had mingled with their sacrifices.'
If there had been difficulties in connection with such a question of
jurisdiction, the despatch of Jesus to Herod would be a graceful way
of making the _amende honorable_, and would also shift an
unpleasant decision on to Herod's shoulders. Pilate would not be
displeased to get rid of embarrassment, and to let Herod be the tool
of the priests' hate.

How awful the thought is of the contrast between Pilate's
conceptions of what he was doing and the reality! How blind to
Christ's beauty it is possible to be, when engrossed with selfish
aims and outward things! How near a soul may be to the light, and
yet turn away from it and plunge into darkness! How patient that
silent prisoner, who lets Himself be bandied about from one tyrant
to another, not because they had power, but because He loved the
world, and would bear the sins of every one of us! How terrible the
change when these unjust judges and He will change places, and
Pilate and Herod stand at His judgment-seat!

III. We have the wretched, frivolous Herod. This is the murderer of
John Baptist--'that fox,' a debauchee, a coward, and as cruel as
sensuous. He had all the vices of his worthless race, and none of
the energy of its founder. He is by far the most contemptible of the
figures in this passage. Note his notion of, and his feeling to,
Jesus. He thought of our Lord as of a magician or juggler, who might
do some wonders to amuse the vacuous _ennui_ of his sated
nature. Time was when he had felt some twinge of conscience in
listening to the Baptist, and had almost been lifted to nobleness by
that strong arm. Time was, too, when he had trembled at hearing of
Jesus, and taken Him for his victim risen from a bloody grave. But
all that is past now. The sure way to stifle conscience is to
neglect it. Do that long and resolutely enough, and it will cease to
utter unheeded warnings. There will be a silence which may look like
peace, but is really death. Herod's gladness was more awful and
really sad than Herod's fear. Better to tremble at God's word than
to treat it as an occasion for mirth. He who hates a prophet because
he knows him to be a prophet and himself to be a sinner, is not so
hopeless as he who only expects to get sport out of the messenger of
God.

Then note the Lord's silence. Herod plies Jesus with a battery of
questions, and gets no answer. If there had been a grain of
earnestness in them all, Christ would have spoken. He never is
silent to a true seeker after truth. But it is fitting that
frivolous curiosity should be unanswered, and there is small
likelihood of truth being found at the goal when there is nothing
more noble than that temper at the starting-point. Christ's silence
is the penalty of previous neglect of Christ's and His forerunner's
words. Jesus guides His conduct by His own precept, 'Give not that
which is holy unto the dogs'; and He knows, as we never can, who
come into that terrible list of men to whom it would only add
condemnation to speak of even His love. The eager hatred of the
priests followed Jesus to Herod's palace, but no judicial action is
recorded as taking place there. Their fierce earnestness of hate
seems out of place in the frivolous atmosphere. The mockery, in
which Herod is not too dignified to join his soldiers, is more in
keeping. But how ghastly it sounds to us, knowing whom they
ignorantly mocked! Cruelty, inane laughter, hideous pleasure in an
innocent man's pain, disregard of law and justice--all these they
were guilty of; and Herod, at any rate, knew enough of Jesus to give
a yet darker colouring to his share in the coarse jest.

But how the loud laugh would have fallen silent if some flash had
told who Jesus was! Is there any of our mirth, perhaps at some of His
servants, or at some phase of His gospel, which would in like manner
stick in our throats if His judgment throne blazed above us? Ridicule
is a dangerous weapon. It does more harm to those who use it than to
those against whom it is directed. Herod thought it an exquisite jest
to dress up his prisoner as a king; but Herod has found out, by this
time, whether he or the Nazarene was the sham monarch, and who is the
real one. Christ was as silent under mockery as to His questioner. He
bears all, and He takes account of all. He bears it because He is the
world's Sacrifice and Saviour. He takes account of it, and will one
day recompense it, because He is the world's King, and will be its
Judge. Where shall we stand then--among the silenced mockers, or
among the happy trusters in His Passion and subjects of His dominion?




A SOUL'S TRAGEDY


    'Then Herod questioned with Him in many words; but He
    answered him nothing.'--LUKE xxiii. 9.

Four Herods play their parts in the New Testament story. The first
of them is the grim old tiger who slew the infants at Bethlehem, and
soon after died. This Herod is the second--a cub of the litter, with
his father's ferocity and lust, but without his force. The third is
the Herod of the earlier part of the Acts of the Apostles, a
grandson of the old man, who dipped his hands in the blood of one
Apostle, and would fain have slain another. And the last is Herod
Agrippa, a son of the third, who is only remembered because he
once came across Paul's path, and thought it such a good jest that
anything should be supposed capable of making a Christian out of
_him_.

There is a singular family likeness in the whole of them, and a very
ugly likeness it is. This one was sensual, cruel, cunning, infirm of
purpose, capricious like a child or a savage. Roman policy amused
him with letting him play at being a ruler, but kept him well in
hand. And I suppose he was made a worse man by the difficulties of
his position as a subject-prince.

Now I wish to put together the various incidents in this man's life
recorded in the Gospels, and try to gather some lessons from them
for you.

I. First, I take him as an example of half-and-half convictions, and
of the inner discord that comes from these.

I do not need to remind you of the shameful story of his repudiation
of his own wife, and of his disgusting alliance with the wife of his
half-brother, who was herself his niece. She was the stronger
spirit, a Biblical Lady Macbeth, the Jezebel to this Ahab; and, to
complete the parallel, Elijah was not far away. John the Baptist's
outspoken remonstrances of course made an implacable enemy of
Herodias, who did all she could to compass his death, but was unable
to manage that, though she secured his imprisonment. The reason for
her inability is given by the Evangelist Mark, in words which are
very inadequately rendered by our Authorised Version, but may be
found more correctly translated in the Revised Version. It is there
said that King 'Herod feared John'--the gaoler afraid of his
prisoner!--'knowing that he was a just man and a holy'--goodness is
awful. The worst men know it, and it extorts respect. 'And kept him
safe'--from Herodias, that is. 'And when he heard him he was
perplexed'--drawn this way and that way by these two magnets,
alternately veering to lust and to purity, hesitating between the
kisses of the beautiful temptress at his side and the words of the
prophet. And yet, with strange inconsistency, in all his
vacillations 'he heard him gladly'; for his better part approved the
nobler voice. And so he staggered on, having religion enough to
spoil some of his sinful delights, but not enough to shake them off.

That is a picture for which in its essence many a man and woman
among us might have sat. For I suppose that there is nothing more
common than these half-and-half convictions which, like inefficient
bullets, get part way through the armoured shell of a ship, and
there stick harmless. Many of us have the clearest convictions in
our understandings, which have never penetrated to that innermost
chamber of all, where the will sits sovereign. It is so about little
things, it is so about great ones. Nothing is more common than that
a man shall know perfectly well that some possibly trivial habit
stands in the way of something that it is his interest or his duty
to pursue; but the knowledge lies inoperative in the outermost part
of him. It is so in regard to graver things. The majority of the
slaves of any vice whatsoever know perfectly well that they ought to
give it up, and yet nothing comes of the conviction.

'He was much perplexed.' What a picture that is of the state of
unrest and conflict into which such half-and-half impressions of
duty cast a man. Such a one is like a vessel with its head now East,
now West, because there is some weak or ignorant steersman at the
helm. I know nothing more sure to produce inward unrest and
disturbance and desolation than that a man's knowledge of duty
should be clear, and his obedience to that knowledge partial. If we
have John down in the dungeon, if conscience is not allowed to be
master, there may be feasting and revelry going on above, but the
stern voice will come up through the grating now and then, and that
will spoil all the laughter. 'When he heard him, he was much
perplexed.'

The reason for these imperfect convictions is generally found, as
Herod shows us, in the unwillingness to get rid of something which
has fastened its claws around us, and which we love too well,
although we know it is a serpent, to shake off. If Herod had once
been man enough to screw himself up, and say to Herodias, 'Now you
pack, and go about your business!' everything else would have come
right in time. But he could not make up his mind to sacrifice the
honeyed poison, and so everything went wrong in time. My friend, how
many of us are prevented from following out our clearest convictions
because they demand a sacrifice? 'If thine eye cause thee to
stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. It is better for
thee.'

And then, further, note that these irresolute convictions and
shirking of plain duty are not atoned for by, though they are often
accompanied with, a strange acquiescence in, and approval of, God's
truth. Herod fancied, inconsistently enough, that he was making
some kind of compensation for disobedience to the message, by liking
to listen to the messenger. And there are a great many of us, all
whose Christianity consists in giving ear to the words which we
never think of obeying. I wonder how many of you there are who fancy
that you have no more concern with this sermon of mine than
approving or disapproving of it, as the case may be; and how many of
us there are who, all our lives long, have substituted criticism of
the Gospel as ministered by us poor preachers--be it approving or
disapproving criticism--for obedience to the Christ and acceptance
of His salvation.

II. We see in Herod an example of the utter powerlessness of such
partial convictions and reformation.

I am not going to tell over again the ghastly story of John's death,
which no other words than the Evangelist's can tell half so
powerfully. I need only remind you of the degradation of the poor
child Salome to the position of a dancing girl, the half-tipsy
generosity of the excited monarch, the grim request from lips so
young and still reddened by the excitement of the dance, Herod's
unavailing sorrow, his fantastic sense of honour which scrupled to
break a wicked promise, but did not scruple to kill a righteous man,
and the ghastly picture of the girl carrying a bleeding head--such a
gift!--to her mother.

But out of that jumble of lust and blood I desire to gather one
lesson. There you have--in an extreme form, it is true--a tremendous
illustration of what half-and-half convictions may come to. Whether
or no we ever get anything like as far on the road as this man did
matters very little. The process which brought him there is the
thing that I seek to point to. It was because he had so long
tampered with the voice of his conscience that it was lulled into
silence at that last critical moment. And this is always the case,
that if a man is false to the feeblest conviction that he has in
regard to the smallest duty, he is a worse man all over ever after.
We cannot neglect any conviction of what we ought to do, without
lowering the whole tone of our characters and laying ourselves open
to assaults of evil from which we would once have turned shuddering
and disgusted. A partial thaw is generally followed by intenser
frost. An abortive insurrection is sure to issue in a more grinding
tyranny. A soul half melted and then cooled off is less easy to melt
than it was before. And so, dear brethren, remember this, that if
you do not swiftly and fully carry out in life and conduct
whatsoever you know you ought to be or do, you cannot set a limit to
what, some time or other, if a strong and sudden temptation is
sprung upon you, you may become. 'Is thy servant a dog that he
should do this thing?' Yes! But he did it. No mortal reaches the
extreme of evil all at once, says the wise old proverb; and the path
by which a man is let down into depths that he never thought it was
possible that he should traverse is by the continual neglect of the
small admonitions of conscience. Neglected convictions mean, sooner
or later, an outburst of evil.

John's murder may illustrate another thing too--viz. how simple,
facile weakness of character may be the parent of all enormities.
Herod did not want to kill John. He very much wanted to keep him
alive. But he was not man enough to put his foot down, and say,
'There! I have said it; and there is to be no more talk about
slaying this prophet of God.' So the continual drop, drop, drop, of
Herodias' suggestions and wishes wore a hole, in the loose-textured
stone at last; and he did the thing that he hated to do and had long
fought against. Why? Because he was a poor weak creature.

The lesson from this is one that I would urge upon all you young
people especially, that in a world like this, where there are so
many more voices soliciting us to evil than inviting us to good, to
be weak is, in the long run, to be wicked. So do you cultivate the
wholesome habit of saying 'No,' and do not be afraid of anything but
of hurting your conscience and sinning against God.

III. Once more, we have in Herod an example of the awakening of
conscience.

When Jesus began to be talked about beyond the narrow limits of the
shores of the Sea of Galilee, and especially when He began to
organise the Apostolate, and His name was spread abroad, some
rumours reached even the court, and there were divergent opinions
about Him. One man said, It is Elias; and another said, It is a
prophet, 'and Herod said, It is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen
from the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves
in him.'

Ah, brethren! when a man has, away back in the chambers of his
memory, some wrong thing, be it great or be it little, he is at the
mercy of any chance or accident to have it revived in all its
vividness. It is an awful thing to walk this world with a whole
magazine of combustibles in our memories, on which any spark may
fall and light lurid and sulphurous flames. A chance thing may do
it, a scent, a look upon a face, a sound, or any trifle may bring
all at once before the wrongdoer that ancient evil. And no lapse of
time makes it less dreadful when it is unveiled. The chance thrust
of a boat-hook that gets tangled in the grey hairs of a corpse,
brings it up grim to the surface. Press a button, by accident, upon
a wall in some old castle, and a door flies open that leads away
down into black depths. You and I have depths of that sort in our
hearts. Then there are no more illusions about whose fault the deed
was. When Herod killed John, he said, 'Oh! It is not I! It is
Herodias. It is Salome. It is my oath. It is the respect I bear to
the people who heard me swear. I must do it, but I am not
responsible.' But when, in 'the sessions of silent thought,' the
deed came back to him, Salome and Herodias, the oath, and the
company were all out of sight, and he said, 'I! _I_ did it.'

That is what we all shall have to do some day, in this world
possibly, in the next certainly. Men sophisticate themselves with
talk about palliations, and excuses, and temptations, and companions
and the like. And philosophers sophisticate themselves nowadays
with a great many learned explanations, which tend to show that a
man is not to blame for the wrong things he does. But all that
rubbish gets burned up when conscience wakes, and the doer says,
'Whom _I_ beheaded.'

Brethren, unless we take refuge in the great sacrifice for the sins
of the world which Jesus Christ has made, we shall, possibly in this
life, and certainly hereafter, be surrounded by a company of our own
evil deeds risen from the dead, and every one of them will shake its
gory locks at us, and say, '_Thou_ didst it.'

IV. The last lesson that I gather from this man's life is the final
insensibility which these half-and-half convictions tend to produce.

Jesus Christ was sent by Pilate to Herod as a kind of peace-offering.
The two had been squabbling about some question of jurisdiction; and
so, partly to escape from the embarrassment of having to deal with
this enigmatical Prisoner, and partly out of a piece of politic
politeness, Pilate sends Jesus to Herod, because He was in his
jurisdiction. Think of the Lord of men and angels being handed about
from one to the other of these two scoundrels, as a piece of politeness!

When Christ stands before Herod, note that all its former
convictions, partial or entire, and all its terrors superficial or
deep, have faded clean away from this frivolous soul. All that he
feels now is a childish delight in having this well-known Man before
him, and a hope that, for his delectation, Jesus will work a
miracle; much as he might expect a conjurer to do one of his tricks!
That is what killing John came to--an incapacity to see anything in
Jesus.

'And he asked Him many questions, and Jesus answered him nothing.'
He locked His lips. Why? He was doing what He Himself enjoined:
'Give not that which is holy to the dogs. Cast not your pearls
before swine.' He said nothing, because He knew it was useless to
say anything. So the Incarnate Word, whose very nature and property
it is to speak, was silent before the frivolous curiosity of the man
that had been false to his deepest convictions.

It is a parable, brother, of what is being repeated over and over
again amongst us. I dare not say that Jesus Christ is ever
absolutely dumb to any man on this side of the grave; but I dare not
refrain from saying that this condition of insensibility to His
words is one that we may indefinitely approach, and that the surest
way to approach it and to reach it is to fight down, or to neglect,
the convictions that lead up to Him. John was the forerunner of
Christ, and if Herod had listened to John, to him John would have
said: 'Behold the Lamb of God!' To you I say it, and beseech you to
take that Lamb of God as the Sacrifice for your sins, for the Healer
and Cleanser of your memories and your consciences, for the Helper
who will enable you joyfully to make all sacrifices to duty, and to
carry into effect every conviction which His own merciful hand
writes upon your hearts. And oh, dear friends, many of you strangers
to me, to whom my voice seldom comes, let me plead with you not to
be content with 'hearing' any of us 'gladly,' but to do what our
words point to, and to follow Christ the Saviour. If you hear the
Gospel, however imperfectly, as you are hearing it proclaimed now,
and if you neglect it as--must I say?--you are doing now, you will
bring another film over your eyes which may grow thick enough to
shut out all the light; you will wind another fold about your hearts
which may prove impenetrable to the sword of the Spirit; you will
put another plug in your ears which may make them deaf to the music
of Christ's voice. Do what you know you ought to do, yield
yourselves to Jesus Christ. And do it now, whilst impressions are
being made, lest, if you let them sleep, they may never return.
Felix trembled when Paul reasoned; but he waved away the messenger
and the message, and though he sent for Paul often, and communed
with him, he never trembled any more.

  'There is a tide in the affairs of men
  Which, taken at the flood,'

would lead us into the haven of rest in Christ; and, if allowed to
pass, may leave us, stranded and shipwrecked, among the rocks.




JESUS AND PILATE


    'And Pilate, when he had called together the chief
    priests and the rulers and the people, 14. Said unto
    them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
    perverteth the people: and, behold, I having examined
    Him before you, have found no fault in this man
    touching those things whereof ye accuse Him: 15. No,
    nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him: and lo, nothing
    worthy of death is done unto Him. 16. I will therefore
    chastise Him, and release Him. 17. (For of necessity
    he must release one unto them at the feast.) 18. And
    they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this
    man, and release unto us Barabbas: 19. (Who for a
    certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was
    cast into prison.) 20. Pilate therefore, willing to
    release Jesus, spake again to them. 21. But they cried,
    saying, Crucify Him, crucify Him. 22. And he said unto
    them the third time, Why, what evil hath He done? I
    have found no cause of death in Him: I will therefore
    chastise Him, and let Him go. 23. And they were
    instant with loud voices, requiring that He might he
    crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief
    priests prevailed. 24. And Pilate gave sentence that
    it should be as they required. 25. And he released
    unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast
    into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered
    Jesus to their will. 26. And as they led Him away,
    they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out
    of the country, and on him they laid the cross, that
    he might bear it after Jesus.'--LUKE xxiii. 13-26.

Luke here marks out three stages of the struggle between Pilate and
the Jews. Thrice did he try to release Jesus; thrice did they yell
their hatred and their demand for His blood. Then came the shameful
surrender by Pilate, in which, from motives of policy, he
prostituted Roman justice. Knowingly he sacrificed one poor Jew to
please his turbulent subjects; unknowingly he slew the Christ of
God.

I. The first weak attempt to be just.

Pilate invested it with a certain formality by convoking a
representative gathering of all classes, 'chief priests and the
rulers and the people.' The nation was summoned to decide solemnly
whether they would or would not put their Messiah to death, and a
Roman governor was their summoner. Surely the irony of fate (or,
rather, of Providence) could go no further than that. Pilate's
_resume_ of the proceedings up to the moment of his speaking is
not without a touch of sarcasm, in the contrast between 'ye' and 'I'
and 'Herod.' It is almost as if he had said, 'Why, herein is a
marvellous thing, that you should have a quicker scent for rebellion
than I or Herod!' He was evidently suspicious of the motives which
induced the 'rulers' to take the new role of eager defenders of
Roman authority, and ready to suspect something below such an
extraordinary transformation. Jews delivering up a Jew because he
was an insurgent against Caesar,--there must be something under
that! He lays stress on their having heard his examination of the
accused, as showing that he had gone into the matter thoroughly,
that the charges had broken down to their knowledge. He represents
his sending Jesus to Herod as done from the high motive of securing
the completest possible investigation, instead of its being a
despicable attempt to shirk responsibility and to pay an empty
compliment to an enemy. He reiterates his conviction of Jesus'
innocence, and then, after all this flourish about his own
carefulness to bring judicial impartiality to bear on the case, he
makes the lame and impotent conclusion of offering to 'chastise
Him.'

What for? The only course for a judge convinced of a prisoner's
innocence is to set him free. But this was a bribe to the accusers,
offered in hope that the smaller punishment would content them.
Pilate knew that he was perpetrating flagrant injustice in such a
suggestion, and he tried to hide it by using a gentle word.
'Chastise' sounds almost beneficent, but it would not make the
scourging less cruel, nor its infliction less lawless. Compromises
are always ticklish to engineer, but a compromise between justice
and injustice is least likely of all to answer. This one signally
failed. The fierce accusers of Jesus were quick to see the sign of
weakness, both in the proposal itself and in their being asked if it
would be acceptable to them. Not so should a Roman governor have
spoken. If pressure had made the iron wall yield so far, a little
more and it would fall flat, and let them at their victim.

Pilate was weak, vacillating, did not know what he wished. He wished
to do right, but he wished more to conciliate, for he knew that he
was detested, and feared to be accused to Rome. The other side knew
what they wanted, and were resolute. Encouraged by the hesitation
of Pilate, they 'cried out all together.' One hears the strident
yells from a thousand throats shrieking out the self-revealing and
self-destroying choice of Barabbas. He was a popular hero for the
very reason that he was a rebel. He had done what his admirers had
accused Jesus of doing, and for which they pretended that they had
submitted Him to Pilate's judgment. The choice of Barabbas convicts
the charges against Jesus of falsehood and unreality. The choice of
Barabbas reveals the national ideal. They did not want a Messiah
like Jesus, and had no eyes for the beauty of His character, nor
ears for the words of grace poured into His lips. They had no
horror of 'a murderer,' and great admiration for a rebel. Barabbas
was the man after their own heart. A nation that can reject Jesus
and choose Barabbas is only fit for destruction. A nation judges
itself by its choice of heroes. The national ideal is potent to
shape the national character. We to-day are sinking into an abyss
because of our admiration for the military type of hero; and there
is not such an immense difference between the mob that rejected
Jesus and applauded Barabbas and the mobs that shout round a
successful soldier, and scoff at the law of Christ if applied to
politics.

II. The second, weaker attempt.

Pilate repeated his proposal of release, but it was all but lost in
the roar of hatred. Note the contrast between 'Pilate spoke' (v. 20)
and 'they shouted.' It suggests his feeble effort swept away by the
rush of ferocity. And they have gathered boldness from his
hesitation, and are now prescribing the mode of Christ's punishment.
Now first the terrible word 'Crucify' is heard. Both Matthew and
Mark tell us that the priests and rulers had 'stirred up' the people
to choose Barabbas, but apparently the mob, once roused, needed no
further stimulant.

Crowds are always cruel, and they are as fickle as cruel. The very
throats now hoarse with fiercely roaring 'Crucify Him' had been
strained by shouting 'Hosanna' less than a week since. The branches
strewed in His path had not had time to wither. 'The voice of the
people is the voice of God,'--sometimes. But sometimes it sounds
very like the voice of the enemy of God, and one would have more
confidence in it if it did not so often and so quickly speak, not
only 'in divers,' but in diverse, 'manners.' To make it the arbiter
of men's merit, still more to trim one's course so as to catch the
breeze of the popular breath, is folly, or worse. Men admire what
they resemble, or try to resemble, and Barabbas has more of his sort
than has Jesus.

III. The final yielding.

It is to Pilate's credit that he kept up his efforts so long. Luke
wishes to impress us with his persistency, as well as with the fixed
determination of the Jews, by his note of 'the third time.' Thrice was
the choice offered to them, and thrice did they put away the possibility
of averting their doom. But Pilate's persistency had a weak place, for
he was afraid of his subjects, and, while willing to save Jesus, was
not willing to imperil himself in doing it. Self-interest takes the
strength out of resolution to do right, like a crumbling stone in a
sea wall, which lets in the wave that ruins the whole structure.

Pilate had come to the end of his shifts to escape pronouncing
sentence. The rulers had refused to judge Jesus according to their
law. Herod had sent Him back with thanks, but unsentenced. The Jews
would not have Him, but Barabbas, released, nor would they accept
scourging in lieu of crucifying. So he has to decide at last whether
to be just and fear not, or basely to give way, and draw down on his
head momentary applause at the price of everlasting horror. Luke
notices in all three stages the loud cries of the Jews, and in this
last one he gives special emphasis to them. 'Their voices
prevailed.' What a condemnation for a judge! He 'gave sentence that
what they asked for should be done.' Baseness in a judge could go no
farther. The repetition of the characterisation of Barabbas brings
up once more the hideousness of the people's choice, and the tragic
words 'to their will' sets in a ghastly light the flagrant injustice
of the judge, and yet greater crime of the Jews. To deliver Jesus to
their will was base; to entertain such a 'will' towards Jesus was
more than base,--it was 'the ruin of them, and of all Israel.' Our
whole lives here and hereafter turn on what is our 'will' to Him.




WORDS FROM THE CROSS


    'And when they were come to the place which is called
    Calvary, there they crucified Him, and the malefactors,
    one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
    34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they
    know not what they do. And they parted His raiment,
    and cast lots. 35. And the people stood beholding. And
    the rulers also with them derided Him, saying, He saved
    others; let Him save Himself, if He be Christ, the
    chosen of God. 36. And the soldiers also mocked Him,
    coming to Him and offering Him vinegar. 37. And saying,
    if Thou be the king of the Jews, save Thyself. 38. And
    a superscription also was written over Him in letters
    of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF
    THE JEWS. 39. And one of the malefactors which were
    hanged railed on Him, saying, If Thou be Christ, save
    Thyself and us. 40. But the other answering rebuked
    him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art
    in the same condemnation? 41. And we indeed justly;
    for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this
    Man hath done nothing amiss. 42. And he said unto
    Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
    kingdom. 43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say
    unto thee, To-day shall thou be with Me in paradise.
    44. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was
    darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour.
    45. And the sun was darkened, and the vail of the
    temple was rent in the midst. 46. And when Jesus had
    cried with a loud voice, He said, Father, into Thy
    hands I commend My spirit: and having said thus, He
    gave up the ghost.'--LUKE xxiii. 33-46.

The calm tone of all the narratives of the Crucifixion is very
remarkable. Each Evangelist limits himself to the bare recording of
facts, without a trace of emotion. They felt too deeply to show
feeling. It was fitting that the story which, till the end of time,
was to move hearts to a passion of love and devotion, should be told
without any colouring. Let us beware of reading it coldly! This
passage is more adapted to be pondered in solitude, with the
thought, 'All this was borne for me,' than to be commented on. But a
reverent word or two is permissible.

Luke's account is noticeably independent of the other three. The
three sayings of Christ's, round which his narrative is grouped, are
preserved by him alone. We shall best grasp the dominant impression
which the Evangelist unconsciously had himself received, and sought
to convey, by gathering the whole  round these three words from the
Cross.

I. The first word sets Jesus forth as the all-merciful Intercessor
and patient friend of sinners. It is very significantly set in the
centre of the paragraph (vs. 33-38) which recounts the heartless
cruelty and mockery of soldiers and rulers. Surrounded by that
whirlwind of abuse, contempt and ferocious glee at His sufferings,
He gave back no taunt, nor uttered any cry of pain, nor was moved to
the faintest anger, but let His heart go out in pity for all who
took part in that wicked tragedy; and, while 'He opened not His
mouth' in complaint or reviling, He did open it in intercession. But
the wonderful prayer smote no heart with compunction, and, after it,
the storm of mocking and savage triumph hurtled on as before.

Luke gathers all the details together in summary fashion, and piles
them on one another without enlarging on any. The effect produced is
like that of a succession of breakers beating on some lonely rock,
or of blows struck by a battering-ram on a fortress.

'They crucified Him,'--there is no need to say who 'they' were.
Others than the soldiers, who did the work, did the deed. Contempt
gave Him two malefactors for companions and hung the King of the
Jews in the place of honour in the midst. Did John remember what his
brother and he had asked? Matter-of-fact indifference as to a piece
of military duty, and shameless greed, impelled the legionaries to
cast lots for the clothes stripped from a living man. What did the
crucifying of another Jew or two matter to them? Gaping curiosity,
and the strange love of the horrible, so strong in the vulgar mind,
led the people, who had been shouting Hosanna! less than a week ago,
to stand gazing on the sight without pity but in a few hearts.

The bitter hatred of the rulers, and their inhuman glee at getting
rid of a heretic, gave them bad preeminence in sin. Their scoff
acknowledged that He had 'saved others,' and their hate had so
blinded their eyes that they could not see how manifestly His
refusal to use His power to save Himself proved Him the Son of God.
He could not save Himself, just because He would save these scoffing
Rabbis and all the world. The rough soldiers knew little about Him,
but they followed suit, and thought it an excellent jest to bring
the 'vinegar,' provided in kindness, to Jesus with a mockery of
reverence as to a king. The gibe was double-barrelled, like the
inscription over the Cross; for it was meant to hit both this
Pretender to royalty and His alleged subjects.

And to all this Christ's sole answer was the ever-memorable prayer.
One of the women who bravely stood at the Cross must have caught the
perhaps low-voiced supplication, and it breathed so much of the
aspect of Christ's character in which Luke especially delights that
he could not leave it out. It opens many large questions which
cannot be dealt with here. All sin has in it an element of
ignorance, but it is not wholly ignorance as some modern teachers
affirm. If the ignorance were complete, the sin would be
nonexistent. The persons covered by the ample folds of this prayer
were ignorant in very different degrees, and had had very different
opportunities of changing ignorance for knowledge. The soldiers and
the rulers were in different positions in that respect. But none
were so entirely blind that they had no sin, and none were so
entirely seeing that they were beyond the reach of Christ's pity or
the power of His intercession. In that prayer we learn, not only His
infinite forgivingness for insults and unbelief levelled at Himself,
but His exaltation as the Intercessor, whom the Father heareth
always. The dying Christ prayed for His enemies; the glorified
Christ lives to make intercession for us.

II. In the second saying Christ is revealed as having the keys of
Hades, the invisible world of the dead. How differently the same
circumstances work on different natures! In the one malefactor,
physical agony and despair found momentary relief in taunts, flung
from lips dry with torture, at the fellow-sufferer whose very
innocence provoked hatred from the guilty heart. The other had been
led by his punishment to recognise in it the due reward of his
deeds, and thus softened, had been moved by Christ's prayer, and by
his knowledge of Christ's innocence, to hope that the same mercy
which had been lavished on the inflicters of His sufferings, might
stretch to enfold the partakers in it.

At that moment the dying thief had clearer faith in Christ's coming
in His kingdom than any of the disciples had. Their hopes were
crumbling as they watched Him hanging unresisting and gradually
dying. But this man looked beyond the death so near for both Jesus
and himself, and believed that, after it, He would come to reign. We
may call him the only disciple that Christ then had.

How pathetic is that petition, 'Remember me'! It builds the hope of
sharing in Christ's royalty on the fact of having shared in His
Cross. 'Thou wilt not forget Thy companion in that black hour, which
will then lie behind us.' Such trust and clinging, joined with such
penitence and submission, could not go unrewarded.

From His Cross Jesus speaks in royal style, as monarch of that dim
world. His promise is sealed with His own sign-manual, 'Verily, I
say.' It claims to have not only the clear vision of, but the
authority to determine, the future. It declares the unbroken
continuance of personal existence, and the reality of a state of
conscious blessedness, in which men are aware of their union with
Him, the Lord of the realm and the Life of its inhabitants. It
graciously accepts the penitent's petition, and assures him that
the companionship, begun on the Cross, will be continued there.
'With Me' makes 'Paradise' wherever a soul is.

III. The third word from the Cross, as recorded by Luke, reveals
Jesus as, in the act of dying, the Master of death, and its
Transformer for all who trust Him into a peaceful surrender of
themselves into the Father's hands. The circumstances grouped round
the act of His death bring out various aspects of its significance.
The darkness preceding had passed before He died, and it bore rather
on His sense of desertion, expressed in the unfathomably profound
and awful cry, 'Why hast Thou forsaken Me?' The rent veil is
generally taken to symbolise the unrestricted access into the
presence of God, which we have through Christ's death; but it is
worth considering whether it does not rather indicate the divine
leaving of the desecrated shrine, and so is the beginning of the
fulfilment of the deep word, 'Destroy this Temple.'

But the centre-point of the section is the last cry which, in its
loudness, indicated physical strength quite incompatible with the
exhaustion to which death by crucifixion was generally due. It thus
confirms the view which sees, both in the words of Jesus and in the
Evangelist's expression for His death, clear indications that He
died, not because His physical powers were unable to live longer,
but by the exercise of His own volition. He died because He chose,
and He chose because He loved and would save. As St. Bernard says,
'Who is He who thus easily falls asleep when He wills? To die is
indeed great weakness, but to die thus is immeasurable power. Truly
the weakness of God is stronger than men.'

Nor let us forget that, in thus dying, Jesus gave us an imitable
example, as well as revealed inimitable power. For, if we trust
ourselves, living and dying, to Him, we shall not be dragged
reluctantly, by an overmastering grasp against which we vainly
struggle, out of a world where we would fain stay, but we may
yield ourselves willingly, as to a Father's hand, which draws His
children gently to His own side, and blesses them, when there, with
His fuller presence.




THE DYING THIEF


    'And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou
    comest into Thy kingdom.'--LUKE xxiii, 42.

There is an old and true division of the work of Christ into three
parts--prophet, priest, and king. Such a distinction manifestly
exists, though it may be overestimated, or rather, the statement of
it may be exaggerated, if it be supposed that separate acts of His
discharge these separate functions, and that He ceases to be the one
before He becomes the other. Rather it is true that all His work is
prophetic, that all His work is priestly, and that His prophetic and
priestly work is the exercise of His kingly authority. But still the
division is a true one, and helps to set before us, clearly and
definitely, the wide range of the benefits of Christ's mission and
death. It is noteworthy that these three groups round the Cross, the
third of which we have to speak of now--that of the 'daughters of
Jerusalem,' that of the deriding scribes and the indifferent
soldiers, and this one of the two thieves--each presents us Christ
in one of the three characters. The words that He spoke upon the
Cross, with reference to others than Himself, may be gathered
around, and arranged under, that threefold aspect of Christ's work.
The _prophet_ said, 'Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for Me,
but weep for yourselves, for the days are coming.' The _priest_
said, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. 'The
_king_, in His sovereignty, ruled the heart of that penitent
man from His Cross, and while the crown shone athwart the smoke and
the agony of the death, the king 'opened the gates of the kingdom
of heaven unto all believers' when He said, 'This day shalt thou be
with Me in Paradise!'

We shall not attempt, in dealing with this incident, to paint
pictures. I have a far more important thing to do than even to try
to bring vividly before your minds the scene on that little hill of
Calvary. It is the meaning that we are concerned with, and not the
mere externals. I take it for granted, then, that we know the
details:--the dying man in his agony, beginning to see dimly, as his
soul closed upon earthly things, who this was--patient, loving,
mighty there in His sufferings; and using his last breath to cry,
'Lord, remember me!'--and the sufferer throned in the majesty of His
meekness, and divinity of His endurance; calm, conscious, full of
felt but silent power, accepting homage, bending to the penitence,
loving the sinner, and flinging open the gates of the pale kingdoms
into which He was to pass, with these His last words.

First, then, we see here an illustration of the Cross in its power
of drawing men to itself. It is strange to think that, perhaps, at
that moment the only human being who thoroughly believed in Christ
was that dying robber. The disciples are all gone. The most faithful
of them are recreant, denying, fleeing. A handful of women are
standing there, not knowing what to think about it, stunned but
loving; and alone (as I suppose), alone of all the sons of men, the
crucified malefactor was in the sunshine of faith, and could say
'I believe!' As everything of the future history of the world and of
the Gospel is typified in the events of the Crucifixion, it was
fitting that here again and at the last there should be a prophetic
fulfilment of His own saying, 'I, if I be lifted up, will draw all
men unto Me.'

But mark, here we have a striking instance of the universal law of
the progress of the Gospel, in the two-fold effort of the
contemplation of the Cross. By its foot was to be seen the derision
of the scribes and the stupor of the soldiery; and now here are the
two thieves--the one chiming in with the universal reproaches; and
the other beholding the same event, having the same circumstances
displayed before him, and they influence him _thus_. Brethren,
it is just the history of the Gospel wherever it goes. It is its
history now, and among us. The Gospel is preached equally to every
man. The same message comes to us all, offering us the same terms.
Christ stands before each of us in the same attitude. And what is
the consequence? A parting of the whole mass of us, some to one side
and some to the other. So, when you take a magnet, and hold it to an
indiscriminate heap of metal filings, it will gather out all the
iron, and leave behind all the rest. 'I, if I be lifted up,' said
He, 'will draw all men unto Me.' The attractive power will go out
over the whole race of His brethren; but from some there will be no
response. In some hearts there will be no yielding to the
attraction. Some will remain rooted, obstinate, steadfast in their
place; and to some the lightest word will be mighty enough to stir
all the slumbering pulses of their sin-ridden hearts, and to bring
them, broken and penitent, for mercy to His feet. To the one He is
'a savour of life unto life, and to the other a savour of death unto
death.' The broadest doctrine of the universal adaptation, and the
universal intention too, of the Gospel, as the 'power of God unto
salvation,' contains hidden in its depths this undeniable fact,
that, be the cause what it may (and as I believe, the cause lies
with us, and is our fault) this separating, judging effect follows
from all faithful preaching of Christ's words. He came to judge the
world, 'that they which see not' (as He Himself said) 'might see,
and they which see might be made blind,' And on the Cross that
process went on in two men, alike in necessity, alike in
criminality, alike in this, that Death's icy finger was just being
laid upon their heart, to stop all the flow of its wild blood and
passion, but different in this, that the one of them turned himself,
by God's grace, and laid hold on the Gospel that was offered to him,
and the other turned himself away, and derided, and died.

And now, there is another consideration. If we look at this man,  this
penitent thief, and contrast him, his previous history, and his present
feelings, with the people that stood around, and rejected and scoffed,
we get some light as to the sort of thing that unfits men for perceiving
and accepting the Gospel when it is offered to them. Remember the other
classes of persons who were there. There were Roman soldiers, with very
partial knowledge of what they were doing, and whose only feeling was
that of entire indifference; and there were Jewish Rabbis, Pharisees,
Priests, and people, who knew a little more of what they were doing,
and whose feeling was derision and scorn. Now, if we mark the ordinary
scriptural representation, especially as to the last class, we cannot
help seeing that there comes out this principle:--The thing of all
others that unfits men for the reception of Christ as a Saviour, and
for the simple reliance on His atoning blood and divine mercy, is not
gross, long profligacy, and outward, vehement transgression; but it is
self-complacency, clean, fatal self-righteousness and self-sufficiency.

Why was it that Scribes and Pharisees turned away from Him? For
three reasons. Because of their pride of wisdom. 'We are the men who
know all about Moses and the traditions of the elders; we judge this
new phenomenon not by the question, How does it come to our
consciences, and how does it appeal to our hearts? but we judge it
by the question, How does it fit our Rabbinical learning and subtle
casuistical laws? _We_ are the Priests and the Scribes; and the
people that know not the law, _they_ may accept a thing that
only appeals to the common human heart, but for us, in our
intellectual superiority, living remote from the common wants of the
lower class, not needing a rough outward Gospel of that sort, we can
do without such a thing, and we reject it.' They turned away from
the Cross, and their hatred darkened into derision, and their
menaces ended in a crucifixion, not merely because of a pride of
wisdom, but because of a complacent self-righteousness that knew
nothing of the fact of sin, that never had learned to believe itself
to be full of evil, that had got so wrapped up in ceremonies as to
have lost the life; that had degraded the divine law of God, with
all its lightning splendours, and awful power, into a matter of
'mint and anise and cummin.' They turned away for a third reason.
Religion had become to them a mere set of traditional dogmas, to
think accurately or to reason clearly about which was all that was
needful. Worship having become ceremonial, and morality having
become casuistry, and religion having become theology, the men were
as hard as a nether millstone, and there was nothing to be done with
them until these three crusts were peeled off the heart, and, close
and burning, the naked heart and the naked truth of God came into
contact.

Brethren, change the name, and the story is true about _us_.
God forbid that I should deny that every form of gross, sensual
immorality, 'hardens all within' (as one poor victim of it said),
'and petrifies the feeling.' God forbid that I should seem to be
speaking slightingly of the exceeding sinfulness of such sin, or to
be pouring contempt upon the laws of common morality. Do not
misapprehend me so. Still it is not sin in its outward forms that
makes the worst impediment between a man and the Cross, but it is
sin plus self-righteousness which makes the insurmountable obstacle
to all faith and repentance. And oh! in our days, when passion is
tamed down by so many bonds and chains; when the power of society
lies upon all of us, prescribing our path, and keeping most of us
from vice, partly because we are not tempted, and partly because we
have been brought up like some young trees behind a wall, within the
fence of decent customs and respectable manners,--we have far more
need to tell orderly, respectable moral men--'My brother, that thing
that you have is worth nothing, as settling your position before God';
than to stand up and thunder about crimes which half of us never heard
of, and perhaps only an infinitesimal percentage of us have ever
committed. All sin separates from God, but the thing that makes the
separation permanent is not the sin, but the ignorance of the sin.
Self-righteousness, aye, and pride of wisdom, they--they have perverted
many a nature, many a young man's glowing spirit, and have turned him
away from the Gospel. If there be a man here who is looking at the
simple message of peace and pardon and purity through Christ, and is
saying to himself, Yes; it may fit the common class of minds that
require outward signs and symbols, and must pin their faith to forms;
but for me with my culture, for me with my spiritual tendencies, for
me with my new lights, _I_ do not want any objective redemption;
_I_ do not want anything to convince _me_ of a divine love, and I
do not need any crucified Saviour to preach to _me_ that God is
merciful!--this incident before us has a very solemn lesson in it for
him. And if there be a man here who is living a life of surface
blamelessness, it has as solemn a lesson for him. Look at the Scribe,
and look at the Pharisee--religious men in their way, wise men in
their way, decent and respectable men in their way; and look at that
poor thief that had been caught in the wilderness amongst the caves
and dens, and had been brought red-handed with blood upon his sword,
and guilt in his heart, and nailed up there in the short and summary
process of a Roman jurisprudence;--and think that Scribe, and Pharisee,
and Priest, saw nothing in Christ; and that the poor profligate wretch
saw this in Him,--innocence that showed heavenly against his diabolical
blackness; and his heart stirred, and he laid hold of Him in the stress
of his mighty agony--as a drowning man catches at anything that
protrudes from the bank; and he held and shook it, and the thing was
fast, and he was safe! Not transgression shuts a man out from mercy.
Transgression, which belongs to us all, makes us subjects for the
mercy; but it is pride, self-righteousness, trust in ourselves, which
'bars the gates of mercy on mankind'; and the men that _are_ condemned
are condemned not only because they have transgressed the commandments
of God, but '_this_ is the condemnation, that light came into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil.'

And then (and but a word) we see here, too, the elements of which
acceptable faith consists. One does not exactly know by what steps
or through what process this poor dying thief passed, which issued
in faith--whether it was an impression from Christ's presence,
whether it was that he had ever heard anything about Him before, or
whether it was only that the wisdom which dwells with death was
beginning to clear his eyes as life ebbed away. But however he
_came_ to the conviction, mark what it was that he believed and
expressed,--I am a sinful man; all punishment that comes down upon me
is richly deserved: This man is pure and righteous; 'Lord, remember
me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom!' That is all--that is all. That
is the thing that saves a man. How much he _did_ know--whether he
knew all the depth of what he was saying, when he said 'Lord!' is a
question that we cannot answer; whether he understood what the
'kingdom' was that he was expecting, is a question that we cannot
solve; but this is clear--the intellectual part of faith may be dark
and doubtful, but the moral and emotional part of it is manifest and
plain. There was, '_I_ am nothing--_Thou_ art everything: I bring
myself and my emptiness unto Thy great fullness: fill it and make me
blessed!' Faith has that. Faith has in it repentance--repentance has in
it faith too. Faith has in it the recognition of the certainty and the
justice of a judgment that is coming down crashing upon every human
head; and then from the midst of these fears, and sorrows, and the
tempest of that great darkness, there rises up in the night of terrors,
the shining of one perhaps pale, quivering, distant, but divinely given
hope, 'My Saviour! My Saviour! He is righteous: He has died--He lives!
I will stay no longer; I will cast myself upon Him!'

Once more--this incident reminds us not only of the attractive power
of the Cross, but of the prophetic power of the Cross. We have here
the Cross as pointing to and foretelling the Kingdom. Pointing out,
and foretelling: that is to say, of course, and only, if we accept
the scriptural statement of what these sufferings were, the Person
that endured them, and the meaning of their being endured. But the
only thing I would dwell upon here, is, that when we think of Christ
as dying for us, we are never to separate it from that other solemn
and future coming of which this poor robber catches a glimpse. They
crowned Him with thorns, and they gave Him a reed for His sceptre.
That mockery, so natural to the strong practical Romans in dealing
with one whom they thought a harmless enthusiast, was a symbol which
they who did it little dreamed of. The crown of thorns proclaims a
sovereignty founded on sufferings. The sceptre of feeble reed speaks
of power wielded in gentleness. The Cross leads to the crown. The
brow that was pierced by the sharp acanthus wreath, therefore wears
the diadem of the universe. The hand that passively held the mockery
of the worthless, pithless reed, therefore rules the princes of the
earth with the rod of iron. He who was lifted up to the Cross, was,
by that very act, lifted up to be a Ruler and Commander to the
peoples. For the death of the Cross God hath highly exalted Him to
be a Prince and a Saviour. The way to glory for Him, the power by
which He wields the kingdom of the world, is precisely through the
suffering. And therefore, whensoever there arises before us the
image of the one, oh! let there rise before us likewise the image of
the other. The Cross links on to the kingdom--the kingdom lights up
the Cross. My brother, the Saviour comes--the Saviour comes a King.
The Saviour that comes a King is the Saviour that has been here and
was crucified. The kingdom that He establishes is all full of
blessing, and love, and gentleness; and to us (if we will unite the
thoughts of Cross and Crown) there is opened up not only the
possibility of having boldness before Him in the day of judgment,
but there is opened up this likewise--the certainty that He 'shall
receive of the travail of His soul and be satisfied.' Oh, remember
that as certain as the historical fact--He died on Calvary; so
certain is the prophetic fact--He shall reign, and you and I will
stand there! I durst not touch that subject. Take it into your own
hearts; and think about it--a kingdom, a judgment-seat, a crown, a
gathered universe; separation, decision, execution of the sentence.
And oh! ask yourselves, 'When that gentle eye, with lightning in its
depths, falls upon _me_, individualises _me_, summons out _me_ to its
bar--how shall I stand?' 'Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness before Him in the day of judgment,' 'Lord, remember me
when Thou comest into Thy kingdom.'

Finally. Here is the Cross as revealing and opening the true
Paradise.--'This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.' We have no
concern at present with the many subtle inferences as to the state
of the dead, and as to the condition of our Lord's human spirit before
the Resurrection, which have been drawn from these words. To me they
do seem fairly to bear the broad and single conclusion that the spirits
of the saved do enter at death into a state of conscious presence with
their Saviour, and therefore of joy and felicity. But beyond this we
have no firm ground for going. It is of more practical worth to note
that the penitent's vague prayer is answered, and over-answered. He
asks, 'When Thou comest'--whensoever that may be--'remember me.' 'I
shall stand afar off; do not let me be utterly forgotten.' Christ
answers--'Remember thee! thou shalt be _with Me_, close to My side.
Remember thee _when_ I come!--_this day_ shalt thou be with Me.'

And what a contrast that is--the conscious blessedness rushing in
close upon the heels of the momentary darkness of death. At the one
moment there hangs the thief writhing in mortal agony; the wild
shouts of the fierce mob at his feet are growing faint upon his ear;
the city spread out at his feet, and all the familiar  sights of
earth are growing dim to his filmy eye. The soldier's spear comes,
the legs are broken, and in an instant there hangs a relaxed corpse;
and the spirit, the spirit--is where? Ah! how far away; released
from all its sin and its sore agony, struggling up at once into such
strange divine enlargement, a new star swimming into the firmament
of heaven, a new face before the throne of God, another sinner
redeemed from earth! The conscious immediate blessedness of the
departed--be he what he may, be his life whatsoever it may have
been--who at last, dark, sinful, standing with one foot on the verge
of eternity, and poising himself for the flight, flings himself into
the arms of Christ--the everlasting blessedness, the Christ-presence
and the Christ-gladness, that is the message that the robber leaves
to us from his cross. Paradise is opened to us again. The Cross is
the true 'tree of life.' The flaming cherubim, and the sword that
turneth every way, are gone, and the broad road into the city, the
Paradise of God, with all its beauties and all its peaceful joy--a
better Paradise, 'a statelier Eden,' than that which we have lost,
is flung open to us for ever.

Do not trust a death-bed repentance, my brother. I have stood by
many a death-bed, and few indeed have they been where I could have
believed that the man was in a condition physically (to say nothing
of anything else) clearly to see and grasp the message of the
Gospel. There is no limit to the mercy. I know that God's mercy is
boundless. I know that 'whilst there is life there is hope.' I know
that a man, going--swept down that great Niagara--if, before his
little skiff tilts over into the awful rapids, he can make one great
bound with all his strength, and reach the solid ground--I know he
may be saved. It is an awful risk to run. A moment's miscalculation,
and skiff and voyager alike are whelming in the green chaos below,
and come up mangled into nothing, far away down yonder upon the
white turbulent foam. '_One_ was saved upon the Cross,' as the
old divines used to tell us, 'that none might despair; and only one,
that none might presume.' _'Now_ is the accepted time, and
_now_ is the day of salvation!'




THE FIRST EASTER SUNRISE


    'Now, upon the first day of the week, very early in
    the morning, they came onto the sepulchre, bringing
    the spices which they had prepared, and certain others
    with them. 2. And they found the stone rolled away
    from the sepulchre. 3. And they entered in, and found
    not the body of the Lord Jesus. 4. And it came to pass,
    as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two
    men stood by them in shining garments: 5. And as they
    were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth,
    they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the
    dead? 6. He is not here, but is risen: remember how He
    spake unto you when He was yet in Galilee, 7. Saying,
    The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of
    sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise
    again. 8. And they remembered His words, 9. And
    returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things
    unto the eleven, and to all the rest. 10. It was Mary
    Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James,
    and other women that were with them, which told these
    things unto the apostles. 11. And their words seemed
    to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.
    12. Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and
    stooping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by
    themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that
    which was come to pass.'--LUKE xxiv. 1-12.

No Evangelist narrates the act of Resurrection. Apocryphal Gospels
cannot resist the temptation of describing it. Why did the Four
preserve such singular reticence about what would have been
irresistible to 'myth' makers? Because they were not myth-makers,
but witnesses, and had nothing to say as to an act that no man had
seen. No doubt, the Resurrection took place in the earliest hours of
the first day of the week. The Sun of Righteousness rose before the
Easter Day sun. It was midsummer day for Him, while it was but
spring for earth's calendar. That early rising has no setting to
follow.

The divergences of the Evangelists reach their maximum in the accounts
of the Resurrection, as is natural if we realise the fragmentary
character of all the versions, the severely condensed style of
Matthew's, the incompleteness of the genuine Mark's, the evidently
selective purpose in Luke's, and the supplementary design of John's.
If we add the perturbed state of the disciples, their separation from
each other, and the number of distinct incidents embraced in the
records, we shall not wonder at the differences, but see in them
confirmation of the good faith of the witnesses, and a reflection of
the hurry and wonderfulness of that momentous day. Differences there
are; contradictions there are not, except between the doubtful verses
added to Mark and the other accounts. We cannot put all the pieces
together, when we have only them to guide us. If we had a complete
and independent narrative to go by, we could, no doubt, arrange our
fragments. But the great certainties are unaffected by the small
divergences, and the points of agreement are vital. They are, for
example, that none saw the Resurrection, that the first to know of
it were the women, that angels appeared to them at the tomb, that
Jesus showed Himself first to Mary Magdalene, that the reports of the
Resurrection were not believed. Whether the group with whom this
passage has to do were the same as that whose experience Matthew
records we leave undetermined. If so, they must have made two visits
to the tomb, and two returns to the Apostles,--one, with only the
tidings of the empty sepulchre, which Luke tells; one, with the
tidings of Christ's appearance, as in Matthew. But harmonistic
considerations do not need to detain us at present.

Sorrow and love are light sleepers, and early dawn found the brave
women on their way. Nicodemus had bound spices in with the body, and
these women's love-gift was as 'useless' and as fragrant as Mary's
box of ointment. Whatever love offers, love welcomes, though Judas
may ask 'To what purpose is this waste?' Angel hands had rolled away
the stone, not to allow of Jesus' exit, for He had risen while it
was in its place, but to permit the entrance of the 'witnesses of
the Resurrection.' So little did these women dream of such a thing
that the empty tomb brought no flash of joy, but only perplexity to
their wistful gaze. 'What does it mean?' was their thought. They and
all the disciples expected nothing less than they did a Resurrection,
therefore their testimony to it is the more reliable.

Luke marks the appearance of the angels as sudden by that 'behold.'
They were not seen approaching, but at one moment the bewildered
women were alone, looking at each other with faces of dreary wonder,
and the next, 'two men' were standing beside them, and the tomb was
lighted by the sheen of their dazzling robes. Much foolish fuss has
been made about the varying reports of the angels, and 'contradictions'
have been found in the facts that some saw them and some did not, that
some saw one and some saw two, that some saw them seated and some saw
them standing, and so on. We know so little of the laws that govern
angelic appearances that our opinion as to the probability or veracity
of the accounts is mere guess-work. Where should a flight of angels
have gathered and hovered if not there? And should they not 'sit in
order serviceable' about the tomb, as around the 'stable' at Bethlehem?
Their function was to prepare a way in the hearts of the women for the
Lord Himself, to lessen the shock,--for sudden joy shocks and may
hurt,--as well as to witness that these 'things angels desire to look
into.'

Their message flooded the women's hearts with better light than
their garments had spread through the tomb. Luke's version of it
agrees with Mark and Matthew in the all-important central part, 'He
is not here, but is risen' (though these words in Luke are not
beyond doubt), but diverges from them otherwise. Surely the message
was not the mere curt announcement preserved by any one of the
Evangelists. We may well believe that much more was said than any or
all of them have recorded. The angels' question is half a rebuke,
wholly a revelation, of the essential nature of 'the Living One,'
who was so from all eternity, but is declared to be so by His
rising, of the incongruity of supposing that He could be gathered
to, and remain with, the dim company of the dead, and a blessed
word, which turns sorrow into hope, and diverts sad eyes from the
grave to the skies, for all the ages since and to come. The angels
recall Christ's prophecies of death and resurrection, which, like so
many of His words to the disciples and to us, had been heard, and
not heard, being neglected or misinterpreted. They had questioned
'what the rising from the dead should mean,' never supposing that it
meant exactly what it said. That way of dealing with Christ's words
did not end on the Easter morning, but is still too often practised.

If we are to follow Luke's account, we must recognise that the women
in a company, as well as Mary Magdalene separately, came back first
with the announcement of the empty tomb and the angels' message, and
later with the full announcement of having seen the Lord. But apart
from the complexities of attempted combination of the narratives,
the main point in all the Evangelists is the disbelief of the
disciples, 'Idle tales,' said they, using a very strong word which
appears only here in the New Testament, and likens the eager story
of the excited women to a sick man's senseless ramblings. That was
the mood of the whole company, apostles and all. Is that mood likely
to breed hallucinations? The evidential value of the disciples'
slowness to believe cannot be overrated.

Peter's race to the sepulchre, in verse 12 of Luke xxiv., is omitted
by several good authorities, and is, perhaps, spurious here. If
allowed to stand as Luke's, it seems to show that the Evangelist had
a less complete knowledge of the facts than John. Mark, Peter's
'interpreter,' has told us of the special message to him from the
risen, but as yet unseen, Lord, and we may well believe that that
quickened his speed. The assurance of forgiveness and the hope of a
possible future that might cover over the cowardly past, with the
yearning to sob his heart out on the Lord's breast, sent him swiftly
to the tomb. Luke does not say that he went in, as John, with one of
his fine touches, which bring out character in a word, tells us that
he did; but he agrees with John in describing the effect of what
Peter saw as being only 'wonder,' and the result as being only that
he went away pondering over it all, and not yet able to grasp the
joy of the transcendent fact. Perhaps, if he had not had a troubled
conscience, he would have had a quicker faith. He was not given to
hesitation, but his sin darkened his mind. He needed that secret
interview, of which many knew the fact but none the details, ere he
could feel the full glow of the Risen Sun thawing his heart and
scattering his doubts like morning mists on the hills.




THE LIVING DEAD


    'Why seek ye the living among the dead! 6. He is not
    here, but is risen.'--LUKE xxiv. 5,6.

We can never understand the utter desolation of the days that lay
betwixt Christ's Death and His Resurrection. Our faith rests on
centuries. We know that that grave was not even an interruption to
the progress of His work, but was the straight road to His triumph
and His glory. We know that it was the completion of the work of
which the raising of the widow's son and of Lazarus were but the
beginnings. But these disciples did not know that. To them the
inferior miracles by which He had redeemed others from the power of
the grave, must have made His own captivity to it all the more
stunning; and the thought which such miracles ending so must have
left upon them, must have been something like, 'He saved others;
Himself He cannot save.' And therefore we can never think ourselves
fully back to that burst of strange sudden thankfulness with which
these weeping Marys found those two calm angel forms sitting with
folded wings, like the Cherubim over the Mercy-seat, but
overshadowing a better propitiation, and heard the words of my text,
'Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is
risen.'

But yet, although the words before us, in the full depth and
preciousness of their meaning, of course could only be once
fulfilled, we may not only gather from them thoughts concerning that
one death and resurrection, but we may likewise apply them, in a
very permissible modification of meaning, to the present condition
of all who have departed in His faith and fear; since for us, too,
it is true that, whenever we go to an open grave, sorrowing for those
whom we love, or oppressed with the burden of mortality in any shape,
if our eyes are anointed, we can see there sitting the quiet angel
forms; and if our ears be purged from the noise of earth, we can hear
them saying to us, in regard to all that have gone away, 'Why seek ye
the living in these graves? They are not here; they are risen, as He
said.' The thoughts are very old, brethren. God be thanked that they
_are_ old! Perhaps to some of you they may come now with new power,
because they come with new application to your own present condition.
Perhaps to some of you they may sound very weak, and 'words weaker
than your grief will make grief more';--but such as they are, let us
look at them for a moment or two together now.

The first thought, then, that these words of the angel messengers,
and the scene in which we find them, suggest, is this--The dead are
the living.

Language, which is more accustomed and adapted to express the
appearances than the realities of things, leads us astray very much
when we use the phrase 'the dead' as if it expressed the continuance
of the condition into which men pass in the act of dissolution. It
misleads us no less, when we use it as if it expressed in itself the
whole truth even as to that act of dissolution. 'The dead' and 'the
living' are not names of two classes which exclude each other. Much
rather, there are _none_ who are _dead_. The dead are the living who
have died. Whilst they were dying they lived, and after they were dead
they lived more fully. All live unto God. 'God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living.' Oh, how solemnly sometimes that thought comes
up before us, that all those past generations which have stormed across
this earth of ours, and then have fallen into still forgetfulness, live
yet. Somewhere at this very instant, they now verily _are_! We say,
'They _were_, they _have been_'. There are no have beens! Life is life
for ever. _To be_ is eternal being. Every man that has died is at this
instant in the full possession of all his faculties, in the intensest
exercise of all his capacities, standing somewhere in God's great
universe, ringed with the sense of God's presence, and feeling in
every fibre of his being that life, which comes after death, is not less
real, but more real, not less great, but more great, not less full or
intense, but more full and intense, than the mingled life which, lived
here on earth, was a centre of life surrounded with a crust and
circumference of mortality. The dead are the living. They lived whilst
they died; and after they die, they live on for ever.

Such a conviction has as a matter of fact been firmly grasped as an
unquestionable truth and a familiar operative belief only within the
sphere of the Christian revelation. From the natural point of view
the whole region of the dead is 'a land of darkness, without any
order, where the light is as darkness.' The usual sources of human
certainty fail us here. Reason is only able to stammer a
peradventure. Experience and consciousness are silent. 'The simple
senses' can only say that it looks as if Death were an end, the
final Omega. Testimony there is none from any pale lips that have
come back to unfold the secrets of the prison-house.

The history of Christ's Death and Resurrection, His dying words
'_This day_ thou shalt be with Me in Paradise,' the full
identity of being with which He rose from the grave, the manhood
changed and yet the same, the intercourse of the forty days before
His ascension, which showed the continuance of all the old love
'stronger than death,' and was in all essential points like His
former intercourse with His disciples, though changed in form and
introductory to the times when they should see Him no more in the
flesh-these teach us, not as a peradventure, nor as a dim hope, nor
as a strong foreboding which may be in its nature prophetic, but as
a certainty based upon a historical fact, that Death's empire is
partial in its range and transitory in its duration. But, after we
are convinced of that, we can look again with new eyes even on the
external accompaniments of death, and see that sense is too hasty in
its conclusion that death is the final end. There is no reason from
what we see passing before our eyes then to believe, that it, with
all its pitifulness and all its pain, has any power at all upon the
soul. True, the spirit gathers itself into itself, and, poising
itself for its flight, becomes oblivious of what is passing round
about it. True, the tenant that is about to depart from the house in
which he has dwelt so long, closes the windows before he goes. But
what is there in the cessation of the power of communication with an
outer world--what is there in the fact that you clasp the nerveless
hand, and it returns no pressure; that you whisper gentle words that
you think might kindle a soul under the dull, cold ribs of death
itself, and get no answer--that you look with weeping gaze to catch
the response of affection from out of the poor filmy, closing,
tearless eyes there, and look in vain--what is there in all that to
lead to the conviction that _the spirit_ is participant of that
impotence and silence? Is not the soul only self-centring itself,
retiring from, the outposts, but not touched in the citadel? Is it
not only that as the long sleep of life begins to end, and the
waking eye of the soul begins to open itself on realities, the
sights and sounds of the dream begin to pass away? Is it not but
that the man, in dying, begins to be what he fully is when he is
dead, 'dead unto sin,' dead unto the world, that he may 'live unto
God' that he may live with God, that he may live really? And so we
can look upon that ending of life, and say, 'It is a very small
thing; it only cuts off the fringes of my life, it does not touch
_me_ at all' It only plays round about the husk, and does not
get at the core. It only strips off the circumferential mortality,
but the soul rises up untouched by it, and shakes the bands of death
from off its immortal arms, and flutters the stain of death from
off its budding wings, and rises fuller of life _because of
death_, and mightier in its vitality in the very act of
submitting the body to the law, 'Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt
thou return.'

Touching but a part of the being, and touching that but for a
moment, death is no state, it is an act. It is not a condition, it
is a transition. Men speak about life as 'a narrow neck of land,
betwixt two unbounded seas': they had better speak about death as
that. It is an isthmus, narrow and almost impalpable, on which, for
one brief instant, the soul poises itself; whilst behind it there
lies the inland lake of past being, and before it the shoreless
ocean of future life, all lighted with the glory of God, and making
music as it breaks even upon these dark, rough rocks. Death is but a
passage. It is not a house, it is only a vestibule. The grave has a
door on its inner side. We roll the stone to its mouth and come
away, thinking that we have left them there till the Resurrection.
But when the outer access to earth is fast closed, the inner portal
that opens on heaven is set wide, and God says to His child, 'Come,
enter into thy chambers and shut thy doors about thee ... until the
indignation be overpast!' Death is a superficial thing, and a
transitory thing--a darkness that is caused by the light, and a
darkness that ends in the light--a trifle, if you measure it by
duration; a trifle if you measure it by depth. The death of the mortal
is the emancipation and the life of the immortal. Then, brethren, we
may go with the words of my text, and look upon every green hillock
below which any that are dear to us are lying, and say to ourselves,
'Not _here_--God be thanked, no--not here: living, and not dead;
_yonder_, with the Master!' Oh, we think far too much of the grave,
and far too little of the throne and the glory! We are far too much
the creatures of sense; and the accompaniments of dissolution and
departure fill up our hearts and our eyes. Think them all away,
believe them all away, love them all away. Stand in the light of
Christ's life, and Christ's death, and Christ's rising, till you
feel, 'Thou art a shadow, not a substance--no real thing at all.'
Yes, a shadow; and where a shadow falls there must be sunlight above
to cast it. Look up, then, above the shadow Death, above the sin and
separation from God, of which it is the shadow! Look up to the
unsetting light of the Eternal life on the throne of the universe,
and see bathed in it the living dead in Christ!

God has taken them to Himself, and we ought not to think (if we
would think as the Bible speaks) of death as being anything else
than the transitory thing which breaks down the brazen walls and
lets us into liberty. For, indeed, if you will examine the New
Testament on this subject, I think you will be surprised to find how
very seldom--scarcely ever--the word  'death' is employed to express
the mere fact of the dissolution of the connection between soul and
body. It is strange, but significant, that the Apostles, and Christ
Himself, so rarely use the word to express that which we exclusively
mean by it. They use all manner of other expressions as if they felt
that the _fact_ remains, but that all that made it death has
gone away. In a real sense, and all the more real because the
external fact continues, Christ 'hath abolished death.' Two men may go
down to the grave together: of one this may be the epitaph, 'He that
believeth in Christ shall never die'; and of the other--passing through
precisely the same physical experience and appearance, the dissolution
of soul and body, we may say,--'There, that is death--death as God
sent it, to be the punishment of man's sin.' The outward fact remains
the same, the whole inner character of it is altered. As to them that
believe, though they have passed through the experience of painful
separation--slow, languishing departure, or suddenly being caught up
in some chariot of fire; not only are they living now, but they never
died at all! Have you understood 'death' in the full, pregnant sense
of the expression, which means not only that _shadow_, the
separation of the body from the soul; but that _reality_, the
separation of the soul from life, because of the separation of the
soul from God?

Then, secondly, this text, indeed the whole incident, may set before
us the other consideration that since they have died, they live a
better life than ours.

I am not going to enter here, at any length, or very particularly,
into what seem to me to be the irrefragable scriptural grounds for
holding the complete, uninterrupted, and even intensified
consciousness of the soul of man, in the interval between death and
the Resurrection. 'Absent from the body, present with the Lord.'
'This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.' These words, if there
were none other, are surely enough; seeing that of all that dark
region we know only what it pleases God to tell us in the Bible, and
seeing that it does not please Him to give us more than hints and
glimpses of any part of it. But putting aside all attempts to
elaborate a full doctrine of the intermediate state from the few
Scripture expressions that bear on it, I merely allege, in general
terms, that the present life of departed saints is fuller and nobler
than that which they possessed on earth. They are even now, whatever
be the details of their condition, 'the spirits of just men made
perfect.' As yet the body is not glorified--but the spirits of the
perfected righteous are now parts of that lofty society whose head
is Christ, whose members are the angels of God, the saints on earth
and the equally conscious redeemed who 'sleep in Jesus.'

In what particulars is their life now higher than it was? First,
they have close fellowship with Christ; then, they are separated
from this present body of weakness, of dishonour, of corruption;
then, they are withdrawn from all the trouble, and toil, and care of
this present life; and then, and not least surely, they have death
behind them, not having that awful figure standing on their horizon
waiting for them to come up with it. These are some of the elements
of the life of the sainted dead. What a wondrous advance on the life
of earth they reveal if we think of them! They are closer to Christ;
they are delivered from the body, as a source of weakness; as a
hinderer of knowledge;  as a dragger-down of all the aspiring
tendencies of the soul; as a source of sin; as a source of pain.
They are delivered from all the necessity of labour which is agony,
of labour which is disproportionate to strength, of labour which
often ends in disappointment, of labour which is wasted so often in
mere keeping life in, of labour which at the best is a curse, though
it be a merciful curse too. They are delivered from that 'fear of
death' which, though it be stripped of its sting, is never
extinguished in any soul of man that lives; and they can smile at
the way in which that narrow and inevitable passage bulked so large
before them all their days, and after all, when they came to it, was
so slight and small! If these are parts of the life of them that
'sleep in Jesus,' if they are fuller of knowledge, fuller of wisdom,
fuller of love and capacity of love, and object of love; fuller of
holiness, fuller of energy, and yet full of rest from head to foot;
if all the hot tumult of earthly experience is stilled and quieted,
all the fever beating of this blood of ours for ever at an end; all
the 'slings and arrows of outrageous fortune' done with for ever,
and if the calm face which we looked last upon, and out of which the
lines of sorrow, and pain, and sickness melted away, giving it a
nobler nobleness than we had ever seen upon it in life, is only an
image of the restful and more blessed being into which they have
passed,--if the dead are thus, then 'Blessed are the dead!'

No wonder that one aspect of that blessedness--the '_sleeping_
in Jesus'--has been the one that the weary have laid hold of at all
times; but do not let us forget what lies even in that figure of
sleep, or distort it as if it meant to express a less vivid life
than that here below. I think we sometimes misunderstand what the
Bible means when it speaks about death as a sleep, by taking it to
express the idea that that intermediate state is one of a kind of
depressed consciousness, and of a less full vitality than the
present. Not so. Sleep is rest, that is one reason for the
scriptural application of the word to death. Sleep is the cessation
of all connection with the external world, that is another reason.
As we play with the names of those that are familiar to us, so a
loving faith can venture to play, as it were, with the awful name of
Him who is King of Terrors, and to minimise it down to that shadow
and reflection of itself which we find in the nightly act of going
to rest. That may be another reason. But sleep is not unconsciousness;
sleep does not touch the spirit. Sleep sets us free from relations to
the outer world but the soul works as hard, though in a different way,
when we slumber as when we wake. People who know what it is to dream,
ought never to fancy that when the Bible talks about death as sleep, it
means to say to us that death is unconsciousness. By no means. Strip the
man of the disturbance that comes from a fevered body, and he will have
a calmer soul. Strip him of the hindrances that come from a body which
is like an opaque tower around his spirit, with only a narrow slit here
and a narrow door there--five poor senses, with which he can come into
connection with an outer universe; and, then surely, the spirit will have
wider avenues out to God, and larger powers of reception, because it
has lost the earthly tabernacle which, just in proportion as it brought
the spirit into connection with the earth to which the tabernacle
belongs, severed its connection with the heavens that are above.
They who have died in Christ live a fuller and a nobler life, by the
very dropping away of the body; a fuller and a nobler life, by the
very cessation of care, change, strife and struggle; and, above all,
a fuller and nobler life, because they 'sleep _in Jesus_,' and
are gathered into His bosom, and wake with Him yonder beneath the
altar, clothed in white robes, and with palms in their hands,
'waiting the adoption--to wit, the redemption of the body.' For
though death be a progress--a progress to the spiritual existence;
though death be a birth to a higher and nobler state; though it be
the gate of life, fuller and better than any which we possess;
though the present state of the departed in Christ is a state of
calm blessedness, a state of perfect communion, a state of rest and
satisfaction;--yet it is not the final and perfect state, either.

And, therefore, in the last place, the better life, which the dead
in Christ are living now, leads on to a still fuller life when they
get back their glorified bodies.

The perfection of man is body, soul, and spirit. That is man, as God
made him. The spirit perfected, the soul perfected, without the
bodily life, is but part of the whole. For the future world, in all
its glory, we have the firm basis laid that it, too, is to be in a
real sense a material world, where men once more are to possess
bodies as they did before, only bodies through which the spirit
shall work conscious of no disproportion, bodies which shall be fit
servants and adequate organs of the immortal souls within, bodies
which shall never break down, bodies which shall never hem in nor
refuse to obey the spirits that dwell in them, but which shall add
to their power, and deepen their blessedness, and draw them closer
to the God whom they serve and the Christ after the likeness of
whose glorious body they are fashioned and conformed. 'Body, soul,
and spirit,' the old combination which was on earth, is to be the
perfect humanity of heaven. The spirits that are perfected, that are
living in blessedness, that are dwelling in God, that are sleeping
in Christ, at this moment are waiting, stretching out (I say, not
longing, but) expectant hands of faith and hope; for that they would
not be unclothed, but clothed upon with their house which is from
heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

We have nothing to say, now and here, about what that bodily
condition may be--about the differences and the identities between
it and our present earthly house of this tabernacle. Only
_this_ we know-reverse all the weakness of flesh, and you get
some faint notion of the glorious body. It is sown in corruption,
dishonour, and weakness. It is raised in incorruption, glory, and
power. Nay, more, it is sown a natural body, fit organ for the
animal life or nature, which stands connected with this material
universe; 'it is raised a spiritual body,' fit servant for the
spirit that dwells in it, that works through it, that is perfected
in its redemption.

Why, then, seek the living among the dead? 'God giveth His beloved
sleep'; and in that peaceful sleep, realities, not dreams, come
round their quiet rest, and fill their conscious spirits and their
happy hearts with blessedness and fellowship. And when thus lulled
to sleep in the arms of Christ they have rested till it please Him
to accomplish the number of His elect, then, in His own time, He
will make the eternal morning to dawn, and the hand that kept them
in their slumber shall touch them into waking, and shall clothe them
when they arise according to the body of His own glory; and they
looking into His face, and flashing back its love, its light, its
beauty, shall each break forth into singing as the rising light of
that unsetting day touches their transfigured and immortal heads, in
the triumphant thanksgiving 'I am satisfied, for I awake in Thy
likeness.'

'Therefore, comfort one another with these words,' and remember that
_we_ are of the day, not of the night; let us not, then, sleep
as do others; but let us reckon that Christ hath died for us, that
whether we wake on earth or sleep in the grave, or wake in heaven,
we may live together with Him!




THE RISEN LORD'S SELF-REVELATION TO WAVERING DISCIPLES


    'And, behold, two of them went that same day to a
    village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about
    threescore furlongs. 14. And they talked together of
    all these things which had happened. 15. And it came
    to pass, that, while they communed together and
    reasoned, Jesus Himself drew near, and went with them.
    16. But their eyes were holden that they should not
    know Him. 17. And He said unto them, What manner of
    communications are these that ye have one to another,
    as ye walk, and are sad? 18. And the one of them,
    whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto Him, Art
    Thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known
    the things which are come to pass there in these days?
    19. And He said unto them, What things? And they said
    unto Him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
    prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the
    people: 20. And how the chief priests and our rulers
    delivered Him to be condemned to death, and have
    crucified Him. 21. But we trusted that it had been He
    which should have redeemed Israel: and besides all
    this, to-day is the third day since these things were
    done. 22. Yea, and certain women also of our company
    made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre;
    23. And when they found not His body, they came,
    saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels,
    which said that He was alive. 24. And certain of them
    which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it
    even so as the women had said: but Him they saw not.
    26. Then He said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart
    to believe all that the prophets have spoken: 26. Ought
    not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
    into His glory? 27. And beginning at Moses and all the
    prophets, He expounded unto them in all the scriptures
    the things concerning Himself. 28. And they drew nigh
    unto the village, whither they went: and He made as
    though He would have gone further. 29. But they
    constrained Him, saying, Abide with us: for it is
    toward evening, and the day is far spent. And He went
    in to tarry with them. 30. And it came to pass, as He
    sat at meat with them, He took bread, and blessed it,
    and brake, and gave to them. 31. And their eyes were
    opened, and they knew Him; and He vanished out of
    their sight. 32 And they said one to another, Did not
    our heart burn within us, while He talked with us by
    the way and while He opened to us the scriptures?'
    --LUKE xxiv. 13-32.

These two disciples had left their companions after Peter's return
from the sepulchre and before Mary Magdalene hurried in with her
tidings that she had seen Jesus. Their coming away at such a crisis,
like Thomas's absence that day, shows that the scattering of the
sheep was beginning to follow the smiting of the shepherd. The
magnet withdrawn, the attracted particles fall apart. What arrested
that process? Why did not the spokes fall asunder when the centre
was removed? John's disciples crumbled away after his death. When
Theudas fell, all his followers 'were dispersed' and came to nought.
The Church was knit more closely together after the death that,
according to all analogy, should have scattered it. Only the fact
of the Resurrection explains the anomaly. No reasonable men would
have held together unless they had known that their Messianic hopes
had not been buried in Christ's grave. We see the beginnings of the
Resurrection of these hopes in this sweet story.

I. We have first the two sad travellers and the third who joins
them. Probably the former had left the group of disciples on purpose
to relieve the tension of anxiety and sorrow by walking, and to get
a quiet time to bring their thoughts into some order. They were like
men who had lived through an earthquake; they were stunned, and
physical exertion, the morning quiet of the country, and the absence
of other people, would help to calm their nerves, and enable them to
realise their position. Their tone of mind will come out more
distinctly presently. Here it is enough to note that the 'things
which had come to pass' filled their minds and conversation. That
being so, they were not left to grope in the dark. 'Jesus Himself
drew near, and went with them.' Honest occupation of mind with the
truth concerning Him, and a real desire to know it, are not left
unhelped. We draw Him to our sides when we wish and try to grasp the
real facts concerning Him, whether they coincide with our
prepossessions or not.

It is profoundly interesting and instructive to note the
characteristics of the favoured ones who first saw the risen Lord.
They were Mary, whose heart was an altar of flaming and fragrant
love; Peter, the penitent denier; and these two, absorbed in
meditation on the facts of the death and burial. What attracts
Jesus? Love, penitence, study of His truth. He comes to these with
the appropriate gifts for them, as truly--yea, more closely--as of
old. Perhaps the very doubting that troubled them brought Him to
their help. He saw that they especially needed Him, for their faith
was sorely wounded. Necessity is as potent a spell to bring Jesus as
desert. He comes to reward fixed and fervent love, and He comes,
too, to revive it when tremulous and cold.

'Their eyes were holden,' says Luke; and similarly 'their eyes were
opened' (ver. 31). He makes the reason for His not being recognised
a subjective one, and his narrative affords no support to the theory
of a change in our Lord's resurrection body. How often does Jesus
still come to us, and we discern Him not! Our paths would be less
lonely, and our thoughts less sad, if we realised more fully and
constantly our individual share in the promise,' I am with you
always.'

II. We have next the conversation (vs. 17-28). The unknown new-comer
strikes into the dialogue with a question which, on some lips, would
have been intrusive curiosity, and would have provoked rude retorts.
But there was something in His voice and manner which unlocked
hearts. Does He not still come close to burdened souls, and with a
smile of love on His face and a promise of help in His tones, ask us
to tell Him all that is in our hearts? 'Communications' told to Him
cease to sadden. Those that we cannot tell to Him we should not
speak to ourselves.

Cleopas naively wonders that there should be found a single man in
Jerusalem ignorant of the things which had come to pass. He forgot
that the stranger might know these, and not know that they were
talking about them. Like the rest of us, he fancied that what was
great to him was as great to everybody. What _could_ be the
subject of their talk but the one theme? The stranger assumes
ignorance, in order to win to a full outpouring. Jesus wishes us to
put all fears and doubts and shattered hopes into plain words to
Him. Speech to Christ cleanses our bosoms of much perilous stuff.
Before He speaks in answer we are lightened.

Very true to nature is the eager answer of the two. The silence once
broken, out flows a torrent of speech, in which love and grief,
disciples' pride in their Master, and shattered hopes, incredulous
bewilderment and questioning wonder, are blended.

That long speech (vs. 19-24) gives a lively conception of the two
disciples' state of mind. Probably it fairly represented the thought
of all. We note in it the limited conception of Jesus as but a
prophet, the witness to His miracles and teaching (the former being
set first, as having more impressed their minds), the assertion of
His universal appreciation by the 'people,' the charging of the
guilt of Christ's death on 'our rulers,' the sad contrast between
the officials' condemnation of Him and their own fond Messianic
hopes, and the despairing acknowledgment that these were shattered.

The reference to 'the third day' seems to imply that the two had
been discussing the meaning of our Lord's frequent prophecy about
it. The connection in which they introduce it looks as if they were
beginning to understand the prophecy, and to cherish a germ of hope
in His Resurrection, or, at all events, were tossed about with
uncertainty as to whether they dared to cherish it. They are chary
of allowing that the women's story was true; naively they attach
more importance to its confirmation by men. 'But Him they saw not,'
and, so long as He did not appear, they could not believe even
angels saying 'that He was alive.'

The whole speech shows how complete was the collapse of the
disciples' Messianic hopes, how slowly their minds opened to admit
the possibility of Resurrection, and how exacting they were in the
matter of evidence for it, even to the point of hesitating to accept
angelic announcements. Such a state of mind is not the soil in which
hallucinations spring up. Nothing but the actual appearance of the
risen Lord could have changed these sad, cautious unbelievers to
lifelong confessors. What else could have set light to these rolling
smoke-clouds of doubt, and made them flame heaven-high and world-wide?

'The ingenuous disclosure of their bewilderment appealed to their
Companion's heart, as it ever does. Jesus is not repelled by doubts
and perplexities, if they are freely spoken to Him. To put our
confused thoughts into plain words tends to clear them, and to bring
Him as our Teacher. His reproach has no anger in it, and inflicts no
pain, but puts us on the right track for arriving at the truth. If
these two had listened to the 'prophets,' they would have understood
their Master, and known that a divine 'must' wrought itself out in
His Death and Resurrection. How often, like them, do we torture
ourselves with problems of belief and conduct of which the solution
lies close beside us, if we would use it?

Jesus claimed 'all the prophets' as His witnesses. He teaches us to
find the highest purpose of the Old Testament in its preparation for
Himself, and to look for foreshadowings of His Death and
Resurrection there. What gigantic delusion of self-importance that
was, if it was not the self-attestation of the Incarnate Word, to
whom all the written word pointed! He will still, to docile souls,
be the Interpreter of Scripture. They who see Him in it all are
nearer its true appreciation than those who see in the Old Testament
everything but Him.

III. We have finally the disclosure and disappearance of the Lord.
The little group must have travelled slowly, with many a pause on
the road, while Jesus opened the Scriptures; for they left the city
in the morning, and evening was near before they had finished their
'threescore furlongs' (between seven and eight miles). His presence
makes the day's march seem short.

'He made as though He would have gone further,' not therein assuming
the appearance of a design which He did not really entertain, but
beginning a movement which He would have carried out if the
disciples' urgency had not detained Him. Jesus forces His company on
no man. He 'would have gone further' if they had not said 'Abide
with us.' He will leave us if we do not keep Him. But He delights to
be held by beseeching hands, and our wishes 'constrain' Him. Happy
are they who, having felt the sweetness of walking with Him on the
weary road, seek Him to bless their leisure and to add a more
blissful depth of repose to their rest!

The humble table where Christ is invited to sit, becomes a sacred
place of revelation. He hallows common life, and turns the meals
over which He presides into holy things. His disciples' tables
should be such that they dare ask their Lord to sit at them. But
how often He would be driven away by luxury, gross appetite, trivial
or malicious talk! We shall all be the better for asking ourselves
whether we should like to invite Jesus to our tables. He is there,
spectator and judge, whether invited or not.

Where Jesus is welcomed as guest He becomes host. Perhaps something
in gesture or tone, as He blessed and brake the bread, recalled the
loved Master to the disciples' minds, and, with a flash, the glad
'It is He!' illuminated their souls. That was enough. His bodily
presence was no longer necessary when the conviction of His risen
life was firmly fixed in them. Therefore He disappeared. The old
unbroken companionship was not to be resumed. Occasional
appearances, separated by intervals of absence, prepared the
disciples gradually for doing without His visible presence.

If we are sure that He has risen and lives for ever, we have a
better presence than that. He is gone from our sight that He may be
seen by our faith. That 'now we see Him not' is advance on the
position of His first disciples, not retrogression. Let us strive to
possess the blessing of 'those who have not seen, and yet have
believed.'




DETAINING CHRIST


    'And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they
    went: and He made as though He would have gone further.
    29. But they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us:
    for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent.
    And He went in to tarry with them.'--LUKE xxiv. 28, 29.

Of course, a chance companion, picked up on the road, is dropped when
the journey's end is reached. When these two disciples had come to
Emmaus, perhaps arriving at some humble inn or caravanserai, or
perhaps at the home of one of them, it would have been an unmannerly
intrusion for the Stranger who had met them on the road, and could
accompany them there without rudely forcing Himself on them, to have
inflicted His company further on them unless they had wished it. And so
'He made as though He would have gone further,' not pretending what
He did not mean, but doing what was but natural and proper in the
circumstances. But Jesus had a further motive for showing His intention
of parting company at the door of t he house in Emmaus. He desired to
evoke the expression of the desire of His two fellow-walkers that He
should tarry with them. Having evoked it, then with infinite
willingness omnipotence lets itself be controlled by feebleness, and
Jesus suffers Himself to be constrained by those whom, unknown to
themselves, He was gently and mightily constraining. 'He _made as
though,'_ unfortunately suggests to an English reader the idea of
acting a part, and of seeming to intend what was not really intended.
But there is no such thought in Luke's mind.

The first suggestion that strikes one from this incident is just
this: Jesus Christ will certainly leave us if we do not detain Him.

It is no more certain that that walk to Emmaus had its end, and that
that first day of the week, day of Resurrection though it was, was
destined to close in sunset and evening darkness, than that all
seasons of quickened intercourse with Jesus Christ, all times when
duty and grace and privilege seem to be very great and real, all
times when we awake more than ordinarily to the recognition of the
Presence of the Lord with us and of the glories that lie beyond,
tend to end and to leave us bare and deprived of the vision, unless
there be on our parts a distinct and resolute effort to make
perpetual that which in its nature is transient and comes to a
close, unless we avert its cessation. All motion tends to rest, and
Christian feeling falls under the same law. Nay, the more thrilling
the moment's experience the more exhausting is it, and the more
certain to be followed by depression and collapse. 'Action and
reaction are equal and contrary.' The height of the wave determines
the depth of the trough. Therefore Christian people have to be
specially careful towards the end of a time of special vitality and
earnestness; because, unless they by desire and by discipline of
their minds interpose, the natural result will be deadness in
proportion to the previous excitement. 'He made as though He would
have gone further,' and He certainly will unless His retreating
skirts be grasped at by the outstretched hands of faith and desire,
and the prayer go after Him, 'Abide with us for it is toward
evening.'

That is quite true, too, in another application of the incident.
Convictions, spiritual experiences of a rudimentary sort, certainly
die away and leave people harder and worse than they were before,
unless they be fostered and cherished and brought to maturity and
invested with permanence by the honest efforts of the subjects of
the same. The grace of God, in the preaching of His Gospel, is like
a flying summer shower. It falls upon one land and then passes on
with its treasures and pours them out somewhere else. The religious
history of many countries and of long centuries is a commentary
written out in great and tragic characters on the profound truth
that lies in the simple incident of my text. Look at Palestine, look
at Asia Minor, at the places where the Gospel first won its
triumphs; look at Eastern Europe. What is the present condition of
these once fair lands but an illustration of this principle, that
Christ who comes to men in His grace is kept only by the earnestness
and faithfulness and desire of the men to whom He comes?

And you and I, dear brethren, both as members of a Christian
community and in our individual capacity, have our religious
blessings on the same conditions as Ephesus and Constantinople had
theirs, and may fling them away by the same negligence as has ruined
large tracts of the world through long ages of time. Christ will
certainly go unless you keep Him.

Then further, notice from my text this other thought, that Christ
seeks by His action to stimulate our desires for Him.

'He made as though He would have gone further.' But while His feet were
directed to the road His heart remained with His two fellow-travellers
whom He was apparently leaving, and His wish was that the sight of His
retiring figure might kindle in their hearts great outgoings of desire
to which He would so gladly yield. It is the same action on His part,
only under a slightly different form, but actuated by the same motive
and the same in substance, as we find over and over again in the
gospels. You remember the instances. I need only refer to them in a word.

Here is one: the dark lake, the rising moon behind the Eastern
hills, a figure coming out of the gloom across the stormy sea, and
when He reached the tossing fishing cobble it seemed as if He would
have passed by; and He would, but that the cry flung out over the
dark water stopped Him.

Here are two blind men sitting by the roadside crying 'Thou Son of
David, have mercy upon us.' Not a word, not even a glance over His
shoulder, no stopping of His resolved stride; onwards towards
Jerusalem, Pilate, and Calvary. Because He did not heed their cry?
Because He did not infinitely long to help them? No. The purpose of
His apparent indifference was attained when 'they cried the more
earnestly, Thou Son of David, have mercy upon us.'

Here is another. A woman half mad with anguish for her demon-ridden
daughter, calling after Him with the shrill shriek of Eastern sorrow
and disturbing the fine nerves of the disciples, but causing no
movements nor any sign that He even heard, or if He heard, heeded,
the ear-piercing and heart-moving cries. Why was that ear which was
always open to the call of misery closed now? Because He wished to
bring her to such an agony of desire as might open her heart very
wide for an amplitude of blessing; and so He let her cry, knowing
that the longer she called the more she would wish, and that the
more she wished the more He would bestow.

And that is what He does with us all sometimes: seeming to leave our
wishes and our yearnings all unnoticed. Then the devil says to us,
'What's the use of crying to Him? He does not hear you.' But faith
hears the promise: 'Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it,' though
to sense there seems to be 'no voice nor any that answered.'

Christ has no other reason in any of the delays and trying
prolongations of His answers than to make us capable of larger
blessing, because delay deepens our longing. He is infinitely
wishful to-day, as He was on that Resurrection evening, to draw near
to every heart and pour upon it the whole sunlit cataract of the
mighty fact that He lives to bless. But He cannot come to us unless
we desire Him, and He cannot give to us more of Himself than we
wish; and therefore He is obliged, as the first thing, to make our
desires larger and fuller, and then He will answer them. 'He could
there do no mighty works because of their unbelief.'

Our faithlessness limits His power; our faith is the measure of our
capacity.

Lastly, the text reminds us that Jesus Christ is glad to be forced.

'They _constrained_': a very strong word, kindred to the other
one which our Lord Himself employs when He speaks about the 'kingdom
of heaven suffering violence, and the violent taking it by force.'
That bold expression gives emphatic utterance to the truth that
there is a real power lodged in the desires of humble hearts that
desire Him, so as that they can prescribe to Him what He shall do
for them and how much of Himself He shall give them. Our feebleness
can in a measure set in motion and regulate the energy of
Omnipotence. 'They constrained Him.'

Do you remember who it was that was called 'a prince with God' and
how he won the title and was able to prevail? We, too, have the
charter given to us that we can--I speak it reverently--guide God's
hand and compel Omnipotence to bless us. We master Nature by
yielding to it and utilising its energies. We have power with God by
yielding to Him and conforming our desires to the longings of His
heart and asking the things that are according to His will.
'Concerning the work of My hands _command_ ye Me.' And what we,
leaning on His promise and in unison with His mighty purpose of
love, desire, _that_ will as certainly come down to us as every
stream must pour into the lowest levels and fill the depressions in
its course.

You can make sure of Christ if two things are yours. He will always
remain with us if, on the one hand, we wish for Him honestly and
really to be with us all the day long, which would be extremely
inconvenient for some of us; and if, on the other hand, we take care
not to do the acts nor cultivate the tempers which drive Him away.
For 'How can two walk together except they be agreed?' And how can
we ask Him to come in and sit down in a house which is all full of
filth and worldliness? Turn the demons out and open the door, and
anything is more likely than that the door will stand gaping and the
doorway be unfilled by the meek presence of the Christ that enters
in.

The old prayer is susceptible of application to our community and to
our individual hearts. When Israel prayed, 'Arise, O Lord, into Thy
rest; Thou and the Ark of Thy strength,' the answer was prompt and
certain. 'This is My rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have
desired it.' But the divine desire was not accomplished till the
human desire opened the Temple gates for the entrance of the Ark.

'He made as though He would have gone further'; but they constrained
Him, and then He entered in.




THE MEAL AT EMMAUS


    'And it came to pass, as He sat at meat with them, He
    took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to
    them. 31. And their eyes were opened, and they knew Him;
    and He vanished out of their sight.'--LUKE xxiv. 30, 31.

Perhaps the most striking characteristic of the Gospel accounts of
our Lord's intercourse with His disciples, in the interval between
the Resurrection and His Ascension, is the singular union of mystery
and simplicity which they present. There is a certain air of
remoteness and depth over all the intercourse, as if it meant more,
and was intended to teach more, than appears on the surface, as I
believe it was intended. And yet, at the same time, there is, along
with that, in most singular combination, the very utmost simplicity,
amounting almost sometimes to baseness and rudeness, as for
instance, here. Some poor house of entertainment, possibly, at any
rate, some poor man's house, in a little country village; the
company these two talkative, and yet despondent disciples; the fare
and the means of manifestation a bit of barley-bread; and out of
these materials are woven lessons that will live in the Church in
all ages. 'He took bread and blessed it, and brake.' These are the
words, almost verbatim, of the institution of the Lord's Supper.
They are the words, almost verbatim, with which more than one of the
Evangelists describes the miraculous feeding of the four and the
five thousand; and it was the old familiar act, expressed by the
Evangelist by the old familiar words, that opened the disciples'
eyes, and they knew Him. How simply the process of discovery is
told! It was quite natural that a casual stranger upon the road
should not say who He was; it was quite as natural that when He
entered into the closer relationship of sitting with the disciples
at the table, and sharing their hospitality, they should expect, as
indeed they did expect, that as they had been frank with Him, He
would be frank with them, and they would find out now who this
unknown teacher and apparent Rabbi was. And so, as it would seem, in
silence, or at least with nothing of any moment, the meal went on,
but all at once, at some point in the meal, the guest assumes the
position of the master of the house, takes upon Himself the function
and office of host, interrupts the progress of the meal by the
solemn prayer of blessing; and whilst the singularity of the action
drew their attention, perhaps some little peculiarity in His way of
doing it, or something else, opened the door for a whole stream of
associations and half-dormant remembrances to rush in, and they
remembered what they had heard of the last supper,--for these two
were not at it,--and they remembered what they had seen,--miraculous
feedings; and they remembered no doubt how He had always done with
them in the happy old days when He communed with them. At all
events, by the natural action of breaking the bread and sharing
it amongst them, the subjective hindrances which had stood in the
way of their recognising Him dropped away like scales from their
eyes, and they beheld Him, and then, without a word, He vanished out
of their sight, and the wearied, hungry men girded up their loins
and rushed back to Jerusalem to tell the brethren the story.

Now, I think that, taking the event as it stands before us, and
especially marking the obviously intended parallelism in expression,
and I hare no doubt in action, between former miracles, the
institution of the Lord's Supper, and this neither sacramental nor
religious meal in the little village--I think we may get some
lessons worth pondering.

I confine myself quite simply to the three points of the narrative:--

  The distribution of the bread;
  The discovery;
  And the disappearance.

'He took bread and blessed it, and brake and gave to them, and their
eyes were opened, and they knew Him; and He vanished out of their
sight.'

I. Look, then, for a moment or two at the thoughts which I think are
intended to be conveyed to us by that first point--the action of
breaking and distributing the bread.

I have said, incidentally, in my previous remarks, that there is a
singular air of remoteness, removedness, mystery, reticence, about
our Lord's relations to His disciples in the interval of these forty
days; and I suppose that that change from the frankness of His
former relations and the close contact in which the Apostles and
disciples had been brought during all the previous three years--I
suppose that that was intended to be the beginning of the
preparation of weaning and preparing them to do without Him
altogether. And along with that removedness, there is also, as I
take it, and as I have already said, a great depth of significance
about the whole of these events which lead people to deal with them
as being symbols, types, exhibitions on a material platform of great
spiritual truths; and although the habit of finding symbolical
meaning in historical events, especially as applied to the Gospels,
has been full of all manner of mischief, yet that there is that
element is not to be denied; and whilst we have to keep it down and
be very careful in our application of it, lest in finding ingenious
fanciful meanings, we lose the plain prose, which is always the best
and the most important, yet that element is there, and we have to
take heed that we do not push the denial of it to excess, as the
recognition of it has often been pushed. And so, from these two
points of view. I think the thing should be looked at. The plain
prose, then, of the matter is this--that at a given point in this
humble road-side meal, our Lord having been guest, having been
constrained to enter in by the loving importunity of these people,
becomes the host, takes upon Himself the position of the head of the
household, and in that position so acts as to bring to the disciples'
remembrance former deeds of miracles, and the institution of the
ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and that was the means of their
recognition.

Well, then, if so, I think that we may say fairly that in this
breaking and distribution of the bread, there is first of all this
lesson--the old familiar blessed intercourse between Him and them
had not been put an end to then by all that had passed during these
three mysterious days; but they were as they used to be in regard to
the closeness of their relationship and the reality of their
intercourse. No doubt, in the former years, Christ had been in the
habit of always acting as the Head of the little family. When they
gathered for their frugal meals, He was the master, they the
disciples; He the elder brother, and they gathered about Him. And He
assumes the old position; and if we will try for a moment to throw
ourselves into their position and to see with their eyes, we shall
understand the pathetic beauty--I was going to say the poetic
beauty, but perhaps you would not like that word to be applied to
the history of our Redeemer--the pathetic beauty of the deed. They
had been thinking of themselves as forsaken of Him; the grave had
broken off all their sweet and blessed intercourse; they were alone
now. 'We trusted that it had been He which should have redeemed
Israel.' He is gone! Even the poor consolation of looking upon the
place where He lies is denied us; for whatever may be doubtful this
is certain, that the grave is open and the body is not there. And so
they felt lost and scattered; and there comes to them this gleam of
consolation--I take my place amongst you just as I used to do; 'I am
He that liveth and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore.'
We used to sit together at the table; let that be repeated here once
more that you may learn, and all the world through you may learn,
that the accident of death, which affects only the externals of
society, has no power over the reality of the bond that knits even
two human hearts with love together, still less a power over the
reality of the bond that binds us to our Master. Death vanishes as a
nothing in their intercourse;  they stand where they were; the
fellowship is unbroken; the society is the same; all that there used
to be of love and friendship, of peaceful concord, of true
association; it abides for ever!

Thus, heavy with meaning and full of immortal hope may be the
simplest act wrought with the simplest materials, when the dead
Christ who lives takes His old place in the midst of His disciples,
and once again as He used to do, parts the bread between them. And,
dear brethren, though it has nothing to do with my present purpose,
may this thought not add a wider application to our text; may it not
be a comfort and hope to many of us to remember that the grim shadow
that stretches athwart our path, and gathers into its blackness so
many of our sunny sparkling joys, and takes the light and the
movement and the colour out of them, is only a shadow, and that the
substance lives in the shadow as it used to live in the sunshine,
and passes through the shadow and comes out on the other side,
blazing in more than its former lustre, and rich with more than its
former preciousness? For all whom we have loved and lost, the death
which was a nothing in regard to Christ's intercourse with His
disciples, is a nothing, too, in regard to our real intercourse and
sense of society and unity with them. They live in Him, and they are
more worthy to be loved than ever they were before. He who has
conquered Death for Himself has conquered it for us all; and every
true and pure human affection rooted in Him is as immortal as the
love that binds souls to Himself. Therefore, let us remember that
they sit at His table, and that we shall sit there some day too.

II. Well, then, still further, another idea that I think belongs to
this first part of our thoughts as to the profound significance of our
Lord's here assuming the office and function of host, is this--we are
thereby taught the same lesson that we are taught by His institution
of the Communion, and taught by the whole details of His relation to
His disciples upon earth--that the true idea of the relation which
results from Him and His Presence is that of the Family.

He takes His place at the head of the table; He is the Lord of the
household, though it be but a household of two men, and they belong
to the family and the society which He founds. Now it seems to me
that next to the great lesson which the Lord's Supper teaches us in
reference to our individual dependence upon Him, His death as being
all our hope and all our life, this is the most important lesson
that it teaches--the simplicity of the rite, the fact that it was
based upon the Jewish rite, which was a purely domestic one; the
fact that our Lord steps into the place of the head of the household
by His very presiding at the Passover service amongst His disciples;
the fact that He parts the common materials of the common meal and
uses them and it as the symbols of His death, and of our life
thereby--all that teaches us the same thing which the whole strain
of His teaching and the whole strain of the New Testament sets
forth--that the Church of Christ is then understood when we think of
it as being one family in Him, bound together by the bands of a
close brotherhood, relying upon Him as the fountain of its life;
having fellowship with one Father through that elder Brother;
pledged, therefore, to all fraternal kindness and frankness of
communion and of mutual help, and gladdened by the hope of
journeying onwards to Him. We cannot, of course, apply the analogy
round and round; but of all the forms of human association which
Christ has honoured and glorified by laying His hand upon them, and
showing that they are symbols of the society that He founds, and of
which He is the centre, it is not the kingdom, but the family that
is the nearest approach to the Church of the living God.

And you and I, Christian men and women, if we come and sit at that
table of our Lord, let us remember that we thereby declare, not only
for ourselves that we enter into individual relations of reliance
upon Him, and draw our life from Him, but that we pledge ourselves
to the family bond, to be true to the brotherhood, that we declare
ourselves the sons of God and the brethren of all that are partakers
of the like precious faith. The thing has become a word, a name
amongst us. I wonder if any of you remember the bitter saying of one
of our modern teachers; he says that he found out somehow or other
how much less 'brethren' in the Church meant than 'brothers' out of
it. Let us learn the lesson and take the rebuke, and remember that
if the Lord's Supper means anything, it means that we belong to the
household of faith, and are members of the great family in heaven
and in earth.

III. Well, then, still further connected with this first idea of the
lesson and significance of the distribution of the bread, I think we
may take another consideration, which is, in fact, only another
application of the one I have already been suggesting--Where Christ
is invited as a guest, He becomes the host.

They constrained Him to abide with them; they made Him welcome to
their rude hospitality. It was little--a hut where poor men lay, a
bit of barley-bread. But it was theirs, and they gave it Him; and He
entered in and supped with them, and then, in the middle of it, the
relations were inverted, and they that had been showing the
hospitality became the guests, and the table that had been theirs
became His. 'And He took the bread and gave it to them.' You have
the same inversion of relation in that first miracle that He wrought
at Cana of Galilee, where invited as a guest, at a point in the
entertainment He provides the supplies for the further conduct of
it. You remember the words which contain the spiritual application
of the same thought--'Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any
man open the door, I will enter in and sup with him and he with Me.'
To put away the metaphor, it amounts to this--our Master never comes
empty-handed. Where He is invited, He comes to bestow; where He is
welcomed, He comes with His gifts; where we say, 'Do Thou take what
I offer,' He says, 'Do thou take Myself.' All His requirements are
veiled promises; all His commandments are assurances of His gifts.
He bestows that He may receive; He seems to take that He may enrich.
They that give to Christ receive back again more than all that they
gave, according to the profound words, 'There is no man that hath
left father or mother, or wife or children, or houses or lands, for
My sake and the Gospel's, but shall receive a hundredfold more in
this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.' The Christ
that is asked to come in order to receive, abides in order to
bestow.

And then there is a second point, going on with the flow of this
little narrative before us, about which a word or two may be said.
The consequence of this assumption of the position of master, host,
bestower is--'Their eyes were opened, and they knew Him.' The
discovery of His person follows on the distribution of His gifts.

Now, there is one point to be remarked before I deal with the
lessons which I think are capable of being gathered from this part
of our subject, and that is, that this narrative gives no sort of
support, as it seems to me, to the ordinary notion that, subsequent
to the Resurrection, there had passed upon our Lord's corporeal
frame any change whatsoever as the commencement of the glorification
of His earthly body. If you observe, the course of the narrative
takes pains to point out to us distinctly, that whatever may have
been the reason why they did not recognise Him at first, that reason
was entirely in them, and not at all in Him. It is not that He was
changed; it is that 'their eyes were holden'; and when they did
recognise Him, it is not that any change whatsoever is recorded as
having passed upon Him, but 'their eyes were opened, and they knew
Him.' And the same thing may be said, as I believe, about the whole
of the appearances, mysterious as they were, of our Lord, in the
interval between the Resurrection and the Ascension. I do not think,
for my part, (although I would by no means speak with confidence
about a matter that is so fragmentarily dealt with in Scripture),
but I do not think, for my part, that the narrative gives any
support whatsoever to the idea of any change analogous to that which
takes place upon us at our resurrection, having begun to take place
upon our Lord so long as He remained upon earth. The Ascension and
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, in His case, are parts of one
process. He was raised with the body with which He was crucified; He
ascended up on high, and there the glorification, as far as
Scripture teaches, is, I conceive, commenced. At all events, there
is nothing in our narrative to support the idea of an incipient
transformation having begun with the Resurrection.

But, passing by that, which has nothing to do with my main present
purpose, I may notice just one or two considerations in reference to
this discovery of our Lord. And the first and main one that I would
suggest is this--Where Christ is loved and desired, the veriest
trifles of common life may be the means of His discovery.  We know not
what was the special point which brought dormant remembrance to life
again, and quickened the associations of the two, so that they knew
Jesus; even as we do not know what was the hindrance, whether
supernatural or whether by reason of their own fault, which prevented
the earlier recognition; but this at least we see, that in all
probability something in the manner of taking the bread and breaking
it, the well-remembered action of the Master, brought back to mind
the whole of the former relation, and a rush of associations and
memories pulled away the veil and scaled off the mists from their
eyes. And so, dear brethren, if we have loving, and waiting, and
Christ-desiring spirits, everything in this world--the common meal,
the events of every day, the most veritable trifles of our earthly
relationships--they will all have hooks and barbs, as it were, which
will draw after them thoughts of Him. There is nothing so small but
that to it there may be attached some filament which will bring after
it the whole majesty and grace of Christ and His love. Whether ye eat
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all in remembrance of Him, and do
all to His glory. Oh, if we had in our inmost spirits a closer
fellowship with Him, and a truer relation to Him, we should be more
quick of apprehension. And, as in regard to those that we love, when
they are away from us, the fold of a garment, some bit of cloth lying
about the room, something upon the table, some common incident of the
day that used to be done in company with them, may bring a flood of
memories that sometimes is too strong for a weak heart, so with the
Lord, if we loved Him--everything would be (as it is to those whose
ears are purged) vocal with His name, and everything would be flushed
with the light that falls from His face, and everything would suffice
to remind us of our love, our hope, our joy. Especially let us
remember that He has entrusted--with strange humility and with
wonderful knowledge of us, and with the truest sympathy and tenderness
for our weakness--He has entrusted a large portion of our most
spiritual remembrance and recognition of Him to material things. Did it
ever strike you what a depth of what I may call Christ's condescension
there lay in this? 'Take this bread and this wine, and if you will not
remember Me because I loved you so well, if you will not remember Me
because I died for you, if earthly things and material realities will
drive Me out of your thoughts, at least remember Me because and when
earthly things and material realities become My agents and My
memorials. If you forget the Cross, perhaps a bit of bread will remind
you of Me; and I am not too proud to spurn the remembrance that roots
itself even in the material things of earth and by such means as that.'
'He took the bread and brake it.' They had listened to all His words
upon the road, and it never occurred to them who He was; they had walked
beside Him all day long, and even their burning hearts did not make them
suspect that it was the Master. It must needs be so--they whom wisdom
and truth and His spiritual Presence cannot teach to recognise, may be
led to recognise Him by the movement of His hands with the barley loaf,
and some intonation of His voice in blessing it. 'This do in remembrance
of Me' is the word of that deep pity that knows our frame and remembers
that we are dust, and is a word of the most marvellous condescension
that ever was uttered in human ears.

IV. And then there is the final consideration here upon which I
touch but for a moment. The distribution and the discovery are
followed by the disappearance of the Lord, 'They knew Him, and'--and
what? And He let their hearts run over in thankful words? No. 'They
knew Him,' and so they all went back to Jerusalem happy together?
No. 'They knew Him, and--He vanished out of their sight.' Yes, for
two reasons. First, because when Christ's Presence is recognised
sense may be put aside. 'It is expedient for you that I go away.'
You and I, dear brethren, need no visible manifestation; we have
lost nothing though we have lost the bodily Presence of our Master.
It is more than made up to us, as He Himself assures us, and as we
shall see ourselves if we think for a moment, by the clearer
knowledge of His spiritual verity and stature, by the deeper
experience of the profounder aspects of His mission and message, by
the indwelling Spirit, and by the knowledge of Him working evermore
for us all. His going is a step in advance. 'If I go not away the
Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart, I will send Him
unto you.' The earthly manifestation was only the basis and the
platform for that which is purer and deeper in kind, and more
precious and powerful; and when the platform has been laid, then
there is no need for the continuance thereof. And so, when He was
manifested to the heart He disappeared from the eyes; and we, who
have not beheld Him, stand upon no lower level than they who did,
for the voice of our experience is, 'Whom having not seen we love;
in whom, though now we see Him not, yet believing, we rejoice with
joy that is unspeakable and full of glory.'

And for another reason.--When Christ is discerned there is work to
be done. 'Their eyes were opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished
out of their sight; and ... they rose up that same hour; and
returned to Jerusalem' and said, He was known to us in breaking of
bread, and He talked with us by the way. Yes, the vision of Christ
binds us to work, and while the more close and intimate and silent
communion has its rights and its place in life, it is never to be
made a substitute for the active exercise of our Christian vocation
to bear witness of Him, and to tell His name to those who need the
consolation of His Resurrection, and the joyful news that He lives
to bless. So then that meal by the wayside may stand as type and
symbol of the way in which we, like the two pedestrians on the road
and at the table, may have heart intercourse with Jesus, and may be
impelled thereby to labour for Him.

There was another time, after the Resurrection, when in like manner
we read that our Lord took bread, and blessed and brake and gave it
to them; and that was in that mysterious meal upon the shores of the
Galilean Lake, which has always been recognised as having a
symbolical meaning--though the exposition and detail have often been
exaggerated and made absurd. In the one case it was two travellers
who met their Lord; it was in an inn that the recognition took
place; it was a brief moment of vision, followed by disappearance,
and the disappearance led on to work; but in the other story it was
when the morning broke that the Lord was manifest; it was after the
night of toil that His form appeared; His words to them were, 'Bring
of the fruits of your labours and lay them upon the beach at My
feet.' And in the light of the eternal morning, after the weary
night of toil, they who on earth in their journey and pilgrimage
have had Him walking with them as third in their sweet society, and
sitting with them in the tents and changeful residences of earth,
may expect to find Him waiting for them upon the shore; and, as one
says, 'It is the Lord!' and another dashes through the water to
reach Christ, the invitation to all of them will be, 'Come and sit
with Me at My table in My kingdom; I provide the meal, and you add
to it by that which you have caught.' 'They rest from their labours
and their works do follow them.' And so 'they go no more out, but
are ever with the Lord.'




PETER ALONE WITH JESUS


    'The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.'
    --LUKE xxiv. 34.

The other appearances of the risen Lord to individuals on the day of
Resurrection are narrated with much particularity, and at
considerable length. John gives us the lovely account of our Lord's
conversation with Mary Magdalene, Luke gives us in full detail the
story of the interview with the two travellers on the road to
Emmaus. Here is another appearance, known to 'the eleven, and them
that were with them' on the Resurrection evening, and enumerated by
Paul in his list of the appearances of the Lord, the account of
which was the common gospel of himself and all the others, and yet
deep silence is preserved in regard to it. No word escaped Peter's
lips as to what passed in the conversation between the denier and
his Lord. That is very significant.

The other appearances of the risen Lord to individuals on the day of
Resurrection suggest their own reasons. He appeared first to Mary
Magdalene because she loved much. The love that made a timid woman
brave, and the sorrow that filled her heart, to the exclusion of
everything else, drew Jesus to her. The two on the road to Emmaus
were puzzled, honest, painful seekers after truth. It was worth
Christ's while to spend hours of that day of Resurrection in
clearing, questioning, and confirming sincere minds. Does not this
other appearance explain itself? The brief spasm of cowardice and
denial had changed into penitence when the Lord looked, and the
bitter tears that fell were not only because of the denial, but
because of the wound of that sharp arrow, the poisoned barb of which
we are happy if we have not felt the thought--'He will never know
how ashamed and miserable I am; and His last look was reproach, and
I shall never see His face any more.' To respond to, and to satisfy,
love, to clear and to steady thought, to soothe the agony of a
penitent, were worthy works for the risen Lord. I venture to think
that such a record of the use of such a day bears historical truth
on its very face, because it is so absolutely unlike what myth-making
or hallucination, or the excited imagination of enthusiasts would
have produced, if these had been the sources of the story of the
Resurrection. But apart from that, I wish in this sermon to try to
gather the suggestions that come to us from this interview, and from
the silence which is observed concerning them.

With regard to--

I. The fact of the appearance itself.

We can only come into the position rightly to understand its
precious significance, if we try to represent to ourselves the state
of mind of the man to whom it was granted. I have already touched
upon that; let me, in the briefest possible way, recapitulate. As I
have said, the momentary impulse to the cowardly crime passed, and
left a melted heart, true penitence, and profound sorrow. One sad
day slowly wore away. Early on the next came the message which
produced an effect on Peter so great, that the gospel, which in some
sense is his gospel (I mean that 'according to Mark') alone contains
the record of it--the message from the open grave: 'Tell my
disciples _and Peter_ that I go before you into Galilee.' There
followed the sudden rush to the grave, when the feet made heavy by a
heavy conscience were distanced by the light step of happy love, and
'the other disciple did outrun Peter.' The more impulsive of the two
dashed into the sepulchre, just as he afterwards threw himself over
the side of the boat, and floundered through the water to get to his
Lord's feet, whilst John was content with looking, just as he
afterwards was content to sit in the boat and say, 'It is the Lord.'
But John's faith, too, outran Peter's, and he departed 'believing,'
whilst Peter only attained to go away 'wondering.' And so another
day wore away, and at some unknown hour in it, Jesus stood before
Peter alone.

What did that appearance say to the penitent man? Of course, it said
to him what it said to all the rest, that death was conquered. It
lifted his thoughts of his Master. It changed his whole atmosphere
from gloom to sunshine, but it had a special message for him. It
said that no fault, no denial, bars or diverts Christ's love. Peter,
no doubt, as soon as the hope of the Resurrection began to dawn upon
him, felt fear contending with his hope, and asked himself, 'If He
is risen, will He ever speak to me again?' And now here He is with a
quiet look on His face that says, 'Notwithstanding thy denial, see,
I have come to thee.'

Ah, brethren! the impulsive fault of a moment, so soon repented of,
so largely excusable, is far more venial than many of our denials.
For a continuous life in contradiction to our profession is a
blacker crime than a momentary fall, and they who, year in and year
out, call themselves Christians, and deny their profession by the
whole tenor of their lives, are more deeply guilty than was the
Apostle, But Jesus Christ comes to us, and no sin of ours, no denial
of ours, can bar out His lingering, His reproachful, and yet His
restoring, love and grace. All sin is inconsistent with the
Christian profession. Blessed be God; we can venture to say that no
sin is incompatible with it, and none bars off wholly the love that
pours upon us all. True; we may shut it out. True; so long as the
smallest or the greatest transgression is unacknowledged and
unrepented, it forms a non-conducting medium around us, and isolates
us from the electric touch of that gracious love. But also true; it
is there hovering around us, seeking an entrance. If the door be
shut, still the knocking finger is upon it, and the great heart of
the Knocker is waiting to enter. Though Peter had been a denier,
because he was a penitent the Master came to him. No fault, no sin,
cuts us off from the love of our Lord.

And then the other great lesson, closely connected with this, but
yet capable of being treated separately for a moment, which we
gather from the fact of the interview, is that Jesus Christ is
always near the sorrowing heart that confesses its evil. He knew of
Peter's penitence, if I might so say, in the grave; and, therefore,
risen, His feet hasted to comfort and to soothe him. As surely as
the shepherd hears the bleat of the lost sheep in the snowdrift, as
surely as the mother hears the cry of her child, so surely is a
penitent heart a magnet which draws Christ, in all His potent
fullness and tenderness, to itself. He that heard and knew the tears
of the denier, and his repentance, when in the dim regions of the
dead, no less hears and knows the first faint beginnings of sorrow
for sin, and bends down from His seat on the right hand of God,
saying, 'I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.' No fault bars
Christ's love. Christ is ever near the penitent spirit; and whilst
he is yet a great way off, He has compassion, and runs and falls on
his neck and kisses him.

Now let us look at--

II. The interview of which we know nothing.

We know nothing of what did pass; we know what must have passed.
There is only one way by which a burdened soul can get rid of its
burden. There is only one thing that a conscience-stricken denier
can say to his Saviour. And--blessed be God!--there is only one
thing that a Saviour can say to a conscience-stricken denier. There
must have been penitence with tears; there must have been full
absolution and remission. And so we are not indulging in baseless
fancies when we say that we know what passed in that conversation,
of which no word ever escaped the lips of either party concerned. So
then, with that knowledge, just let me dwell upon one or two
considerations suggested.

One is that the consciousness of Christ's love, uninterrupted by our
transgression, is the mightiest power to deepen penitence and the
consciousness of unworthiness. Do you not think that when the
Apostle saw in Christ's face, and heard from His lips, the full
assurance of forgiveness, he was far more ashamed of himself than he
had ever been in the hours of bitterest remorse? So long as there
blends with the sense of my unworthiness any doubt about the free,
full, unbroken flow of the divine love to me, my sense of my own
unworthiness is disturbed. So long as with the consciousness of
demerit there blends that thought--which often is used to produce
the consciousness, viz., the dread of consequences, the fear of
punishment--my consciousness of sin is disturbed. But sweep away
fear of penalty, sweep away hesitation as to the divine love, then I
am left face to face with the unmingled vision of my own evil, and
ten thousand times more than ever before do I recognise how black my
transgression has been; as the prophet puts it with profound truth,
'Thou shalt be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy sins, when I am pacified towards thee for all
that thou hast done.' If you would bring a man to know how bad he
is, do not brandish a whip before his face, or talk to him about an
angry God. You may bray a fool in a mortar, and his foolishness will
not depart from him. You may break a man down with these violent
pestles, and you will do little more. But get him, if I may continue
the metaphor, not into the mortar, but set him in the sunshine of
the divine love, and that will do more than break, it will melt the
hardest heart that no pestle would do anything but triturate. The
great evangelical doctrine of full and free forgiveness through
Jesus Christ produces a far more vital, vigorous, transforming
recoil from transgression than anything besides. 'Do we make void
the law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.'

Then, further, another consideration may be suggested, and that is
that the acknowledgment of sin is followed by immediate forgiveness.
Do you think that when Peter turned to his Lord, who had come from
the grave to soothe him, and said, 'I have sinned,' there was any
pause before He said, 'and thou art forgiven'? The only thing that
keeps the divine love from flowing into a man's heart is the barrier
of unforgiven, because unrepented, sin. So soon as the acknowledgment
of sin takes away the barrier--of course, by a force as natural as
gravitation--the river of God's love flows into the heart. The
consciousness of forgiveness may be gradual; the fact of forgiveness
is instantaneous. And the consciousness may be as instantaneous as
the fact, though it often is not. 'I believe in the forgiveness of
sins'; and I believe that a man, that you, may at one moment be held
and bound by the chains of sin, and that at the next moment, as when
the angel touched the limbs of this very Apostle in prison, the
chains may drop from off ankles and wrists, and the prisoner may be
free to follow the angel into light and liberty. Sometimes the change
is instantaneous, and there is no reason why it should not be an
instantaneous change, experienced at this moment, by any man or woman
among us. Sometimes it is gradual. The Arctic spring comes with a
leap, and one day there is thick-ribbed ice, and a few days after
there are grass and flowers. A like swift transformation is within
the limits of possibility for any of us, and--blessed be God! within
the experience of a good many of us. There is no reason why it should
not be that of each of us, as well as of this Apostle.

Then there is one other thought that I would suggest, viz., that the
man who is led through consciousness of sin and experience of
uninterrupted love which is forgiveness, is thereby led into a
higher and a nobler life. Peter's bitter fall, Peter's gracious
restoration, were no small part of the equipment which made him what
we see him in the days after Pentecost--when the coward that had
been ashamed to acknowledge his Master, and all whose impulsive and
self-reliant devotion passed away before a flippant servant-girl's
tongue, stood before the rulers of Israel, and said: 'Whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye!' The sense of sin, the assurance of pardon, shatter a
man's unwholesome self-confidence, and develop his self-reliance
based upon his trust in Jesus Christ. The consciousness of sin, and
the experience of pardon, deepen and make more operative in life the
power of the divine love. Thus, the publicans and the harlots do go
into the Kingdom of God many a time before the Pharisees. So let us
all be sure that even our sins and faults may be converted into
stepping stones to higher things.

III. Lastly, notice the deep silence in which this interview is
shrouded.

I have already pointed to the occupations of that Resurrection day
as bearing on their face the marks of veracity. It seems to me that
if the story of the Resurrection is not history, the talk between
the denier and the Master would have been a great deal too tempting
a subject for romancers of any kind to have kept their hands off. If
you read the apocryphal gospels you will see how eager they are to
lay hold of any point in the true gospels, and spin a whole farrago
of rubbish round about it. And do you think they could ever have let
this incident alone without spoiling it by expanding it, and putting
all manner of vulgarities into their story about it? But the men who
told the story were telling simple facts, and when they did not know
anything they said nothing.

But why did not Peter say anything about it? Because nobody had
anything to do with it but himself  and his Master. It was his
business, and no one else's. The other scene by the lake reinstated
him in his office, and it was public because it concerned others
also; but what passed when he was restored to his faith was of no
concern to any one but the Restorer and the restored. And so, dear
friends, a religion which has a great deal to say about its
individual experiences is in very slippery places. The less you
think about your emotions, and eminently the less you talk about
them, the sounder, the truer, and the purer they will be. Goods in a
shop-window get fly-blown very quickly, and lose their lustre. All
the deep secrets of a man's life, his love for his Lord, the way by
which he came to Him, his penitence for his sin, like his love for
his wife, had better speak in deeds than in words to others. Of
course while that is true on one side, we are not to forget the
other side. Reticence as to the secret things of my own personal
experience is never to be extended so as to include silence as to
the fact of my Christian profession. Sometimes it is needful, wise,
and Christlike for a man to lift the corner of the bridal curtain,
and let in the day to some extent, and to say, 'Of whom I am chief,
but I obtained mercy.' Sometimes there is no such mighty power to
draw others to the faith which we would fain impart, as to say,
'Whether this Man be a sinner or no, I know not; but one thing I
know, that whereas I was blind now I see.' Sometimes--always--a man
must use his own personal experience, cast into general forms, to
emphasise his profession, and to enforce his appeals. So very
touchingly, if you will turn to Peter's sermons in the Acts, you
will find that he describes himself there (though he does not hint
that it is himself) when he appeals to his countrymen, and says, 'Ye
denied the Holy One and the Just.' The personal allusion would make
his voice vibrate as he spoke, and give force to the charge.
Similarly, in the letter which goes by his name--the second of the
two Epistles of Peter--there is one little morsel of evidence that
makes one inclined to think that it is his, notwithstanding the
difficulties in the way, viz., that he sums up all the sins of the
false teachers whom he is denouncing in this: 'Denying the Lord that
bought them.' But with these limitations, and remembering that the
statement is not one to be unconditionally and absolutely put, let
the silence with regard to this interview teach us to guard the
depths of our own Christian lives.

Now, dear brethren, have you ever gone apart with Jesus Christ, as
if He and you were alone in the world? Have you ever spread out all
your denials and faults before Him? Have you ever felt the swift
assurance of His forgiving love, covering over the whole heap, which
dwindles as His hand lies upon it? Have you ever felt the increased
loathing of yourselves which comes with the certainty that He has
passed by all your sins? If you have not, you know very little about
Christ, or about Christianity (if I may use the abstract word) or
about yourselves; and your religion, or what you call your religion,
is a very shallow and superficial and inoperative thing. Do not
shrink from being alone with Jesus Christ. There is no better place
for a guilty man, just as there is no better place for an erring
child than its mother's bosom. When Peter had caught a dim glimpse
of what Jesus Christ was, he cried: 'Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord!' When he knew his Saviour and himself better, he
clung to Him because he was so sinful. Do the same, and He will say
to you: 'Son, thy sins be forgiven thee; Daughter, thy faith hath
made thee whole. Go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.'




THE TRIUMPHANT END


    'And as they thus spake, Jesus Himself stood in the
    midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.
    37. But they were terrified and affrighted, and
    supposed that they had seen a spirit. 38. And He said
    unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts
    arise in your hearts? 39. Behold My hands and My feet,
    that it is I Myself: handle Me, and see; for a spirit
    hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have. 40. And
    when He had thus spoken, He shewed them His hands and
    His feet. 41. And while they yet believed not for joy,
    and wondered, He said unto them, Have ye here any
    meat? 42. And they gave Him a piece of a broiled fish,
    and of an honeycomb. 43. And He took it, and did eat
    before them. 44. And He said unto them, These are the
    words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with
    you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were
    written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and
    in the psalms, concerning Me. 45. Then opened He their
    understanding, that they might understand the
    scriptures, 46. And said unto them, Thus it is written,
    and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
    the dead the third day: 47. And that repentance and
    remission of sins should be preached in His name among
    all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 48. And ye are
    witnesses of these things. 49. And, behold, I send the
    promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye in the
    city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from
    on high. 50. And He led them out as far as to Bethany;
    and He lifted up His hands, and blessed them. 51. And
    it came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted
    from them, and carried up into heaven. 52. And they
    worshipped Him, and returned to Jerusalem with great
    joy: 53. And were continually in the temple, praising
    and blessing God.'--LUKE xxiv. 36-53.

There are no marks of time in this passage, and, for anything that
appears, the narrative is continuous, and the Ascension might have
occurred on the evening of the Resurrection. But neither is there
anything to forbid interpreting this close of Luke's Gospel by the
fuller details contained in the beginning of his other treatise, the
Acts, where the space of forty days interposes between the
Resurrection and the Ascension. It is but reasonable to suppose that
an author's two books agree, when he gives no hint of change of
opinion, and it is reasonable to regard the narrative in this
passage as a summary of the whole period of forty days. If so, it
contains three things,--the first appearance of the risen Lord to
the assembled disciples (vs. 36-43), a condensed summary of the
teachings of the risen Lord (vs. 44-49), and an equally compressed
record of the Ascension (vs. 50-53).

I. The proofs of the Resurrection graciously granted to incredulous
love (vs. 36-43). The disciples were probably assembled in the upper
room, where the Lord's Supper had been instituted, and which became
their ordinary meeting-place (Acts i.) up till Pentecost. What
sights that room saw! There, when night had come, they were
discussing the strange reports of the Resurrection, when, all
suddenly, they saw Jesus, not coming or moving, but standing in the
midst. Had He come in unnoticed by them in their eager talk? The
doors were shut. How had this calm Presence become visible all at
once?

So little were they the enthusiastic, credulous people whom modern
theories which explain away the Resurrection assume them to have
been, that even His familiar voice in His familiar salutation,
tenfold more significant now than ever before, did not wake belief
that it was verily He. They fled to the ready refuge of supposing
that they saw 'a spirit.' Our Lord has no rebukes for their
incredulity, but patiently resumes His old task of instruction, and
condescends to let them have the evidence of two senses, not
shrinking from their investigating touch. When even these proofs
were seen by Him to be insufficient, He added the yet more cogent
one of 'eating before them.' Then they were convinced.

Now their incredulity is important, and the acknowledgment shows the
simple historical good faith of the narrator. A witness who at first
disbelieved is all the more trustworthy. These hopeless mourners who
had forgotten all Christ's prophecies of His Resurrection, and were
so fixed in their despair that the two from Emmaus could not so far
kindle a gleam of hope as to make them believe that their Lord stood
before them, were not the kind of people in whom hallucination would
operate, as modern deniers of the Resurrection make them out to have
been. What changed their mood? A fancy? Surely nothing less than a
solid fact. Hallucination may lay hold on a solitary, morbid mind,
but it does not attack a company, and it scarcely reaches to
fancying touch and the sight of eating.

Note Luke's explanation of the persistent incredulity, as being 'for
joy.' It is like his notice that the three in Gethsemane 'slept for
sorrow.' Great emotion sometimes produces effects opposite to what
might have been expected. Who can wonder that the mighty fact which
turned the black smoke of despair into bright flame should have
seemed too good to be true? The little notice brings the disciples
near to our experience and sympathy. Christ's loving forbearance and
condescending affording of more than sufficient evidence show how
little changed He was by Death and Resurrection. He is as little
changed by sitting at the right hand of God. Still He is patient
with our slow hearts. Still He meets our hesitating faith with
lavish assurances. Still He lets us touch Him, if not with the hand
of sense, with the truer contact of spirit, and we may have as firm
personal experience of the reality of His life and Presence as had
that wondering company in the upper room.

II. Verses 44-49 are best taken as a summary of the forty days'
teaching. They fall into stages which are distinctly separated.
First we have (ver. 44) the reiteration of Christ's earlier
teaching, which had been dark when delivered, and now flashed up
into light when explained by the event. 'These are my words which I
spake,' and which you did not understand or note. Jesus asserts that
He is the theme of all the ancient revelation. If we suppose that
the present arrangement of the Old Testament existed then, its
present three divisions are named; namely, Law, Prophets, and
Hagiographa, as represented by its chief member. But, in any case,
He lays His hand on the whole book, and declares that He, and His
Death as sacrifice, are inwrought into its substance. 'The testimony
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.' Whatever views we hold as to
the date and manner of origin of the Old Testament books, we miss
the most pregnant fact about them if we fail to recognise that they
all point onwards to Him.

Another stage is marked by that remarkable expression, 'He opened
their mind.' His teaching was not, like ours, from without only. He
gave not merely instruction, but inspiration. It was not enough to
spread truth before the disciples. He did more; He made them able to
receive it. He gives no lesser gifts from the throne than He gave in
the upper room, and we may receive, if our minds are kept expectant
and in touch with Him, the same inward eye to see wondrous things
out of the Word.

Verse 46, by its repetition of 'and He said,' seems to point to
another stage, in which the teaching as to the meaning of the Old
Testament passes into instructions for the future. Already Jesus had
hinted at the cessation of the old close intercourse in that
pathetic 'while I was yet with you,' and now He goes on to outline
the functions and equipment of the disciples in the future period of
His absence. As to the past sufferings, He indicates a double
necessity for them,--one based on their having been predicted;
another, deeper, based on the fitness of things. These sufferings
made the preaching of repentance and forgiveness possible, and
imposed on His followers the obligation of preaching His name to all
the world. Without the Cross His servants would have no gospel.
Having the Cross, His servants are bound to publish it everywhere.

The universal reach of His atonement is implied in the commission.
The sacrifice for the world's sin is the sole ground of remission of
sin, and is to be proclaimed to every creature. Mark that here the
same word is employed in connection with proclaiming Christ's Death
as in John's version of this saying (John xx. 23), which is misused
as a fortress of the priestly power of absolution. The plain
inference is that the servant's power of remission is exercised by
preaching the Master's death of expiation.

The ultimate reach of the message is to be to all nations; the
beginning of the universal gospel is to be at Jerusalem. The whole
history of the world and the Church lies between these two. By that
command to begin at Jerusalem, the connection of the Old with the
New is preserved, the Jewish prerogative honoured, the path made
easier for the disciples, the development of the Church brought into
unison with their natural sentiments and capacities.

The spirit of the commandment remains still imperative. 'The eyes of
a fool are in the ends of the earth.' A wise and Christlike
beneficence will not gaze far afield, and neglect things close at
our doors. The scoff at the supporters of foreign missions, as if
they quixotically went abroad when they should work at home, has
no point even as regards Christian practice, for it is the people
who work for the distant heathen who also toil for home ones; but it
has still less ground in regard to Christian conceptions of duty,
for the Lord of the harvest has bidden the reapers begin with the
fields nearest them.

The equipment for work is investiture with divine power. A partial
bestowment of the Spirit, which is the Father's promise, took place
while Jesus spoke. 'I send' refers to something done at the moment;
but the fuller clothing with that garment of power was to be waited
for in expectancy and desire. No man can do the Christian work of
witnessing for and of Christ without that clothing with power. It
was granted as an abiding gift on Pentecost. It needs perpetual
renewal. We may all have it. Without it, eloquence, learning, and
all else, are but as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.

III. Verses 50-53 give us the transcendent miracle which closes the
earthly life of Jesus. We cannot here enter on the large questions
which it raises, but must content ourselves with simply pointing to
the salient features of Luke's condensed account. The mention of the
place as 'over against Bethany' recalls the many memories of that
village where Jesus had found His nearest approach to a home, where
He had exercised His stupendous life-giving power, whence He had set
out to the upper room and the near Cross. His last act was to bless
His followers. He is the High-priest for ever, and these uplifted
hands meant a sacreder thing than the affectionate good wishes of a
departing friend. He gives the blessings which He invokes. His wish
is a conveyance of good.

The hands remained in the attitude of benediction while He ascended,
and the last sight of Him, as the cloud wrapped Him round, showed
Him shedding blessing from them. He continues that attitude and act
till He comes again. Two separate motions are described in verse 51.
He was parted from them,--that is, withdrew some little distance on
the mountain, that all might see, and none might hinder, His
departure; and 'was carried up into heaven' by a slow upward
movement, as the word implies. Contrast this with Elijah's rapture.
There was no need of fiery chariot or whirlwind to lift Jesus to the
heavens. He went up where He was before, returning to the glory
which He had with the Father before the world was. The end matches
the beginning. The supernatural birth corresponds with the
supernatural departure.

We have to think of that Ascension as the entrance of corporeal
humanity into the divine glory, as the beginning of His heavenly
activity for the world, as the token of His work being triumphantly
completed, as the prophecy and pledge of immortal life like His own
for all who love Him. Therefore we may share the joy which flooded
the lately sorrowful disciples' hearts, and, like them, should make
all life sacred, and be continually in the Temple, blessing God, and
have the deep roots of our lives hid with Christ in the glory.




CHRIST'S WITNESSES


    'Ye are witnesses of these things. 49. And, behold, I
    send the promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye
    in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
    power from on high.'--LUKE xxiv. 48, 49.

Luke's account of the Resurrection and subsequent forty days is so
constructed as to culminate in this appointment of the disciples to
their high functions and equipment for it, by the gift of the Holy
Spirit. The Evangelist has evidently in view his second 'treatise,'
and is here preparing the link of connection between it and the
Gospel. Hence this very condensed summary of many conversations lays
stress upon these points--the fulfilment of prophecy in Christ's
life and death; the world-wide destination of the blessings to be
proclaimed in His name; and the appointment and equipment of the
disciples.

The same notes are again struck in the beginning of the Acts of the
Apostles. The same charge to the disciples, when viewed in
connection with Christ's life on earth, may be considered as its end
and aim; and when viewed in connection with the history of the
Church, as its foundation and beginning. So that we are following in
the line plainly marked out for us by the Evangelist himself, when
we take these words as containing a charge and a gift as really
belonging to all Christians in this day as to the little group on
the road to Bethany, to whom they were first addressed on the
Ascension morning. There are, then, but two points to be looked at
in the words before us; the one the function of the Church, and the
other its equipment for it.

I. The task of the Church.

Now, of course, I need not remind you that there is a special sense
in which the office of witness-bearing belonged only to those who
had seen Christ in the flesh, and could testify to the fact of His
Resurrection. I need not dwell upon that further than to remark that
the fact that the designation of the first preachers of the Gospels
was 'witnesses' is significant of a great deal. For witness implies
fact, and the nature of their message, as being the simple
attestation to the occurrence of things that truly happened in the
earth, is wrapped up in that name. They were not speculators,
philosophers, moralists, legislators. They had neither to argue nor
to dissertate, nor to lay down rules for conduct, nor to ventilate
their own fancies. They were witnesses, and their business was to
tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. All
doctrine and all morality will come second. The first form of the
Gospel is, 'How that Jesus Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures, and that He was raised again the third day, according to
the Scriptures.' First, a history; then a religion; then a morality;
and morality and religion because it is a history of redemption.

These early Christians were witnesses in another sense. The very
existence of the Church at all was a testimony to that supernatural
fact without which it could not have been. We are often told in
recent years that the belief in the Resurrection grew slowly up
amongst the early Christians. What became of the Church whilst it
was growing? What held it together? How comes it that the fate of
Christ's followers was not the fate of the followers of Theudas and
other people that rose up, 'boasting themselves to be somebody,'
whose followers as a matter of course, 'came to nought' when the
leader was slain? There is only one answer. 'He rose again from the
dead.' Else there is no possibility of accounting for the fact that
the Church as a distinct organisation survived Calvary. The
Resurrection was no gradually evolved hardening of desire and fancy
into fact, but it was the foundation upon which the Church was
built. 'Ye'--by your words and by your existence as a community--'are
the witnesses of these things.'

But that is somewhat apart from the main purpose of my remarks now.
I desire rather to emphasise the thought that, with modifications in
form, the substance of the functions of these early believers
remains still the office and dignity of all Christian men. 'Ye are
the witnesses of these things.'

And what is the manner of testimony that devolves upon you and me,
Christian friends? Witness by your lives. Most men take their
notions of what Christianity is from the average of the Christians
round about them. And, if we profess to be Christ's followers, we
shall be taken as tests and specimen cases of the worth of the
religion that we profess. 'Ye are the Epistles of Christ,' and if
the writing be blurred and blotted and often half unintelligible,
the blame will be laid largely at His door. And men will say, and
say rightly, 'If that is all that Christianity can do, we are just
as well without it.' It is our task to 'adorn the doctrine of
Christ,' marvellous as it may seem that anything in our poor lives
can commend that fairest of all beautiful things--and to commend it
to some hearts. Just as some poor black-and-white engraving of a
masterpiece  of the painter's brush may, to an eye untrained in the
harmony of colour, be a better interpretation of the artist's
meaning than his own proper work, so our feeble copies of the
transcendent splendour and beauty may suit some purblind and
untrained eyes better than the serener and loftier perfection which
we humbly copy. 'We are the witnesses of these things.' And depend
upon it, mightier than all direct effort, and more unusual than all
utterances of lip, is the witness of the life of all professing
Christians to the reality of the facts upon which they say they base
their faith.

But beyond that, there is yet another department of testimony which
belongs to each of us, and that is the attestation of personal
experience. That is a form of Christian service which any and every
Christian can put forth. You cannot all be preachers, in the
technical sense. You cannot all be thinkers and strong champions,
argumentative or otherwise, for God's truth. But I will tell you
what you all can be. You can all say, 'Come and hear all ye; and I
will declare what He hath done for my soul.' It does not take
eloquence, gifts, learning, intellectual grasp of the doctrinal side
of Christian truth for a man to say, as the first preacher of Christ
upon earth said, 'Brother! we have found the Messias.' That was all,
and that was enough. That you can say, if you _have_ found Him,
and after all, the witness of personal experience of what faith in
Jesus Christ can make of a man, and do for a man, is the strongest
and most universal weapon placed in the hands of Christian men and
women. There is nothing that goes so far as that, if it be backed up
by a life corresponding, which, like a sounding-board behind a man,
flings his words out into the world'; 'Whether this man be a sinner
or no I know not'; 'I leave all that talk about heights and depths
of argument and controversy to other people, but this one thing I
know'--not I _think,_ not I _believe,_ not I am disposed to come to
the conclusion that--but 'this one thing I _know_, that whereas I
was blind now I see.' There is no getting over that! 'Ye are the
witnesses of these things.' And do not be ashamed of your function,
nor slothful nor cowardly in its discharge.

May I say a word here about the grounds on which this obligation to
witness rests for us? If Jesus Christ had never said, 'Go ye into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature,' it would not
have made a bit of difference as to the imperative duty that is laid
upon all Christian men; for that arises, not from that command,
which only gives voice to a previous obligation, but it flows, from
the very nature of things, from the message that we receive from our
links with other men and from the constitution and make of our own
natures.

It flows directly from the gift that we have received. There are
plenty of truths which, _per se_, carry with them no obligation
to impart them. But any truth in which is wrapped up the possible
happiness of another man, any truth which bears upon moral or
spiritual subjects, carries with it the strongest obligation to
impart it. We have such large insights into God and His love as the
Gospel gives us, not that we may eat our morsel alone, or merely sun
ourselves in the light, and expatiate in the warmth of the beams
that come to us, but that we may share them with all around: 'God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness  hath shined into
our hearts,' that we may 'give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.'

The obligation arises from the links that knit us all together. 'Am
I my brother's keeper?' Why, the question answers itself. If he is
_your_ 'brother,' you are certainly _his_ 'keeper.' And you cannot
shuffle off the obligation by any irrelevant pitting of one field of
Christian work against another; still less by any criticism, hostile
or friendly, as it may be, of the methods of Christian work, or of the
parity and elevation of the character and motives of the workers.
Humanity is one, linked by a mystic chain, and every link of it should
thrill by a common impulse; and through all the members there should
circulate a common life. That great thought is one of the gains that
the Gospel has brought us, and in the presence of it and our indebtedness
and obligation to every man, woman, and child that bears the form of
man, all geographical limits to Christian witnessing seem supremely
absurd and incongruous. You cannot get rid of your obligation by saying,
'I do not care about foreign missions, I go in for home ones.' And you
cannot get rid of it by chiming in an ignorant second to the talk
that has been going on lately, carping at or criticising methods of
work. It would be a very strange thing if we had hit all at once, in
the very beginning of an enterprise, upon the best of all possible
methods; and it would be a very strange thing if the mission-field
is the only one where there are no lazy workers and selfish motives
and unworthy occupants of high places. All that is true about home
as it is about other places. But grant it all, and back comes the
obligation based upon the nature of the truth that we have received,
upon our links with our brethren, and upon our loyalty to our
Master, and it peals into the ears of every Christian man and woman:
'Thou art a witness of these things'; and 'to this end wert thou
born again, that thou mightest bear witness to the truth.'

Ah, brethren! the issues of faithfulness to that high function are
sweet and blessed and wonderful. A witnessing Christian will be a
believing Christian; for there is no surer way to deepen my own
convictions about any moral or spiritual truth than to constitute
myself their humble servant to proclaim them. Whosoever is a
believer should be an apostle, and if he is an apostle he will be
tenfold a believer. There is nothing which will give a man a firmer
grasp of the Gospel for his own soul than when he finds that,
ministered by his humble efforts, it produces in other hearts the
same effects which he finds it working upon himself. There is no
page in the great book of the evidences of the truth of Christianity
more conclusive than that which in the last century has been written
by the experience of Christian missions. Let the objectors, Jannes
and Jambres, who withstood Moses, let them do the same with their
enchantments, and then we will discuss the questions of the truth of
the Gospel with them.

Nor need I do more than remind you of the highest of all blessed
issues which is yet to come. 'Be thou faithful unto death and I will
give thee a crown of life.' Alas! alas! how many of us professing
Christians will have to stand at last without that 'crown of
rejoicing' which they wear who, by their poor work and witness, have
won some souls to the Master. Do you, Christian men, contemplate
entering heaven alone, or bringing your sheaves with you? It will be
sad to stand with hands empty then, because they were idle in the
days of the seed-basket and the reaping-hook, whilst those that
sowed and those that reaped shall rejoice together. 'Ye are the
witnesses of these things': see to it that you do your work.

II. And now, secondly, and briefly, note the equipment of the
witnesses for their task.

Our Lord here distinguishes two stages in the endowment. Then and
there they receive the gift of the Divine Spirit, as is more fully
recorded in John's account of these last days, but that gift, rich
and precious as it was, was not yet the full bestowment which they
needed for their task. That came on the day of Pentecost. Mark the
vivid and picturesque word which our Lord here employs: 'Until ye be
_clothed_ with power from on high.' That divine gift coming
down as a vesture, wraps and covers and hides their own weakness,
their own naked and poor personality.

I can only say a word or two about this matter. The same collocation
of ideas--a witnessing Spirit by whose indwelling energy the
Christian community becomes witnesses, is found (and has been
explained at length by me in former discourses) in the farewell
words of our Lord in the upper chamber. 'The Spirit of Truth which
proceedeth from the Father, He shall bear witness of Me, and ye also
shall bear witness because ye have been with Me from the beginning.'

I need only remark here that the only power by which Christians can
discharge their work of witnessing in the world is the power which
clothes them from above. The new life which Jesus Christ brings and
gives to us is the only life which will avail for discharging this
office. Our self-will, the old life of nature, with all its
dependence upon ourselves, is nought in reference to this task. But
when that divine spark enters into men's hearts, then natural
endowments are heightened into supernatural gifts, and new forces
are developed, and new powers are bestowed and the earthen vessel is
filled with new treasure. Without it--and  there is a great deal of
so-called Christian witnessing to-day without it--noise,
advertising, skill in getting up externals, and all the other
unworthy methods which Christian churches sometimes stoop to adopt,
are powerless, as they ought to be. You may accomplish a great deal
by fussy activity which calls itself Christian earnestness, and has
not God's Spirit in it. But it is no more growth than are what the
children call 'devil's puff-balls' which they find in the fields in
these autumn mornings; and it will go up in poisonous, brown dust
like these when it is pricked.

The one condition of Christian churches doing their Christian work
is that they shall be clothed and filled with God's Spirit. Do not
let us rely on machinery; do not let us rely on externals; do not
let us rely on advertising tricks which might do very well for a
cheap shop, but are all out of harmony with the work that we have to
do; but let us rely on this, and on this alone. Holding converse
with God and Christ, we shall come out of the secret place of the
Most High with our faces glowing with the communion, and our lips on
fire to proclaim the sweetnesses that lie within the shrine.

One word more and I have done. This clothing with the Spirit, which
is the only fitness of the Church for its witnessing work, is only
to be won by much solitary waiting. 'Tarry ye,' or as in the
original it stands even more vividly, _'Sit ye still_ in the
city ... till ye be clothed.' It is because so many Christian
workers are so seldom alone with Christ that so much of their work
is nought, and comes to nought. To draw apart from outward activity
into the solitary place, and sit with Him, is the only means by
which we can keep up the freshness of our own spirits, and be fit
for His service. Mary was being trained for Martha's work when she
sat at Christ's feet; but Martha could not do hers without being
'troubled and careful,' because she was more accustomed to the work
than to the communion that would have made it light.

So, Christian friends, behold your task and your equipment. I
beseech you, who call yourselves Christ's servants, to lay to heart
your plain and unavoidable obligations. If you have found Jesus, you
are as truly and as individually bound to proclaim Him as if a
definite and direct divine command sounded in your ears. Your
possession of the Gospel as the food of your own souls binds you to
impart it to all the famished. The call to witness comes as straight
to you as it did to the young Pharisee on the road to Damascus when
he heard 'Saul! Saul!' called from the sky.

May you and I answer as he did, 'Lord! what wilt Thou have _me_
to do!'




THE ASCENSION


    'And He led them out as far as to Bethany, and He
    lifted up His hands, and blessed them. 51. And it
    came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted
    from them, and carried up into heaven.'
    --LUKE xxiv. 50, 51.

    'And when He had spoken these things, while they
    beheld, He was taken up; and a cloud received Him
    out of their sight.'--ACTS i. 9.

Two of the four Evangelists, viz., Matthew and John, have no record
of the Ascension. But the argument which infers ignorance from
silence, which is always rash, is entirely discredited in this case.
It is impossible to believe that Matthew, who wrote as the last word
of his gospel the great words, 'All power is given unto Me in heaven
and in earth ... lo! I am with you alway....' was ignorant of the
fact which alone makes these words credible. And it is equally
impossible to believe that the Evangelist who recorded the tender
saying to Mary, 'Go to My brethren, and say unto them I ascend to My
Father, and your Father,' was ignorant of its fulfilment. The
explanation of the silence is to be sought in a quite different
direction. It comes from the fact that to the Evangelists, rightly,
the Ascension was but the prolongation and the culmination of the
Resurrection. That being recorded, there was no need for the
definite record of this.

There is another singular point about these records, viz., that Luke
has two accounts, one in the end of his gospel, one in the beginning
of Acts; and that these two accounts are obviously different. The
differences have been laid hold of as a weapon with which to attack
the veracity of both accounts. But there again a little
consideration clears the path. The very places in which they
respectively occur might have solved the difficulty, for the one is
at the end of a book, and the other is at the beginning of a book;
and so, naturally, the one regards the Ascension as the end of the
earthly life, and the other as the beginning of the heavenly. The
one is all suffused with evening light; the other is radiant with
the promise of a new day. The one is the record of a tender
farewell, in the other the sense of parting has almost been absorbed
in the forward look to the new phase of relationship which is to
begin. If Luke had been a secular biographer, the critics would have
been full of admiration at the delicacy of his touch, and the
fineness of keeping in the two narratives, the picture being the
same in both, and the scheme of colouring being different. But as he
is only an Evangelist, they fall foul of him for his 'discrepancies.'
It is worth our while to take both his points of view.

But there is another thing to be remembered, that, as the appendix
of his account of the Ascension in the book of the Acts, Luke tells
us of the angel's message;--'This  same Jesus ... shall ... return.'
So there are three points of view which have to be combined in order
to get the whole significance of that mighty fact: the Ascension as
an end; the Ascension as a beginning; the Ascension as the pledge of
the return. Now take these three points.

I. We have the aspect of the Ascension as an end.

The narrative in Luke's gospel, in its very brevity, does yet
distinctly suggest that retrospective and valedictory tone. Note
how, for instance, we are told the locality--'He led them out as far
as Bethany.' The name at once strikes a chord of remembrance. What
memories clustered round it, and how natural it was that the parting
should take place there, not merely because the crest of the Mount
of Olives hid the place from the gaze of the crowded city; but
because it was within earshot almost of the home where so much of
the sweet earthly fellowship, that was now to end, had passed. The
same note of regarding the scene as being the termination of those
blessed years of dear and familiar intercourse is struck in the
fact, so human, so natural, so utterly inartificial, that He lifted
His hands to bless them, moved by the same impulse with which so
often we have wrung a hand at parting, and stammered, 'God bless
you!' And the same valedictory hue is further deepened by the fact
that what Luke puts first is not the Ascension, but the parting. 'He
was parted from them,' that is the main fact; 'and He was carried up
into heaven,' comes almost as a subordinate one. At all events it is
regarded mainly as being the medium by which the parting was
effected.

So the aspect of the Ascension thus presented is that of a tender
farewell; the pathetic conclusion of three long, blessed years. And
yet that is not all, for the Evangelist adds a very enigmatic word:
'They returned to Jerusalem with great joy.' Glad because He had
gone? No. Glad merely because He had gone up? No. The saying is a
riddle, left at the end of the book, for readers to ponder, and is a
subtle link of connection with what is to be written in the next
volume, when the aspect of the Ascension as an end is subordinate,
and its aspect as a beginning is prominent. So regarded, it filled
the disciples with joy. Thus you see, I think, that without any
illegitimate straining of the expressions of the text, we do come to
the point of view from which, to begin with, this great event must
be looked at. We have to take the same view, and to regard that
Ascension not only as the end of an epoch of sweet friendship, but
as the solemn close and culmination of the whole earthly life. I
have no time to dwell upon the thoughts that come crowding into
one's mind when we take that point of view. But let me suggest, in
the briefest way, one or two of them.

Here is an end which circles round to, and is of a piece with, the
beginning. 'I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world; again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father.' The
Ascension corresponds with, and meets the miracle of, the
Incarnation. And as the Word who became flesh, came by the natural
path of human birth, and entered in through the gate by which we all
enter, and yet came as none else has come, by His own will, in the
miracle of His Incarnation, so at the end, He passed out from life
through the gate by which we all pass, and 'was obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross,' and yet He passed likewise on a path
which none but Himself has trod, and ascended up to heaven, whence
He had descended to earth. He came into the world, not as leaving
the Father, for He is 'the Son of Man which is in heaven,' and He
ascended up on high, not as leaving us, for He is 'with us alway,
even to the end of the world.' Thus the Incarnation and the
Ascension support each other.

But let me remind you how, in this connection, we have the very same
combination of lowliness and gentleness with majesty and power which
runs through the whole of the story of the earthly life of Jesus
Christ. Born in a stable, and waited on by angels, the subject of
all the humiliations of humanity, and flashing forth through them
all the power of divinity, He ascends on high at last, and yet with
no pomp nor visible splendour to the world, but only in the presence
of a handful of loving hearts, choosing some dimple of the hill
where its folds hid them from the city. As He came quietly and
silently into the world, so quietly and silently He passed thence.
In this connection there is more than the picturesque contrast
between the rapture of Elijah, with its whirlwind, and chariot of
fire and horses of fire, and the calm, slow rising, by no external
medium raised, of the Christ. It was fit that the mortal should be
swept up into the unfamiliar heaven by the pomp of angels and the
chariot of fire. It was fit that when Jesus ascended to His 'own
calm home, His habitation from eternity,' there should be nothing
visible but His own slowly rising form, with the hands uplifted, to
shed benediction on the heads of the gazers beneath.

In like manner, regarding the Ascension as an end, may we not say
that it is the seal of heaven impressed on the sacrifice of the
Cross? 'Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a
Name, which is above every name; that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow.' We find in that intimate connection between the
Cross and the Ascension, the key to the deep saying which carries
references to both in itself, when the Lord spoke of Himself as
being lifted up and drawing all men unto Him. The original primary
reference no doubt was to His elevation on the Cross, 'as Moses
lifted up the serpent.' But the final, and at the time of its being
spoken, the mysterious, reference was to the fact that in descending
to the depth of humiliation He was rising to the height of glory.
The zenith of the Ascension is the rebound from the nadir of the
Cross. The lowliness of the stoop measures the loftiness of the
elevation, and the Son of Man was glorified at the moment when the
Son of Man was most profoundly abased. The Cross and the Ascension,
if I might use so violent a figure, are like the twin stars, of
which the heavens present some examples, one dark and lustreless,
one flashing with radiancy of light, but knit together by an
invisible vinculum, and revolving round a common centre. When He
'parted from them, and was carried up into heaven,' He ended the
humiliation which caused the elevation.

And then, again, I might suggest that, regarded in its aspect as an
end, this Ascension is also the culmination and the natural
conclusion of the Resurrection. As I have said, the Scripture point
of view with reference to these two is not that they are two, but
that the one is the starting point of the line of which the other is
the goal. The process which began when He rose from the dead,
whatever view we may take of the condition of His earthly life
during the forty days of parenthesis, could have no rational and
intelligible ending, except the Ascension. Thus we should think of
it not only as the end of a sweet friendship, but as the end of the
gracious manifestation of the earthly life, the counterpart of the
Incarnation and descent to earth, the end of the Cross and the
culmination of the Resurrection. The Son of Man, the same that also
descended into the lowest parts of the earth, ascended up where He
was before.

Now let us turn to the other aspect which the Evangelist gives, when
He ceases to be an Evangelist, and becomes a Church Historian.
_Then_ he considers

II. The Ascension as a beginning.

The place which it holds in the Acts of the Apostles explains the
point of view from which it is to be regarded. It is the foundation
of everything that the writer has afterwards to say. It is the basis
of the Church. It is the ground of all the activity which Christ's
servants put forth. Not only its place explains this aspect of it,
but the very first words of the book itself do the same. 'The former
treatise have I made ... of all that Jesus began both to do and
teach'--and now I am to tell you of an Ascension, and of all that
Jesus continued to do and teach. So that the book is the history of
the work of the Lord, who was able to do that work, just because He
had ascended up on high. The same impression is produced if we
ponder the conversation which precedes the account of the Ascension
in the book of Acts, which, though it touches the same topics as are
touched by the words that precede the account in the Gospel, yet
presents them in a different aspect, and suggests the endowments
with which the Christian community is to be invested, and the work
which therefore it is to do, in consequence of the Ascension of
Jesus Christ. The Apostle Peter had caught that thought when, on the
day of Pentecost, he said, 'He, being exalted to the right hand of
the Father, hath shed forth this which ye see and hear,' and
throughout the whole book the same point of view is kept up. 'The
work that is done upon earth He doeth it all Himself.'

So there is in _this_ narrative nothing about parting, there is
nothing about blessing. There is simply the ascending up and the
significant addition of the reception into the cloud, which, whilst
He was yet plainly visible, and not dwindled by distance into a
speck, received Him out of their sight. The cloud was the symbol of
the Divine Presence, which had hung over the Tabernacle, which had
sat between the cherubim, which had wrapped the shepherds and the
angels on the hillside, which had come down in its brightness on the
Mount of Transfiguration, and which now, as the symbol of the Divine
Presence, received the ascending Lord, in token to the men that
stood gazing up into heaven, that He had passed to the right hand of
the Majesty on high.

Thus we have to think of that Ascension as being the groundwork and
foundation of all the world-wide and age-long energy which the
living Christ is exercising to-day. As one of the other Evangelists,
or at least, the appendix to his gospel, puts it, He ascended up on
high, and 'they went everywhere preaching the word, the Lord also
working with them, and confirming the word with signs following.' It
is the ascended Christ who sends the Spirit upon men; it is the
ascended Christ who opens men's hearts to hear; it is the ascended
Christ who sends forth His messengers to the Gentiles; it is the
ascended Christ who, to-day, is the energy of all the Church's
powers, the whiteness of all the Church's purity, the vitality of
all the Church's life. He lives, and therefore, there is a Christian
community on the face of the earth. He lives, and therefore it will
never die.

So we, too, have to look to that risen Lord as being the power by
which alone any of us can do either great or small work in His
Church. That Ascension is symbolically put as being to 'the right
hand of God.' What is the right hand of God? The divine omnipotence.
Where is it? Everywhere. What does sitting at the right hand of God
mean? Wielding the powers of omnipotence. And so He says, 'All power
is given unto Me'; and He is working a work to-day, wider in its
aspects than, though it be the application and consequence of, the
work upon the Cross. He cried there, 'It is finished!' but 'the work
of the ascended Jesus' will never be finished until 'the kingdoms
of this world are become the kingdom of our God and of His Christ.'

There are other aspects of His work in heaven which space will not
allow me to dwell upon, though I cannot but mention them. By the
Ascension Christ begins to prepare a place for us. How could any of
us stand in the presence of that eternal Light if He were not there?
We should be like some savage or rustic swept up suddenly and put
down in the middle of the glittering ring of courtiers round a
throne, unless we could lift our eyes and recognise a known and
loving face there. Where Christ is, I can be. He has taken one human
nature up into the Glory, and other human natures will therefore
find in it a home.

The ascended Christ, to use the symbolism which one of the New
Testament writers employs for illustration of a thought far greater
than the symbol--has like a High Priest passed within the veil,
'there to appear in the presence of God for us.' And the
intercession which is far more than petition, and is the whole
action of that dear Lord who identifies as with Himself, and whose
mighty work is ever present before the divine mind as an element in
His dealings, that intercession is being carried on for ever for us
all. So, 'set your affection on things above, where Christ is,
sitting at the right hand of God.' So, expect His help in your work,
and do the work which He has left you to carry on here. So, face
death and the dim kingdoms beyond, without quiver and without doubt,
assured that where the treasure is, there the heart will be also;
and that where the Master is, there the servants who follow in His
steps will be also at last.

And now there is the third aspect here of

III. The Ascension as being the pledge of the return.

The two men in white apparel that stood by gently rebuked the gazers
for gazing into heaven. They would not have rebuked them for gazing,
if they could have seen Him, but to look into the empty heaven was
useless. And they added the reason why the heavens need not be
looked at, as long as there is the earth to stand on: 'For this same
Jesus whom ye have seen go into heaven shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen Him go.' Note the emphatic declaration of identity;
'this _same_ Jesus.' Note the use of the simple human name;
'this same _Jesus_,' and recall the thoughts that cluster round
it, of the ascended humanity, and the perpetual humanity of the
ascended Lord, 'the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever,' Note
also the strong assertion, of visible, corporeal return: 'Shall so
come in _like_ manner as ye have seen Him go.' That return is
no metaphor, no mere piece of rhetoric, it is not to be eviscerated
of its contents by being taken as a synonym for the diffusion of His
influence all over a regenerated race, but it points to the return
of the Man Jesus locally, corporeally, visibly. 'We believe that
Thou shalt come to be our Judge'; we believe that Thou wilt come to
take Thy servants home.

The world has not seen the last of Jesus Christ. Such an Ascension,
after such a life, cannot be the end of Him. 'As it is appointed
unto all men once to die, and after death the Judgment, so Christ
also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many, shall
appear the second time, without sin unto salvation.' As inevitably
as for sinful human nature judgment follows death, so inevitably for
the sinless Man, who is the sacrifice for the world's sins, His
judicial return will follow His atoning work, and He will come
again, having received the Kingdom, to take account of His servants,
and to perfect their possession of the salvation which by His
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, He wrought for
the world.

Therefore, brethren, one sweet face, and one great fact--the face of
the Christ, the fact of the Cross--should fill the past. One sweet
face, one great fact--the face of the Christ, the fact of His
Presence with us all the days--should fill the present. One regal
face, one great hope, should fill the future; the face of the King
that sitteth upon the throne, the hope that He will come again, and
'so we shall be ever with the Lord.'


END OF VOL. II.








Produced by Eric Eldred, Tonya Allen, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




Youth and Egolatry

By PIO BAROJA

Translated from the Spanish By Jacob S. Fassett, Jr. and Frances L.
Phillips



TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION BY H. L. MENCKEN

PROLOGUE

ON INTELLECTUAL LOVE
EGOTISM

I. FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

The bad man of Itzea
Humble and a wanderer
Dogmatophagy
Ignoramus, Ignorabimus
Nevertheless, we call ourselves materialists
In defense of religion
Arch-European
Dionysus or Apollonian
Epicuri de grege porcum
Evil and Rousseau's Chinaman
The root of disinterested evil
Music as a sedative
Concerning Wagner
Universal musicians
The folk song
On the optimism of eunuchs

II. MYSELF, THE WRITER

To my readers thirty years hence
Youthful writings
The beginning and end of the journey
Mellowness and the critical sense
Sensibility
On devouring one's own God
Anarchism
New paths
Longing for change
Baroja, you will never amount to anything (A Refrain)
The patriotism of desire
My home lands
Cruelty and stupidity
The anterior image
The tragi-comedy of sex
The veils of the sexual life
A little talk
The sovereign crowd
The remedy

III. THE EXTRARADIUS

Rhetoric and anti-rhetoric
The rhythm of style
Rhetoric of the minor key
The value of my ideas
Genius and admiration
My literary and artistic inclinations
My library
On being a gentleman
Giving offence
Thirst for glory
Elective antipathies
To a member of several academies

IV. ADMIRATIONS AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

Cervantes, Shakespeare, Moliere
The encyclopedists
The romanticists
The naturalists
The Spanish realists
The Russians
The critics

V. THE PHILOSOPHERS

VI. THE HISTORIANS

The Roman historians
Modern and contemporary historians

VII. MY FAMILY

Family mythology
Our History

VIII. MEMORIES OF CHILDHOOD

San Sebastian
My parents
Monsignor
Two lunatics
The hawk
In Madrid
In Pamplona
Don Tirso Larequi
A visionary rowdy
Sarasate
Robinson Crusoe and the Mysterious Island

IX. AS A STUDENT

Professors
Anti-militarism
To Valencia

X. AS A VILLAGE DOCTOR

Dolores, La Sacristana

XI. AS A BAKER

My father's disillusionment
Industry and democracy
The vexations of a small tradesman

XII. AS A WRITER

Bohemia
Our own generation
Azorin
Paul Schmitz
Ortega y Gasset
A pseudo-patron

XIII. PARISIAN DAYS

Estevanez
My versatility according to Bonafoux

XIV. LITERARY ENMITIES

The enmity of Dicenta
The posthumous enmity of Sawa
Semi-hatred on the part of Silverio Lanza

XV. THE PRESS

Our newspapers and periodicals
Our journalists
Americans

XVI. POLITICS

Votes and applause
Politicians
Revolutionists
Lerroux
An offer
Socialists
Love of the workingman
The conventionalist Barriovero
Anarchists
The morality of the alternating party system
On obeying the law
The sternness of the law

XVII. MILITARY GLORY

The old-time soldier
Down goes prestige
Science and the picturesque
What we need today
Our armies
A word from Kuroki, the Japanese

EPILOGUE
Palinode and fresh outburst of ire

APPENDICES
Spanish politicians
On Baroja's anarchists
Note




INTRODUCTION


Pio Baroja is a product of the intellectual reign of terror that went on
in Spain after the catastrophe of 1898. That catastrophe, of course, was
anything but unforeseen. The national literature, for a good many years
before the event, had been made dismal by the croaking of Iokanaans, and
there was a definite _defaitiste_ party among the _intelligentsia_.
But among the people in general, if there was not optimism, there was at
least a sort of resigned indifference, and so things went ahead in the
old stupid Spanish way and the structure of society, despite a few
gestures of liberalism, remained as it had been for generations. In Spain,
of course, there is always a _Kulturkampf_, as there is in Italy,
but during these years it was quiescent. The Church, in the shadow of
the restored monarchy, gradually resumed its old privileges and its old
pretensions. So on the political side. In Catalonia, where Spain keeps the
strangest melting-pot in Europe and the old Iberian stock is almost
extinct, there was a menacing seething, but elsewhere there was not much
to chill the conservative spine. In the middle nineties, when the
Socialist vote in Germany was already approaching the two million mark,
and Belgium was rocked by great Socialist demonstrations, and the
Socialist deputies in the French Chamber numbered fifty, and even England
was beginning to toy gingerly with new schemes of social reform, by
Bismarck out of Lassalle, the total strength of the Socialists of Spain
was still not much above five thousand votes. In brief, the country seemed
to be removed from the main currents of European thought. There was
unrest, to be sure, but it was unrest that was largely inarticulate and
that needed a new race of leaders to give it form and direction.

Then came the colossal shock of the American war and a sudden
transvaluation of all the old values. Anti-clericalism got on its legs
and Socialism got on its legs, and out of the two grew that great
movement for the liberation of the common people, that determined and
bitter struggle for a fair share in the fruits of human progress, which
came to its melodramatic climax in the execution of Francisco Ferrer.
Spain now began to go ahead very rapidly, if not in actual achievement,
then at least in the examination and exchange of ideas, good and bad.
Parties formed, split, blew up, revived and combined, each with its sure
cure for all the sorrows of the land. Resignationism gave way to a harsh
and searching questioning, and questioning to denunciation and demand
for reform. The monarchy swayed this way and that, seeking to avoid both
the peril of too much yielding and the worse peril of not yielding
enough. The Church, on the defensive once more, prepared quickly for
stormy weather and sent hurried calls to Rome for help. Nor was all this
uproar on the political and practical side. Spanish letters, for years
sunk into formalism, revived with the national spirit, and the new books
in prose and verse began to deal vigorously with the here and now.
Novelists, poets and essayists appeared who had never been heard of
before--young men full of exciting ideas borrowed from foreign lands and
even more exciting ideas of their own fashioning. The national
literature, but lately so academic and remote from existence, was now
furiously lively, challenging and provocative. The people found in it,
not the old placid escape from life, but a new stimulation to arduous
and ardent living. And out of the ruck of authors, eager, exigent, and
the tremendous clash of nations, new and old, there finally emerged a
prose based not upon rhetorical reminiscences, but responsive minutely
to the necessities of the national life. The oratorical platitudes of
Castelar and Canovas del Castillo gave way to the discreet analyses of
Azorin (Jose Martinez Ruiz) and Jose Ortega y Gasset, to the sober
sentences of the Rector of the University of Salamanca, Miguel de
Unamuno, writing with a restraint which is anything but traditionally
Castilian, and to the journalistic impressionism of Ramiro de Maeztu,
supple and cosmopolitan from long residence abroad. The poets now
jettisoned the rotundities of the romantic and emotional schools of
Zorrilla and Salvador Rueda, and substituted instead the precise,
pictorial line of Ruben Dario, Juan Ramon Jimenez, and the brothers
Machado, while the socialistic and republican propaganda which had
invaded the theatre with Perez Galdos, Joaquin Dicenta, and Angel
Guimera, bore fruit in the psychological drama of Benavente, the social
comedies of Linares Rivas, and the atmospheric canvases which the
Quinteros have painted of Andalusia.

In the novel, the transformation is noticeable at once in the rapid
development of the pornographic tale, whose riches might bring a blush
to the cheek of Boccaccio, and provide Poggio and Aretino with a
complete review; but these are stories for the barrack, venturing only
now and then upon the confines of respectability in the erotic romances
of Zamacois and the late enormously popular Felipe Trigo. Few Spaniards
who write today but have written novels. Yet the gesture of the grand
style of Valera is palsied, except, perhaps, for the conservative
Quixote, Ricardo Leon, a functionary in the Bank of Spain, while the
idyllic method lingers fitfully in such gentle writers as Jose Maria
Salaverria, after surviving the attacks of the northern realists under
the lead of Pereda, in his novels of country life, and of the less
vigorous Antonio de Trueba, and of Madrid vulgarians, headed by Mesonero
Romanos and Coloma. The decadent novel, foreshadowed a few years since
by Alejandro Sawa, has attained full maturity in Hoyos y Vinent, while
the distinctive growth of the century is the novel of ideas, exact,
penetrating, persistently suggestive in the larger sense, which does not
hesitate to make demands upon the reader, and this is exemplified most
distinctively, both temperamentally and intellectually, by Pio Baroja.

It would be difficult to find two men who, dealing with the same ideas,
bring to them more antagonistic attitudes of mind than Baroja and Blasco
Ibanez. For all his appearance of modernism, Blasco really belongs to
the generation before 1898. He is of the stock of Victor Hugo--a
popular rhapsodist and intellectual swashbuckler, half artist and half
mob orator--a man of florid and shallow certainties, violent
enthusiasms, quack remedies, vast magnetism and address, and even vaster
impudence--a fellow with plain touches of the charlatan. His first solid
success at home was made with _La Barraca_ in 1899--and it was a
success a good deal more political than artistic; he was hailed for his
frenzy far more than for his craft. Even outside of Spain his subsequent
celebrity has tended to ground itself upon agreement with his politics,
and not upon anything properly describable as a critical appreciation of
his talents. Had _The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse_ been
directed against France instead of in favour of France, it goes without
saying that it would have come to the United States without the
_imprimatur_ of the American Embassy at Madrid, and that there
would have appeared no sudden rage for the author among the generality
of novel-readers. His intrinsic merits, in sober retrospect, seem very
feeble. For all his concern with current questions, his accurate news
instinct, he is fundamentally a romantic of the last century, with more
than one plain touch of the downright operatic.

Baroja is a man of a very different sort. A novelist undoubtedly as
skilful as Blasco and a good deal more profound, he lacks the quality of
enthusiasm and thus makes a more restricted appeal. In place of gaudy
certainties he offers disconcerting questionings; in place of a neat and
well-rounded body of doctrine he puts forward a sort of generalized
contra-doctrine. Blasco is almost the typical Socialist--iconoclastic,
oratorical, sentimental, theatrical--a fervent advocate of all sorts of
lofty causes, eagerly responsive to the shibboleths of the hour. Baroja
is the analyst, the critic, almost the cynic. If he leans toward any
definite doctrine at all, it is toward the doctrine that the essential
ills of man are incurable, that all the remedies proposed are as bad as
the disease, that it is almost a waste of time to bother about humanity
in general. This agnostic attitude, of course, is very far from merely
academic, monastic. Baroja, though his career has not been as dramatic
as Blasco's, has at all events taken a hand in the life of his time and
country and served his day in the trenches of the new enlightenment. He
is anything but a theorist. But there is surely no little significance
in his final retreat to his Basque hillside, there to seek peace above
the turmoil. He is, one fancies, a bit disgusted and a bit despairing.
But if it is despair, it is surely not the despair of one who has
shirked the trial.

The present book, _Juventud, Egolatria_, was written at the height
of the late war, and there is a preface to the original edition, omitted
here, in which Baroja defends his concern with aesthetic and
philosophical matters at such a time. The apologia was quite gratuitous.
A book on the war, though by the first novelist of present-day Spain,
would probably have been as useless as all the other books on the war.
That stupendous event will be far more soundly discussed by men who have
not felt its harsh appeal to the emotions. Baroja, evading this grand
enemy of all ideas, sat himself down to inspect and co-ordinate the
ideas that had gradually come to growth in his mind before the bands
began to bray. The result is a book that is interesting, not only as the
frank talking aloud of one very unusual man, but also as a
representation of what is going on in the heads of a great many other
Spaniards. Blasco, it seems to me, is often less Spanish than French;
Valencia, after all, is next door to Catalonia, and Catalonia is
anything but Castilian. But Baroja, though he is also un-Castilian and
even a bit anti-Castilian, is still a thorough Spaniard. He is more
interested in a literary feud in Madrid than in a holocaust beyond the
Pyrenees. He gets into his discussion of every problem a definitely
Spanish flavour. He is unmistakably a Spaniard even when he is trying
most rigorously to be unbiased and international. He thinks out
everything in Spanish terms. In him, from first to last, one observes
all the peculiar qualities of the Iberian mind--its disillusion, its
patient weariness, its pervasive melancholy. Spain, I take it, is the
most misunderstood of countries. The world cannot get over seeing it
through the pink mist of _Carmen_, an astounding Gallic caricature,
half flattery and half libel. The actual Spaniard is surely no such
grand-opera Frenchman as the immortal toreador. I prescribe the
treatment that cured me, for one, of mistaking him for an Iberian. That
is, I prescribe a visit to Spain in carnival time.

Baroja, then, stands for the modern Spanish mind at its most
enlightened. He is the Spaniard of education and worldly wisdom,
detached from the mediaeval imbecilities of the old regime and yet aloof
from the worse follies of the demagogues who now rage in the country.
Vastly less picturesque than Blasco Ibanez, he is nearer the normal
Spaniard--the Spaniard who, in the long run, must erect a new structure
of society upon the half archaic and half Utopian chaos now reigning in
the peninsula. Thus his book, though it is addressed to Spaniards,
should have a certain value for English-speaking readers. And so it is
presented.

H. L. MENCKEN.




PROLOGUE

ON INTELLECTUAL LOVE

Only what is of the mind has value to the mind. Let us dedicate
ourselves without compunction to reflecting a little upon the eternal
themes of life and art. It is surely proper that an author should write
of them.

I cultivate a love which is intellectual, and of a former epoch, besides
a deafness to the present. I pour out my spirit continually into the
eternal moulds without expecting that anything will result from it.

But now, instead of a novel, a few stray comments upon my life have come
from my pen.

Like most of my books, this has appeared in my hands without being
planned, and not at my bidding. I was asked to write an autobiographical
sketch of ten or fifteen pages. Ten or fifteen pages seemed a great many
to fill with the personal details of a life which is as insignificant as
my own, and far too few for any adequate comment upon them. I did not
know how to begin. To pick up the thread, I began drawing lines and
arabesques. Then the pages grew in number and, like Faust's dog, my pile
soon waxed big, and brought forth this work.

At times, perhaps, the warmth of the author's feeling may appear ill-
advised to the reader; it may be that he will find his opinions
ridiculous and beside the mark on every page. I have merely sought to
sun my vanity and egotism, to bring them forth into the air, so that my
aesthetic susceptibilities might not be completely smothered.

This book has been a work of mental hygiene.




EGOTISM


Egotism resembles cold drinks in summer; the more you take, the
thirstier you get. It also distorts the vision, producing an hydropic
effect, as has been noted by Calderon in his _Life is a Dream_.

An author always has before him a keyboard made up of a series of I's.
The lyric and satiric writers play in the purely human octave; the
critic plays in the bookman's octave; the historian in the octave of the
investigator. When an author writes of himself, perforce he plays upon
his own "I," which is not exactly that contained in the octave of the
sentimentalist nor yet in that of the curious investigator. Undoubtedly
at times it must be a most immodest "I," an "I" which discloses a name
and a surname, an "I" which is positive and self-assertive, with the
imperiousness of a Captain General's edict or a Civil Governor's decree.

I have always felt some delicacy in talking about myself, so that the
impulsion to write these pages of necessity came from without.

As I am not generally interested when anybody communicates his likes and
dislikes to me, I am of opinion that the other person most probably
shares the same feelings when I communicate mine to him. However, a time
has now arrived when it is of no consequence to me what the other person
thinks.

In this matter of giving annoyance, a formula should be drawn up and
accepted, after the manner of Robespierre: the liberty of annoying
another begins where his liberty of annoying you leaves off.

I understand very well that there may be persons who believe that their
lives are wholly exemplary, and who thus burn with ardour to talk about
them. But I have not led an exemplary life to any such extent. I have
not led a life that might be called pedagogic, because it is fitted to
serve as a model, nor a life that might be called anti-pedagogic,
because it would serve as a warning. Neither do I bring a fistful of
truths in my hand, to scatter broadcast. What, then, have I to say? And
why do I write about myself? Assuredly, to no useful purpose.

The owner of a house is sometimes asked:

"Is there anything much locked up in that room?"

"No, nothing but old rubbish," he replies promptly.

But one day the owner opens the room, and then he finds a great store of
things which he had not remembered, all of them covered with dust; so he
hauls them out and generally they prove to be of no service at all. This
is precisely what I have done.

These pages, indeed, are a spontaneous exudation. But are they sincere?
Absolutely sincere? It is not very probable. The moment we sit for a
photographer, instinctively we dissemble and compose our features. When
we talk about ourselves, we also dissemble.

In as short a book as this the author is able to play with his mask and
to fix his expression. Throughout the work of an entire lifetime,
however, which is of real value only when it is one long autobiography,
deceit is impossible, because when the writer is least conscious of it,
he reveals himself.




I

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

The Bad Man of Itzea


When I first came to live in this house at Vera del Bidasoa, I found
that the children of the district had taken possession of the entryway
and the garden, where they misbehaved generally. It was necessary to
drive them away little by little, until they flew off like a flock of
sparrows.

My family and I must have seemed somewhat peculiar to these children,
for one day, when one little fellow caught sight of me, he took refuge
in the portal of his house and cried out:

"Here comes the bad man of Itzea!"

And the bad man of Itzea was I.

Perhaps this child had heard from his sister, and his sister had heard
from her mother, and her mother had heard from the sexton's wife, and
the sexton's wife from the parish priest, that men who have little
religion are very bad; perhaps this opinion did not derive from the
priest, but from the president of the Daughters of Mary, or from the
secretary of the Enthronization of the Sacred Heart of Jesus; perhaps
some of them had read a little book by Father Ladron de Guevara
entitled, _Novelists, Good and Bad_, which was distributed in the
village the day that I arrived, and which states that I am irreligious,
a clerophobe, and quite shameless. Whether from one source or another,
the important consideration to me was that there was a bad man in Itzea,
and that that bad man was I.

To study and make clear the instincts, pride, and vanities of the bad
man of Itzea is the purpose of this book.




HUMBLE AND A WANDERER


Some years ago, I cannot say just how many, probably twelve or fourteen,
during the days when I led, or thought I led, a nomadic life, happening
to be in San Sebastian, I went to visit the Museum with the painter
Regoyos. After seeing everything, Soraluce, the director, indicated that
I was expected to inscribe my name in the visitor's register, and after
I had done so, he said:

"Place your titles beneath."

"Titles!" I exclaimed. "I have none."

"Then put down what you are. As you see, the others have done the same."

I looked at the book. True enough; there was one signature, So-and-So,
and beneath, "Chief of Administration of the Third Class and Knight of
Charles III"; another, Somebody Else, and beneath was written "Commander
of the Battalion of Isabella the Catholic, with the Cross of Maria
Cristina."

Then, perhaps slightly irritated at having neither titles nor honours
(burning with an anarchistic and Christian rancour, as Nietzsche would
have it), I jotted down a few casual words beneath my signature:

"Pio Baroja, a humble man and a wanderer."

Regoyos read them and burst out laughing.

"What an idea!" exclaimed the director of the Museum, as he closed the
volume.

And there I remained a humble man and a wanderer, overshadowed by Chiefs
of Administration of all Classes, Commanders of all Branches of the
Service, Knights of all kinds of Crosses, rich men returned from
America, bankers, etc., etc.

Am I a humble man and a wanderer? Not a bit of it! There is more
literary phantasy in the phrase than there is truth. Of humility I do
not now, nor have I ever possessed more than a few rather Buddhistic
fragments; nor am I a wanderer either, for making a few insignificant
journeys does not authorize one to call oneself a wanderer. Just as I
put myself down at that time as a humble man and a wanderer, so I might
call myself today a proud and sedentary person. Perhaps both
characterizations contain some degree of truth; and perhaps there is
nothing in either.

When a man scrutinizes himself very closely, he arrives at a point where
he does not know what is face and what is mask.




DOGMATOPHAGY


If I am questioned concerning my ideas on religion, I reply that I am an
agnostic--I always like to be a little pedantic with philistines--now I
shall add that, more than this, I am a dogmatophagist.

My first impulse in the presence of a dogma, whether it be political,
moral, or religious, is to cast about for the best way to masticate,
digest, and dispose of it.

The peril in an inordinate appetite for dogma lies in the probability of
making too severe a drain upon the gastric juices, and so becoming
dyspeptic for the rest of one's life.

In this respect, my inclination exceeds my prudence. I have an incurable
dogmatophagy.

Ignoramus, Ignorabimus

Such are the words of the psychologist, DuBois-Reymond, in one of his
well-known lectures. The agnostic attitude is the most seemly that it is
possible to take. Nowadays, not only have all religious ideas been
upset, but so too has everything which until now appeared most solid,
most indivisible. Who has faith any longer in the atom? Who believes in
the soul as a monad? Who believes in the objective validity of the
senses?

The atom, unity of the spirit and of consciousness, the validity of
perception, all these are under suspicion today. _Ignoramus,
ignorabimus_.




NEVERTHELESS, WE CALL OURSELVES MATERIALISTS


Nevertheless, we call ourselves materialists. Yes; not because we
believe that matter exists as we see it, but because in this way we may
contradict the vain imaginings and all those sacred mysteries which
begin so modestly, and always end by extracting the money from our
pockets.

Materialism, as Lange has said, has proved itself the most fecund
doctrine of science. Wilhelm Ostwald, in his _Victory of Scientific
Materialism_, has defended the same thesis with respect to modern
physics and chemistry.

At the present time we are regaled with the sight of learned friars
laying aside for a moment their ancient tomes, and turning to dip into
some manual of popular science, after which they go about and astonish
simpletons by giving lectures.

The war horse of these gentlemen is the conception entertained by
physicists at the present-day concerning matter, according to which it
has substance in the precise degree that it is a manifestation of
energy.

"If matter is scarcely real, then what is the validity of materialism?"
shout the friars enthusiastically.

The argument smacks of the seminary and is absolutely worthless.

Materialism is more than a philosophical system: it is a scientific
method, which will have nothing to do either with fantasies or with
caprices.

The jubilation of these friars at the thought that matter may not exist,
in truth and in fact is in direct opposition to their own theories.
Because if matter does not exist, then what could God have created?




IN DEFENSE OF RELIGION


The great defender of religion is the lie. Lies are the most vital
possession of man. Religion lives upon lies, and society maintains
itself upon them, with its train of priests and soldiers--the one,
moreover, as useless as the other. This great Maia of falsehood sustains
all the sky borders in the theatre of life, and, when some fall, it
lifts up others.

If there were a solvent for lies, what surprises would be in store for
us! Nearly everybody who now appears to us to be upright, inflexible,
and to hold his chest high, would be disclosed as a flaccid, weak
person, presenting in reality a sorry spectacle.

Lies are much more stimulating than truth; they are also almost always
more tonic and more healthy. I have come to this conclusion rather late
in life. For utilitarian and practical ends, it is clearly our duty to
cultivate falsehood, arbitrariness, and partial truths. Nevertheless, we
do not do so. Can it be that, unconsciously, we have something of the
heroic in us?




ARCH-EUROPEAN


I am a Basque, if not on all four sides, at least on three and a half.
The remaining half, which is not Basque, is Lombard.

Four of my eight family names are Guipuzcoan, two of them are Navarrese,
one Alavese, and the other Italian. I take it that family names are
indicative of the countries where one's ancestors lived, and I take it
also that there is great potency behind them, that the influence of each
works upon the individual with a duly proportioned intensity. Assuming
this to be the case, the resultant of the ancestral influences operative
upon me would indicate that my geographical parallel lies somewhere
between the Alps and the Pyrenees. Sometimes I am inclined to think that
the Alps and the Pyrenees are all that is European in Europe. Beyond
them I seem to see Asia; below them, Africa.

In the riparian Navarrese, as in the Catalans and the Genovese, one
already notes the African; in the Gaul of central France, as well as in
the Austrian, there is a suggestion of the Chinese.

Clutching the Pyrenees and grafted upon the Alps, I am conscious of
being an Arch-European.



DIONYSIAN OR APOLLONIAN?


Formerly, when I believed that I was both humble and a wanderer, I was
convinced that I was a Dionysian. I was impelled toward turbulence, the
dynamic, the theatric. Naturally, I was an anarchist. Am I today? I
believe I still am. In those days I used to enthuse about the future,
and I hated the past.

Little by little, this turbulence has calmed down--perhaps it was never
very great. Little by little I have come to realize that if following
Dionysus induces the will to bound and leap, devotion to Apollo has a
tendency to throw the mind back until it rests upon the harmony of
eternal form. There is great attraction in both gods.




EPICURI DE GREGE PORCUM


I am also a swine of the herd of Epicurus; I, too, wax eloquent over
this ancient philosopher, who conversed with his pupils in his garden.
The very epithet of Horace, upon detaching himself from the Epicureans,
"_Epicuri de grege porcum_," is full of charm.

All noble minds have hymned Epicurus. "Hail Epicurus, thou honour of
Greece!" Lucretius exclaims in the third book of his poem.

"I have sought to avenge Epicurus, that truly holy philosopher, that
divine genius," Lucian tells us in his _Alexander, or the False
Prophet_. Lange, in his _History of Materialism_, sets down
Epicurus as a disciple and imitator of Democritus.

I am not a man of sufficient classical culture to be able to form an
authoritative opinion of the merits of Epicurus as a philosopher. All my
knowledge of him, as well as of the other ancient philosophers, is
derived from the book of Diogenes Laertius.

Concerning Epicurus, I have read Bayle's magnificent article in his
_Historical and Critical Dictionary_, and Gassendi's work, _De
Vita et Moribus Epicuri_. With this equipment, I have become one of
the disciples of the master.

Scholars may say that I have no right to enrol myself as one of the
disciples of Epicurus, but when I think of myself, spontaneously there
comes to my mind the grotesque epithet which Horace applied to the
Epicureans in his _Epistles_, a characterization which for my part
I accept and regard as an honour: "Swine of the herd of Epicurus,
_Epicuri de grege porcum_."




EVIL AND ROUSSEAU'S CHINAMAN


I do not believe in utter human depravity, nor have I any faith in great
virtue, nor in the notion that the affairs of life may be removed beyond
good and evil. We shall outgrow, we have already outgrown, the
conception of sin, but we shall never pass beyond the idea of good and
evil; that would be equivalent to skipping the cardinal points in
geography. Nietzsche, an eminent poet and an extraordinary psychologist,
convinced himself that we should be able to leap over good and evil with
the help of a springboard of his manufacture.

Not with this springboard, nor with any other, shall we escape from the
polar North and South of the moral life.

Nietzsche, a product of the fiercest pessimism, was at heart a good man,
being in this respect the direct opposite of Rousseau, who, despite the
fact that he is forever talking about virtue, about sensibility, the
heart, and the sublimity of the soul, was in reality a low, sordid
creature.

The philanthropist of Geneva shows the cloven hoof now and then. He
asks: "If all that it were necessary for us to do in order to inherit
the riches of a man whom we had never seen, of whom we had never even
heard, and who lived in the furthermost confines of China, were to press
a button and cause his death, what man living would not press that
button?"

Rousseau is convinced that we should all press the button, and he is
mistaken, because the majority of men who are civilized would do nothing
of the kind. This, to my mind, is not to say that men are good; it is
merely to say that Rousseau, in his enthusiasm for humanity, as well as
in his aversion to it, is wide of the mark. The evil in man is not evil
of this active sort, so theatrical, so self-interested; it is a passive,
torpid evil which lies latent in the depths of the human animal, it is
an evil which can scarcely be called evil.




THE ROOT OF DISINTERESTED EVIL


Tell a man that an intimate friend has met with a great misfortune. His
first impulse is one of satisfaction. He himself is not aware of it
clearly, he does not realize it; nevertheless, essentially his emotion
is one of satisfaction. This man may afterward place his fortune, if he
has one, at the disposition of his friend, yes, even his life; yet this
will not prevent his first conscious reaction upon learning of the
misfortune of his friend, from being one which, although confused, is
nevertheless not far removed from pleasure. This feeling of
disinterested malice may be observed in the relations between parents
and children as well as in those between husbands and wives. At times it
is not only disinterested, but counter-interested.

The lack of a name for this background of disinterested malice, which
does exist, is due to the fact that psychology is not based so much upon
phenomena as it is upon language.

According to our current standards, latent evil of this nature is
neither of interest nor significance. Naturally, the judge takes account
of nothing but deeds; to religion, which probes more deeply, the intent
is of importance; to the psychologist, however, who attempts to
penetrate still further, the elemental germinative processes of volition
are of indispensable significance.

Whence this foundation of disinterested malice in man? Probably it is an
ancestral legacy. Man is a wolf toward man, as Plautus observes, and the
idea has been repeated by Hobbes.

In literature, it is almost idle to look for a presentation of this
disinterested, this passive evil, because nothing but the conscious is
literary. Shakespeare, in his _Othello_, a drama which has always
appeared false and absurd to me, emphasizes the disinterested malice of
Iago, imparting to him a character and mode of action which are beyond
those of normal men; but then, in order to accredit him to the
spectators, he adds also a motive, and represents him as being in love
with Desdemona.

Victor Hugo, in _L'Homme qui Rit_, undertook to create a type after
the manner of Iago, and invented Barkilphedro, who embodies
disinterested yet active malice, which is the malice of the villain of
melodrama.

But that other disinterested malice, which lurks in the sodden sediment
of character, that malice which is disinterested and inactive, and not
only incapable of drawing a dagger but even of writing an anonymous
note, this no writer but Dostoievski has had the penetration to reveal.
He has shown us at the same time mere inert goodness, lying passive in
the soul, without ever serving as a basis for anything.




MUSIC AS A SEDATIVE


Music, the most social of the arts, and that undoubtedly which possesses
the greatest future, presents enormous attractions to the bourgeoisie.
In the first place, it obviates the necessity of conversation; it is not
necessary to know whether your neighbor is a sceptic or a believer, a
materialist or a spiritualist; no possible argument can arise concerning
the meaning and metaphysics of life. Instead of war, there is peace. The
music lover may argue, but his conceptions are entirely circumscribed by
the music, and have no relation whatever either to philosophy or to
politics as such. The wars are small wars, and spill no blood. A
Wagnerite may be a freethinker or a Catholic, an anarchist or a
conservative. Even painting, which is an art of miserable general ideas,
is not so far removed from intelligence as is music. This explains why
the Greeks were able to attain such heights in philosophy, and yet fell
to such depths in music.

Music has an additional merit. It lulls to sleep the residuum of
disinterested malice in the soul.

As a majority of the lovers of painting and sculpture are second-hand
dealers and Jews in disguise, music lovers, for the most part, are a
debased people, envious, embittered and supine.




CONCERNING WAGNER


I am one of those who do not understand music, yet I am not completely
insensible to it. This does not prevent me, however, from entertaining a
strong aversion to all music lovers, and especially to Wagnerites.

When Nietzsche, who apparently possessed a musical temperament, set
Bizet up against Wagner, he confessed, of course, premeditated
vindictiveness. "It is necessary to mediterraneanize music," declares
the German psychologist. But how absurd! Music must confine itself to
the geographical parallel where it was born; it is Mediterranean,
Baltic, Alpine, Siberian. Nor is the contention valid that an air should
always have a strongly marked rhythm, because, if this were the case, we
should have nothing but dance music. Certainly, music was associated
with the dance in the beginning, but a sufficient number of years have
now elapsed to enable each of these arts to develop independently.

As regards Nietzsche's hostility to the theatocracy of Wagner, I share
it fully. This business of substituting the theatre for the church, and
teaching philosophy singing, seems ridiculous to me. I am also out of
patience with the wooden dragons, swans, stage fire, thunder and
lightning.

Although it may sound paradoxical, the fact is that all this scenery is
in the way. I have seen King Lear in Paris, at the Theatre Antoine,
where it was presented with very nearly perfect scenery. When the King
and the fool roamed about the heath in the third act, amid thunder and
lightning, everybody was gazing at the clouds in the flies and watching
for the lightning, or listening to the whistling of the wind; no one
paid any attention to what was said by the characters.




UNIVERSAL MUSICIANS


German music is undoubtedly the most universal music, especially that of
Mozart and Beethoven. It seems as if there were fewer particles of their
native soil imbedded in the works of these two masters than is common
among their countrymen. They bring out in sharp relief the cultural
internationalism of Germany.

Mozart is an epitome of the grace of the eighteenth century; he is at
once delicate, joyous, serene, gallant, mischievous. He is a courtier of
whatever country one will. Sometimes, when listening to his music, I ask
myself: "Why is it that this, which must be of German origin, seems to
be part of all of us, to have been designed for us all?"

Beethoven, too, like Mozart, is a man without a country. As the one
manipulates his joyous, soft, serene rhythms, the other throbs and
trembles with obscure meanings and pathetic, heartrending laments, the
source of which lies hidden as at the bottom of some mine.

He is a Segismund who complains against the gods and against his fate in
a tongue which knows no national accent. A day will come when the
negroes of Timbuktu will listen to Mozart's and Beethoven's music and
feel that it belongs to them, as truly as it ever did to the citizens of
Munich or of Vienna.




THE FOLK SONG


The folk song lies at the opposite pole from universal music. It is
music which smacks most of the soil whereon it has been produced. By its
very nature it is intelligible at all times to all persons in the
locality, if only because music is not an intellectual art; it deals in
rhythms, it does not deal in ideas. But beyond the fact of its
intelligibility, music possesses different attractions for different
people. The folk song preserves to us the very savour of the country in
which we were born; it recalls the air, the climate that we breathed and
knew. When we hear it, it is as if all our ancestors should suddenly
present themselves. I realize that my tastes may be barbaric, but if
there could only be one kind of music, and I were obliged to choose
between the universal and the local, my preference would be wholly for
the latter, which is the popular music.




ON THE OPTIMISM OF EUNUCHS


In a text book designed for the edification of research workers--a
specimen of peculiarly disagreeable tartuffery--the histologist, Ramon y
Cajal, who, as a thinker, has always been an absolute mediocrity,
explains what the young scholar should be, in the same way that the
Constitution of 1812 made it clear what the ideal Spanish citizen should
be.

So we know now the proper character of the young scholar. He must be
calm, optimistic, serene ... and all this with ten or twelve coppers in
his pocket!

Some friends inform me that in the Institute for Public Education at
Madrid, where an attempt is made to give due artistic orientation to the
pupils, they have contrived an informal classification of the arts in
the order of their importance; first comes painting; then, music; and,
last, literature.

Considering carefully what may be the reasons for such a sequence, it
would appear that the purpose must be to deprive the student of any
occasion for becoming pessimistic. Certainly nobody will ever have his
convictions upset by looking at ancient cloths daubed over with linseed
oil, nor by the bum-ta-ra of music. But, to my mind, in a country like
Spain, it is better that our young men should be dissatisfied than that
they should go to the laboratory every day in immaculate blouses,
chatter like proper young gentlemen about El Greco, Cezanne and the
Ninth Symphony, and never have the brains to protest about anything.
Back of all this correctness may be divined the optimism of eunuchs.




II

MYSELF, THE WRITER

TO MY READERS THIRTY YEARS HENCE


Among my books there are two distinct classes: Some I have written with
more effort than pleasure, and others I have written with more pleasure
than effort.

My readers apparently are not aware of this distinction, although it
seems evident to me. Can it be that true feeling is of no value in a
piece of literature, as some of the decadents have thought? Can it be
that enthusiasm, weariness, loathing, distress and ennui never transpire
through the pages of a book? Indubitably none of them transpire unless
the reader enters into the spirit of the work. And, in general, the
reader does not enter into the spirit of my books. I cherish a hope
which, perhaps, may be chimerical and ridiculous, that the Spanish
reader thirty or forty years hence, who takes up my books, whose
sensibilities, it may be, have been a little less hardened into
formalism than those of the reader of today, will both appreciate and
dislike me more intelligently.




YOUTHFUL WRITINGS


As I turn over the pages of my books, now already growing old, I receive
the impression that, like a somnambulist, I have frequently been walking
close to the cornice of a roof, entirely unconsciously, but in imminent
danger of falling off; again, it seems to me that I have been travelling
paths beset with thorns, which have played havoc with my skin.

I have maintained myself rather clumsily for the most part, yet at times
not without a certain degree of skill.

All my books are youthful books; they express turbulence; perhaps their
youth is a youth which is lacking in force and vigour, but nevertheless,
they are youthful books.

Among thorns and brambles there lies concealed a tiny Fountain of Youth
in my soul. You may say that its waters are bitter and saline, instead
of being crystalline and clear. And it is true. Yet the fountain flows
on, and bubbles, and gurgles and splashes into foam. That is enough for
me. I do not wish to dam it up, but to let the water run and remove
itself. I have always felt kindly toward anything that removes itself.




THE BEGINNING AND END OF THE JOURNEY


I formerly considered myself a young man of protoplasmic capabilities,
and I entertained very little enthusiasm for form until after I had
talked with some Russians. Since then I have realized that I was more
clean cut, more Latin, and a great deal older than I had supposed.

"I see that you belong to the _ancient regime_," a Frenchwoman remarked
to me in Rome.

"I? Impossible!"

"Yes," she insisted. "You are a conversationalist. You are not an
elegant, sprucely dressed abbe; you are an abbe who is cynical and ill-
natured, who likes to fancy himself a savage amid the comfortable
surroundings of the drawing-room."

The Frenchwoman's observation set me to thinking.

Can it be that I am hovering in the vicinity of Apollo's Temple without
realizing it?

Possibly my literary life has been merely a journey from the Valley of
Dionysus to the Temple of Apollo. Now somebody will tell me that art
begins only on the bottom step of the Temple of Apollo. And it is true.
But there is where I stop--on the bottom step.




MELLOWNESS AND THE CRITICAL SENSE


Whenever my artistic conscience reproaches me, I always think: If I were
to undertake to write these books today, now that I am aware of their
defects, I should never write them. Nevertheless, I continue to write
others with the same old faults. Shall I ever attain that mellowness of
soul in which all the vividness of impression remains, yet in which it
has become possible to perfect the expression? I fear not. Most likely,
when I reach the stage of refining the expression, I shall have nothing
to say, and so remain silent.




SENSIBILITY


In my books, as in most that are modern, there is an indefinable
resentment against life and against society.

Resentment against life is of far more ancient standing than resentment
against society.

The former has always been a commonplace among philosophers.

Life is absurd, life is difficult of direction, life is a disease, the
better part of the philosophers have told us.

When man turned his animosity against society, it became the fashion to
exalt life. Life is good; man, naturally, is magnanimous, it was said.
Society has made him bad.

I am convinced that life is neither good nor bad; it is like Nature,
necessary. And society is neither good nor bad. It is bad for the man
who is endowed with a sensibility which is excessive for his age; it is
good for a man who finds himself in harmony with his surroundings.

A negro will walk naked through a forest in which every drop of water is
impregnated with millions of paludal germs, which teems with insects,
the bites of which produce malignant abcesses, and where the temperature
reaches fifty degrees Centigrade in the shade.

A European, accustomed to the sheltered life of the city, when brought
face to face with such a tropical climate, without means of protection,
would die.

Man needs to be endowed with a sensibility which is proper to his epoch
and his environment; if he has less, his life will be merely that of a
child; if he has just the right measure, it will be the life of an
adult; if he has more, he will be an invalid.




ON DEVOURING ONE'S OWN GOD


It is said that the philosopher Averroes was wont to remark: "What a
sect these Christians are, who devour their own God!"

It would seem that this divine alimentation ought to make men themselves
divine. But it does not; our theophagists are human--they are only too
human, as Nietzsche would have it.

There can be no doubt but that the Southern European races are the most
vivacious, the most energetic, as well as the toughest in the world.
They have produced all the great conquerors. Christianity, when it found
it necessary to overcome them, innoculated them with its Semitic virus,
but this virus has not only failed to make them weaker, but, on the
contrary, it has made them stronger. They appropriated what suited them
in the Asiatic mentality, and proceeded to make a weapon of their
religion. These cruel Levantine races, thanks only to Teutonic
penetration, are at last submitting to a softening process, and they
will become completely softened upon the establishment in Europe of the
domination of the Slav.

Meanwhile they maintain their sway in their own countries.

"They are quite inoffensive," we are told.

Nonsense! They would burn Giordano Bruno as willingly now as they did in
the old days.

There is a great deal of fire remaining in the hearts of our
theophagists.




ANARCHISM


In an article appearing in _Hermes_, a magazine published in
Bilbao, Salaverria assumes that I have been cured of my anarchism, and
that I persist in a negative and anarchistic attitude in order to retain
my literary clientele; which is not the fact. In the first place, I can
scarcely be said to have a clientele; in the second place, a small
following of conservatives is much more lucrative than a large one of
anarchists. It is true that I am withdrawing myself from the festivals
of Pan and the cult of Dionysus, but I am not substituting for them,
either outwardly or inwardly, the worship of Yahveh or of Moloch. I have
no liking for Semitic traditions--none and none whatever! I am not able,
like Salaverria, to admire the rich simply because they are rich, nor
people in high stations because they happen to occupy them.

Salaverria assumes that I have a secret admiration for grand society,
generals, magistrates, wealthy gentlemen from America, and Argentines
who shout out: "How perfectly splendid!" I have the same affection for
these things that I have for the cows which clutter up the road in front
of my house. I would not be Fouquier-Tinville to the former nor butcher
to the latter; but my affection then has reached its limit. Even when I
find something worthy of admiration, my inclination is toward the small.
I prefer the Boboli Gardens to those of Versailles, and Venetian or
Florentine history to that of India.

Great states, great captains, great kings, great gods, leave me cold.
They are all for peoples who dwell on vast plains which are crossed by
mighty rivers, for the Egyptians, for the Chinese, for the Hindus, for
the Germans, for the French.

We Europeans who are of the region of the Pyrenees and the Alps, love
small states, small rivers, and small gods, whom we may address
familiarly.

Salaverria is also mistaken when he says that I am afraid of change. I
am not afraid. My nature is to change. I am predisposed to develop, to
move from here to there, to reverse my literary and political views if
my feelings or my ideas alter. I avoid no reading except that which is
dull; I shall never retreat from any performance except a vapid one, nor
am I a partisan either of austerity or of consistency. Moreover, I am
not a little dissatisfied with myself, and I would give a great deal to
have the pleasure of turning completely about, if only to prove to
myself that I am capable of a shift of attitude which is sincere.




NEW PATHS


Some months since three friends met together in an old-fashioned
bookshop on the venerable Calle del Olivo--a writer, a printer, and
myself.

"Fifteen years ago all three of us were anarchists," remarked the
printer.

"What are we today?" I inquired.

"We are conservatives," replied the man who wrote. "What are you?"

"I believe that I have the same ideas I had then."

"You have not developed if that is so," retorted the writer with a show
of scorn.

I should like to develop, but into what? How? Where am I to find the
way?

When sitting beside the chimney, warming your feet by the fire as you
watch the flames, it is easy to imagine that there may be novel walks to
explore in the neighbourhood; but when you come to look at the map you
find that there is nothing new in the whole countryside.

We are told that ambition means growth. It does not with me. Ortega y
Gasset believes that I am a man who is constitutionally unbribable. I
should not go so far as to say that, but I do say that I do not believe
that I could be bribed in cold blood by the offer of material things. If
Mephistopheles wishes to purchase my soul, he cannot do it with a
decoration or with a title; but if he were to offer me sympathy, and be
a little effusive while he is about it, adding then a touch of
sentiment, I am convinced that he could get away with it quite easily.




LONGING FOR CHANGE


Just as the aim of politicians is to appear constant and consistent,
artists and literary men aspire to change.

Would that the desire of one were as easy of attainment as that of the
other!

To change! To develop! To acquire a second personality which shall be
different from the first! This is given only to men of genius and to
saints. Thus Caesar, Luther, and Saint Ignatius each lived two distinct
lives; or, rather, perhaps, it was one life, with sides that were
obverse and reverse.

The same thing occurs sometimes also among painters. The evolution of El
Greco in painting upsets the whole theory of art.

There is no instance of a like transformation either in ancient or
modern literature. Some such change has been imputed to Goethe, but I
see nothing more in this author than a short preliminary period of
exalted feeling, followed by a lifetime dominated by study and the
intellect.

Among other writers there is not even the suggestion of change.
Shakespeare is alike in all his works; Calderon and Cervantes are always
the same, and this is equally true of our modern authors. The first
pages of Dickens, of Tolstoi or of Zola could be inserted among the
last, and nobody would be the wiser.

Even the erudite rhetorical poets, the Victor Hugos, the Gautiers, and
our Spanish Zorrillas, never get outside of their own rhetoric.




BAROJA, YOU WILL NEVER AMOUNT TO ANYTHING

(_A Refrain_)


"Baroja does not amount to anything, and I presume that he will never
amount to anything," Ortega y Gasset observes in the first issue of the
_Spectator_.

I have a suspicion myself that I shall never amount to anything.
Everybody who knows me has always thought the same.

When I first went to school in San Sebastian, at the age of four--and it
has rained a great deal since that day--the teacher, Don Leon Sanchez y
Calleja, who made a practice of thrashing us with a very stiff pointer
(oh, these hallowed traditions of our ancestors!), looked me over and
said:

"This boy will prove to be as sulky as his brother. He will never amount
to anything."

I studied for a time in the Institute of Pamplona with Don Gregorio
Pano, who taught us mathematics; and this old gentleman, who looked like
the Commander in _Don Juan Tenorio_, with his frozen face and his
white beard, remarked to me in his sepulchral voice:

"You are not going to be an engineer like your father. You will never
amount to anything."

When I took therapeutics under Don Benito Hernando in San Carlos, Don
Benito planted himself in front of me and said:

"That smile of yours, that little smile ... it is impertinent. Don't you
come to me with any of your satirical smiles. You will never amount to
anything, unless it is negative and useless."

I shrugged my shoulders.

Women who have known me always tell me: "You will never amount to
anything."

And a friend who was leaving for America volunteered:

"When I return in twenty or thirty years, I shall find all my
acquaintances situated differently: one will have become rich, another
will have ruined himself, this fellow will have entered the cabinet,
that one will have been swallowed up in a small town; but you will be
exactly what you are today, you will live the same life, and you will
have just two pesetas in your pocket. That is as far as you will get."

The idea that I shall never amount to anything is now deeply rooted in
my soul. It is evident that I shall never become a deputy, nor an
academician, nor a Knight of Isabella the Catholic, nor a captain of
industry, nor alderman, nor Member of the Council, nor a common cheat,
nor shall I ever possess a good black suit.

And yet when a man has passed forty, when his belly begins to take on
adipose tissue and he puffs out with ambition, he ought to be something,
to sport a title, to wear a ribbon, to array himself in a black frock
coat and a white waistcoat; but these ambitions are denied to me. The
professors of my childhood and my youth rise up before my eyes like the
ghost of Banquo, and proclaim: "Baroja, you will never amount to
anything."

When I go down to the seashore, the waves lap my feet and murmur:
"Baroja, you will never amount to anything." The wise owl that perches
at night on our roof at Itzea calls to me: "Baroja, you will never
amount to anything," and even the crows, winging their way across the
sky, incessantly shout at me from above: "Baroja, you will never amount
to anything."

And I am convinced that I never shall amount to anything.




THE PATRIOTISM OF DESIRE


I may not appear to be a very great patriot, but, nevertheless, I am.
Yet I am unable to make my Spanish or Basque blood an exclusive
criterion for judging the world. If I believe that a better orientation
may be acquired by assuming an international point of view, I do not
hold it improper to cease to feel, momentarily, as a Spaniard or a
Basque.

In spite of this, a longing for the accomplishment of what shall be for
the greatest good of my country, normally obsesses my mind, but I am
wanting in the patriotism of lying.

I should like to have Spain the best place in the world, and the Basque
country the best part of Spain.

The feeling is such a natural and common one that it seems scarcely
worth while to explain it.

The climate of Touraine or of Tuscany, the Swiss lakes, the Rhine and
its castles, whatever is best in Europe, I would root up, if I had my
say, and set down here between the Pyrenees and the Straits of
Gibraltar. At the same time, I should denationalize Shakespeare,
Dickens, Tolstoi and Dostoievski, making them Spaniards. I should see
that the best laws and the best customs were those of our country. But
wholly apart from this patriotism of desire, lies the reality. What is
to be gained by denying it? To my mind nothing is to be gained.

There are many to whom the only genuine patriotism is the patriotism of
lying, which in fact is more of a matter of rhetoric than it is of
feeling.

Our falsifying patriots are always engaged in furious combat with other
equally falsifying internationalists.

"Nothing but what we have is of any account," cries one party.

"No, it is what the other fellow has," cries the other.

Patriotism is telling the truth as to one's country, in a sympathetic
spirit which is guided and informed by a love of that which is best.

Now some one will say: "Your patriotism, then, is nothing but an
extension of your ego; it is purely utilitarian."

Absolutely so. But how can there be any other kind of patriotism?




MY HOME LANDS


I have two little countries, which are my homes--the Basque provinces,
and Castile; and by Castile I mean Old Castile. I have, further, two
points of view from which I look out upon the world: one is my home on
the Atlantic; the other is very like a home to me, on the Mediterranean.

All my literary inspirations spring either from the Basque provinces or
from Castile. I could never write a Gallegan or a Catalan novel.

I could wish that my readers were all Basques and Castilians.

Other Spaniards interest me less. Spaniards who live in America, or
Americans, do not interest me at all.




CRUELTY AND STUPIDITY


It appears from an article written by Azorin in connection with a book
of mine, that, to my way of thinking, there are two enormities which are
incredible and intolerable. They are cruelty and stupidity.

Civilized man has no choice but to despise these manifestations of
primitive, brute existence.

We may be able to tolerate stupidity and lack of comprehension when they
are simple and wholly natural, but what of an utter obtuseness of
understanding which dresses itself up and becomes rhetorical? Can
anything be more disagreeable?

When a fly devours the pollen greedily from the pyrethrum, which, as we
know, will prove fatal to him, it becomes clear at once that flies have
no more innate sagacity than men. When we listen to a conservative
orator defending the past with salvos of rhetorical fireworks, we are
overwhelmed by a realization of the complete odiousness of ornamental
stupidity.

With cruelty it is much the same. The habits of the sphex surprise while
bull fights disgust us. The more cruelty and stupidity are dressed up,
the more hateful they become.




THE ANTERIOR IMAGE


I wrote an article once called, "The Spaniard Fails to Understand."
While I do not say it was good, the idea had some truth in it. It is a
fact that failure to understand is not exclusively a Spanish trait, but
the failing is a human one which is more accentuated among peoples of
backward culture, whose vitality is great.

Like a child the Spaniard carries an anterior image in his mind, to
which he submits his perceptions. A child is able to recognize a man or
a horse more easily in a toy than in a painting by Raphael or by
Leonardo da Vinci, because the form of the toy adapts itself more
readily to the anterior image which he has in his consciousness.

It is the same with the Spaniard. Here is one of the causes of his want
of comprehension. One rejects what does not fit in with one's
preconceived scheme of things.

I once rode to Valencia with two priests who were by no means unknown.
One of them had been in the convent of Loyola at Azpeitia for four
years. We talked about our respective homes; they eulogized the
Valencian plain while I replied that I preferred the mountains. As we
passed some bare, treeless hills such as abound near Chinchilla, one of
them--the one, in fact, who had been at Loyola--remarked to me:

"This must remind you of your own country."

I was dumbfounded. How could he identify those arid, parched, glinting
rocks with the Basque landscape, with the humid, green, shaded
countryside of Azpeitia? It was easy to see that the anterior image of a
landscape existing in the mind of that priest, provided only the general
idea of a mountain, and that he was unable to distinguish, as I was,
between a green mountain overgrown with turf and trees, and an arid
hillside of dry rocks.

An hypothesis explaining the formation of visual ideas has been
formulated by Wundt, which he calls the hypothesis of projection. It
attributes to the retina an innate power of referring its impressions
outward along straight lines, in directions which are determined.

According to Mueller, who has adopted this hypothesis, what we perceive
is our own retina under the category of space, and the size of the
retinal image is the original unit of measurement applied by us to
exterior objects.

The Spaniard like a child, will have to amplify his retinal image, if he
is ever to amount to anything. He will have to amplify it, and, no
doubt, complicate it also.




THE TRAGI-COMEDY OF SEX


It is very difficult to approach the sex question and to treat it at
once in a clear and dignified manner. And yet, who can deny that it
furnishes the key to the solution of many of the enigmas and obscurities
of psychology?

Who can question that sex is one of the bases of temperament?

Nevertheless, the subject may be discussed permissibly in scientific and
very general terms, as by Professor Freud. What is unpardonable is any
attempt to bring it down to the sphere of the practical and concrete.

I am convinced that the repercussion of the sexual life is felt through
all the phenomena of consciousness.

According to Freud, an unsatisfied desire produces a series of obscure
movements in consciousness which eat at the soul as electricity is
generated in a storage battery, and this accumulation of psychic energy
must needs produce a disturbance in the nervous system.

Such nervous disturbances, which are of sexual origin, produced by the
strangulation of desires, shape our mentality.

What is the proper conduct for a man during the critical years between
the ages of fourteen and twenty-three? He should be chaste, the priests
will say, shutting their eyes with an hypocritical air. He can marry
afterwards and become a father.

A man who can be chaste without discomfort between fourteen and twenty-
three, is endowed with a most unusual temperament. And it is one which
is not very common at present. As a matter of fact, young men are not
chaste, and cannot be.

Society, as it is well aware of this, opens a little loophole to
sexuality, which is free from social embarrassment--the loophole of
prostitution.

As the bee-hive has its workers, society has its prostitutes.

After a few years of sexual life without the walls, passed in the
surrounding moats of prostitution, the normal man is prepared for
marriage, with its submission to social forms and to standards which are
clearly absurd.

There is no possibility of escaping this dilemma which has been decreed
by society.

The alternative is perversion or surrender.

To a man of means, who has money to spend, surrender is not very
difficult; he has but to follow the formula. Prostitution among the
upper classes does not offend the eye, and it reveals none of the sores
which deface prostitution as it is practised among the poor. Marriage,
too, does not sit heavily upon the rich. With the poor, however, shame
and surrender walk hand in hand.

To practise the baser forms of prostitution is to elbow all that is most
vile in society, and to sink to its level oneself. Then, to marry
afterwards without adequate means, is a continual act of self-abasement.
It is to be unable to maintain one's convictions, it is to be compelled
to fawn upon one's superiors, and this is more true in Spain than it is
elsewhere, as everything here must be obtained through personal
influence.

Suppose one does not submit? If you do not submit you are lost. You are
condemned irretrievably to perversions, to debility, to hysteria.

You will find yourself slinking about the other sex like a famished
wolf, you will live obsessed by lewd ideas, your mind will solace itself
with swindles and cheats wherewith to provide a solution of the riddle
of existence, you will become the mangy sheep that the shepherd sets
apart from the flock.

Ever since early youth, I have been clearly conscious of this dilemma,
and I have determined and said: "No; I choose the abnormal--give me
hysteria, but submission, never!"

So derangement and distortion have come to my mind.

If I could have followed my inclinations freely during those fruitful
years between fifteen and twenty-five, I should have been a serene
person, a little sensual, perhaps, and perhaps a little cynical, but I
should certainly not have become violent.

The morality of our social system has disturbed and upset me.

For this reason I hate it cordially, and I vent upon it in full measure,
as best I may, all the spleen I have to give.

I like at times to disguise this poison under a covering of art.




THE VEILS OF THE SEXUAL LIFE


I am unable to feel any spontaneous enthusiasm for fecundity such as
that which Zola sings. Moreover, I regard the whole pose as a
superstition. I may be a member of an exhausted race,--that is quite
possible,--but between the devotion to our species which is professed by
these would-be re-peoplers of countries, and the purely selfish
preoccupation of the Malthusians, my sympathies are all with the latter.
I see nothing beyond the individual in this sex question--beyond the
individual who finds himself inhibited by sexual morality.

This question must be faced some day and cleared up, it must be seen
divested of all mystery, of all veils, of all deceit. As the hygiene of
nutrition has been studied openly, in broad daylight, so it must be with
sex hygiene.

As a matter of fact, the notion of sin, then, that of honour, and,
finally, dread of syphilis and other sexual diseases, rest like a cloud
on the sexual life, and they are jumbled together with all manner of
fantastic and literary fictions.

Obviously, rigid sexual morality is for the most part nothing more than
the practice of economy in disguise. Let us face this whole problem
frankly. A man has no right to let his life slip by to gratify fools'
follies. We must have regard to what is, with Stendhal. It will be
argued of course that these veils, these subterfuges of the sexual life,
are necessary. No doubt they are to society, but they are not to the
individual. There are those who believe that the interests of the
individual and of society are one, but we, who are defenders of the
individual as against the State, do not think so.




A LITTLE TALK


Myself: I often think I should have been happier if I had been impotent.

My Hearers: How can you say such a terrible thing?

Myself: Why not? To a man like me, sex is nothing but a source of
misery, shame and cheap hypocrisy, as it is to most of us who are
obliged to get on without sufficient means under this civilization of
ours. Now you know why I think that I should have been better off if I
had been impotent.


UPON THE SUPPOSED MORALITY OF MARRIAGE

Single life is said to be selfish and detestable. Certainly it is
immoral. But what of marriage? Is it as moral as it is painted?

I am one who doubts it.

Marriage, like all other social institutions of consequence, is
surrounded by a whole series of common assumptions that cry out to be
cleared up.

There is a pompous and solemn side to marriage, and there is a private
museum side.

Marriage poses as an harmonious general concord in which religion,
society, and nature join.

But is it anything of the kind? It would appear to be doubtful. If the
sole purpose of marriage is to rear children, a man ought to live with a
woman only until she becomes pregnant, and, after that moment, he ought
not to touch her. But here begins the second part. The woman bears a
baby; the baby is nourished by the mother's milk. The man has no right
to co-habit with his wife during this period either, because it will be
at the risk of depriving the child of its natural source of nutriment.

In consequence, a man must either co-habit with his wife once in two
years, or else there will be some default in the marriage.

What is he to do? What is the moral course? Remember that three factors
have combined to impose the marriage. One, the most far-reaching today,
is economic; another, which is also extremely important, is social, and
the third, now rapidly losing its hold, but still not without influence,
is religious. The three forces together attempt to mould nature to their
will.

Economic pressure and the high cost of living make against the having of
children. They encourage default.

"How are we to have all these children?" the married couple asks. "How
can we feed and educate them?"

Social pressure also tends in the same direction. Religious morality,
however, still persists in its idea of sin, although the potency of this
sanction is daily becoming less, even to the clerical eye.

If nature had a vote, it would surely be cast in favour of polygamy. Man
is forever sexual, and in equal degree, until the verge of decrepitude.
Woman passes through the stages of fecundation, pregnancy, and
lactation.

There can be no doubt but that the most convenient, the most logical and
the most moral system of sexual intercourse, naturally, is polygamy.

But the economic subdues the natural. Who proposes to have five wives
when he cannot feed one?

Society has made man an exclusively social product, and set him apart
from nature.

What can the husband and wife do, especially when they are poor? Must
they overload themselves with children, and then deliver them up to
poverty and neglect because God has given them, or shall they limit
their number?

If my opinion is asked, I advise a limit--although it may be artificial
and immoral.

Marriage presents us with this simple choice: we may either elect the
slow, filthy death of the indigent workingman, of the carabineer who
lives in a shack which teems with children, or else the clean life of
the French, who limit their offspring.

The middle class everywhere today is accepting the latter alternative.
Marriage is stripping off its morality in the bushes, and it is well
that it should do so.




THE SOVEREIGN CROWD


A strong man may either dominate and subdue the sovereign crowd when he
confronts it, as he would a wild beast, or he may breathe his thoughts
and ideas into it, which is only another form of domination.

As I am not strong enough to do either, I shun the sovereign masses, so
as not to become too keenly conscious of their collective bestiality and
ill temper.




THE REMEDY


Every man fancies that he has something of the doctor in him, and
considers himself competent to advise some sort of a cure, so I come now
with a remedy for the evils of life. My remedy is constant action. It is
a cure as old as the world, and it may be as useful as any other, and
doubtless it is as futile as all the rest. As a matter of fact, it is no
remedy at all.

The springs of action lie all within ourselves, and they derive from the
vigour and health which we have inherited from our fathers. The man who
possesses them may draw on them whenever he will, but the man who is
without them can never acquire them, no matter how widely he may seek.




III

THE EXTRARADIUS


The extraradius of a writer may be said to be made up of his literary
opinions and inclinations. I wish to expose the literary cell from the
nucleus out and to unfold it, instead of proceeding in from the
covering.

The term may seem pedantic and histological, but it has the attraction
to my mind of a reminiscence of student days.




RHETORIC AND ANTI-RHETORIC


If I were to formulate my opinions upon style, I should say: "Imitations
of other men's styles are bad, but a man's own style is good."

There is a store of common literary finery, almost all of which is in
constant use and has become familiar.

When a writer lays hands on any of this finery spontaneously, he makes
it his own, and the familiar flower blossoms as it does in Nature.

When an author's inspiration does not proceed from within out, but
rather from without in, then he becomes at once a bad rhetorician.

I am one of those writers who employ the least possible amount of this
common store of rhetoric. There are various reasons for my being anti-
rhetorical. In the first place I do not believe that the pages of a bad
writer can be improved by following general rules; if they do gain in
one respect, they lose inevitably in another.

So much for one reason; but I have others.

Languages display a tendency to follow established forms. Thus Spanish
tends toward Castilian. But why should I, a Basque, who never hears
Castilian spoken in my daily life in the accents of Avila or of Toledo,
endeavour to imitate it? Why should I cease to be a Basque in order to
appear Castilian, when I am not? Not that I cherish sectional pride, far
from it; but every man should be what he is, and if he can be content
with what he is, let him be held fortunate.

For this reason, among others, I reject Castilian turns and idioms when
they suggest themselves to my mind. Thus if it occurs to me to write
something that is distinctively Castilian, I cast about for a phrase by
means of which I may express myself in what to me is a more natural way,
without suggestion of our traditional literature.

On the other hand, if the pure rhetoricians, of the national school, who
are _castizo_--the Mariano de Cavias, the Ricardo Leons--should
happen to write something simply, logically and with modern directness,
they would cast about immediately for a roundabout way of saying it,
which might appear elaborate and out of date.




THE RHYTHM OF STYLE


There are persons who imagine that I am ignorant of the three or four
elementary rules of good writing, which everybody knows, while others
believe that I am unacquainted with syntax. Senor Bonilla y San Martin
has conducted a search through my books for deficiencies, and has
discovered that in one place I write a sentence in such and such
fashion, and that in another I write something else in another, while in
a third I compound a certain word falsely.

With respect to the general subject of structural usage which he raises,
it would be easy to cite ample precedent among our classic authors; with
respect to the word _misticidad_ occurring in one of my books, I
have put it into the mouth of a foreigner. The faults brought to light
by Senor Bonilla are not very serious. But what of it? Suppose they
were?

An intelligent friend once said to me:

"I don't know what is lacking in your style; I find it acrid." I feel
that this criticism is the most apt that has yet been made.

My difficulty in writing Castilian does not arise from any deficiency in
grammar nor any want of syntax. I fail in measure, in rhythm of style,
and this shocks those who open my books for the first time. They note
that there is something about them that does not sound right, which is
due to the fact that there is a manner of respiration in them, a system
of pauses, which is not traditionally Castilian.

I should insist upon the point at greater length, were it not that the
subject of style is cluttered up with such a mass of preconceptions,
that it would be necessary to redefine our terminology, and then, after
all, perhaps we should not understand one another. Men have an idea that
they are thinking when they operate the mechanism of language which they
have at command. When somebody makes the joints of language creak, they
say: "He does not know how to manage it." Certainly he does know how to
manage it. Anybody can manage a platitude. The truth is simply this: the
individual writer endeavours to make of language a cloak to fit his
form, while, contrarywise, the purists attempt to mould their bodies
till they fit the cloak.




RHETORIC OF THE MINOR KEY


Persons to whom my style is not entirely distasteful, sometimes ask:

"Why use the short sentence when it deprives the period of eloquence and
rotundity?"

"Because I do not desire eloquence or rotundity," I reply. "Furthermore,
I avoid them." The vast majority of Spanish purists are convinced that
the only possible rhetoric is the rhetoric of the major key. This, for
example, is the rhetoric of Castelar and Costa, the rhetoric which
Ricardo Leon and Salvador Rueda manipulate today, as it has been
inherited from the Romans. Its purpose is to impart solemnity to
everything, to that which already has it by right of nature, and to that
which has it not. This rhetoric of the major key marches with stately,
academic tread. At great, historic moments, no doubt it is very well,
but in the long run, in incessant parade, it is one of the most deadly
soporifics in literature; it destroys variety, it is fatal to subtlety,
to nice transitions, to detail, and it throws the uniformity of the
copybook over everything.

On the other hand, the rhetoric of the minor key, which seems poor at
first blush, soon reveals itself to be more attractive. It moves with a
livelier, more life-like rhythm; it is less bombastic. This rhetoric
implies continence and basic economy of effort; it is like an agile man,
lightly clothed and free of motion.

To the extent of my ability I always avoid the rhetoric of the major
key, which is assumed as the only proper style, the very moment that one
sits down to write Castilian. I should like, of course, to rise to the
heights of solemnity now and then, but very seldom.

"Then what you seek," I am told, "is a familiar style like that of
Mesonero Romanos, Trueba and Pereda?"

No, I am not attracted by that either.

The familiar, rude, vulgar manner reminds me of a worthy bourgeois
family at the dinner table. There sits the husband in his shirt sleeves,
while the wife's hair is at loose ends and she is dirty besides, and all
the children are in rags.

I take it that one may be simple and sincere without either affectation
or vulgarity. It is well to be a little neutral, perhaps, a little grey
for the most part, so that upon occasion the more delicate hues may
stand out clearly, while a rhythm may be employed to advantage which is
in harmony with actual life, which is light and varied, and innocent of
striving after solemnity.

A modern poet, in my opinion, has illustrated this rhetoric of the minor
key to perfection.

He is Paul Verlaine.

A style like Verlaine's, which is non-sequent, macerated, free, is
indispensable to any mastery of the rhetoric of the minor key. This, to
me, has always been my literary ideal.




THE VALUE OF MY IDEAS


From time to time, my friend Azorin attempts to analyse my ideas. I do
not pretend to be in the secret of the scales, as such an assumption
upon my part would be ridiculous. As the pilot takes advantage of a
favourable wind, and if it does not blow, of one that is unfavourable, I
do the same. The meteorologist is able to tell with mathematical
accuracy in his laboratory, after a glance at his instruments, not only
the direction of the prevailing wind, but the atmospheric pressure and
the degree of humidity as well. I am able only, however, to say with the
pilot: "I sail this way," and then make head as best I may.




GENIUS AND ADMIRATION


I have no faith in the contention of the Lombrosians that genius is akin
to insanity, neither do I think that genius is an infinite capacity for
taking pains. Lombroso, for that matter, is as old-fashioned today as a
hoop skirt.

Genius partakes of the miraculous. If some one should tell me that a
stick had been transformed into a snake by a miracle, naturally I should
not believe it; but if I should be asked whether there was not something
miraculous in the very existence of a stick or of a snake, I should be
constrained to acknowledge the miracle.

When I read the lives of the philosophers in Diogenes Laertius, I arrive
at the conclusion that Epicurus, Zeno, Diogenes, Protagoras and the
others were nothing more than men who had common sense. Clearly, as a
corollary, I am obliged to conclude that the people we meet nowadays
upon the street, whether they wear gowns, uniforms or blouses, are mere
animals masquerading in human shape.

Contradicting the assumption that the great men of antiquity were only
ordinary normal beings, we must concede the fact that most extraordinary
conditions must have existed and, indeed, have been pre-exquisite,
before a Greece could have arisen in antiquity, or an Athens in Greece,
or a man such as Plato in Athens.

By very nature, the sources of admiration are as mysterious to my mind
as the roots of genius. Do we admire what we understand, or what we do
not understand? Admiration is of two kinds, of which the more common
proceeds from wonder at something which we do not understand. There is,
however, an admiration which goes with understanding.

Edgar Poe composed several stories, of which _The Goldbug_ is one,
in which an impenetrable enigma is first presented, to be solved
afterwards as by a talisman; but, then, a lesson in cryptography ensues,
wherein the talisman is explained away, and the miraculous gives place
to the reasoning faculties of a mind of unusual power.

He has done something very similar in his poem, _The Raven_, where
the poem is followed by an analysis of its gestation, which is called
_The Philosophy of Composition_. Would it be more remarkable to
write _The Raven_ by inspiration, or to write it through conscious
skill? To find the hidden treasure through the talisman of _The
Goldbug_, or through the possession of analytical faculties such as
those of the protagonist of Poe's tale?

Much consideration will lead to the conclusion that one process is as
marvellous as the other.

It may be said that there is nothing miraculous in nature, and it may be
said that it is all miraculous.




MY LITERARY AND ARTISTIC INCLINATIONS


Generally speaking, I neither understand old books very well, nor do I
care for them--I have been able to read only Shakespeare, and perhaps
one or two others, with the interest with which I approach modern
writers.

It has sometimes seemed to me that the unreadableness of the older
authors might be made the foundation of a philosophic system. Yet I
have met with some surprises.

One was that I enjoyed the _Odyssey_.

"Am I a hypocrite?" I asked myself.

I do not find old painters to be as incompatible as old authors. On the
contrary, my experience has been that they are the reverse. I greatly
prefer a canvas by Botticelli, Mantegna, El Greco or Velazquez to a
modern picture.

The only famous painter of the past for whom I have entertained an
antipathy, is Raphael; yet, when I was in Rome and saw the frescos in
the Vatican, I was obliged again to ask myself if my attitude was a
pose, because they struck me frankly as admirable.

I do not pretend to taste, but I am sincere; nor do I endeavour to be
consistent. Consistency does not interest me.

The only consistency possible is a consistency which comes from without,
which proceeds from fear of public opinion, and anything of this sort
appears to me to be contemptible.

Not to change because of what others may think, is one of the most
abject forms of slavery.

Let us change all we can. My ideal is continual change--change of life,
change of home, of food, and even of skin.




MY LIBRARY


Among the things that I missed most as a student, was a small library.
If I had had one, I believe I should have dipped more deeply into books
and into life as well; but it was not given me. During the period which
is most fruitful for the maturing of the mind, that is, during the years
from twelve to twenty, I lived by turns in six or seven cities, and as
it was impossible to travel about with books, I never retained any.

A lack of books was the occasion of my failure to form the habit of re-
reading, of tasting again and again and of relishing what I read, and
also of making notes in the margin.

Nearly all authors who own a small library, in which the books are
properly arranged, and nicely annotated, become famous.

I am not sentimentalizing about stolid, brazen note-taking, such as that
with which the gentlemen of the Ateneo debase their books, because that
merely indicates barbarous lack of culture and an obtuseness which is
Kabyline.

Having had no library in my youth, I have never possessed the old
favourites that everybody carries in his pocket into the country, and
reads over and over until he knows them by heart.

I have looked in and out of books as travellers do in and out of inns,
not stopping long in any of them. I am very sorry but it is too late now
for the loss to be repaired.




ON BEING A GENTLEMAN


Viewed from without, I seem to impress some as a crass, crabbed person,
who has very little ability, while others regard me as an unhealthy,
decadent writer. Then Azorin has said of me that I am a literary
aristocrat, a fine and comprehensive mind.

I should accept Azorin's opinion very gladly, but personality needs to
be hammered severely in literature before it leaves its slag. Like metal
which is removed from the furnace after casting and placed under the
hammer, I would offer my works to be put to the test, to be beaten by
all hammers.

If anything were left, I should treasure it then lovingly; if nothing
were left, we should still pick up some fragments of life.

I always listen to the opinions of the non-literary concerning my books
with the greatest interest. My cousin, Justo Goni, used to express his
opinion without circumlocution. He always carried off my books as they
appeared, and then, a long time after, would give his opinion.

Of _The Way of Perfection_ he said:

"Good, yes, very good; but it is so tiresome."

I realized that there was some truth in his view.

When he read the three novels to which I had given the general title,
_The Struggle for Life_, he stopped me on the Calle de Alcala one
day and said:

"You have not convinced me."

"How so?"

"Your hero is a man of the people, but he is falsified. He is just like
you are; you can never be anything but a gentleman."

This gentility with which my cousin reproached me, and without doubt he
was correct, is common to nearly all Spanish writers.

There are no Spaniards at present, and there never have been any at any
other time, who write out of the Spanish soul, out of the hearts of the
people. Even Dicenta did not. His _Juan Jose_ is not a workingman,
but a young gentleman. He has nothing of the workingman about him beyond
the label, the clothes, and such externals.

Galdos, for example, can make the common people talk; Azorin can portray
the villages of Castile, set on their arid heights, against backgrounds
of blue skies; Blasco Ibanez can paint the life of the Valencians in
vivid colours with a prodigality that carries with it the taint of the
cheap, but none of them has penetrated into the popular soul. That would
require a great poet, and we have none.




GIVING OFFENCE


I have the name of being aggressive, but, as a matter of fact, I have
scarcely ever attacked any one personally.

Many hold a radical opinion to be an insult.

In an article in _La Lectura_, Ortega y Gasset illustrates my
propensity to become offensive by recalling that as we left the Ateneo
together one afternoon, we encountered a blind man on the Calle del
Prado, singing a _jota_, whereupon I remarked: "An unspeakable
song!"

Admitted. It is a fact, but I fail to see any cause of offence. It is
only another way of saying more forcefully: "I do not like it, it does
not please me," or what you will.

I have often been surprised to find, after expressing an opinion, that I
have been insulted bitterly in reply.

At the outset of my literary career, Azorin and I shared the ill will of
everybody.

When Maeztu, Azorin, Carlos del Rio and myself edited a modest magazine,
by the name of _Juventud_, Azorin and I were the ones principally
to be insulted. The experience was repeated later when we were both
associated with _El Globo_.

Azorin, perhaps, was attacked and insulted more frequently, so that I
was often in a position to act as his champion.

Some years ago I published an article in the _Nuevo Mundo_, in
which I considered Vazquez Mella and his refutation of the Kantian
philosophy, dwelling especially upon his seventeenth mathematical proof
of the existence of God. The thing was a burlesque, but a conservative
paper took issue with me, called me an atheist, a plagiarist, a drunkard
and an ass. As for being an atheist, I did not take that as an insult,
but as an honour.

Upon another occasion, I published an article about Spanish women, with
particular reference to Basque women, in which I maintained that they
sacrificed natural kindliness and sympathy on the altars of honour and
religion, whereupon the Daughters of Mary of San Sebastian made answer,
charging that I was a degenerate son of their city, who had robbed them
of their honour, which was absolutely contrary to the fact. In passing,
they suggested to the editor of the _Nuevo Mundo_ that he should not
permit me to write again for the magazine.

I wrote an article once dealing with Maceo and Cuba, whereupon a
journalist from those parts jumped up and called me a fat Basque ox.

The Catalans have also obliged me with some choice insults, which I have
found engaging. When I lectured in Barcelona in the Casa del Pueblo,
_La Veu de Catalunya_ undertook to report the affair, picturing me
as talking platitudes before an audience of professional bomb throwers
and dynamiters, and experts with the Browning gun.

Naturally, I was enchanted.

Recently, when writing for the review _Espana_, I had a similar
experience, which reminded me of my connection with the smaller
periodicals of fifteen years ago. Some gentlemen, mostly natives of the
provinces, approached the editor, Ortega y Gasset, with the information
that I was not a fit person to contribute to a serious magazine, as what
I wrote was not so, while my name would ruin the sale of the weekly.

These pious souls and good Christians imagined that I might need that
work in order to earn my living, so in the odour of sanctity they did
whatever lay in their power to deprive me of my means of support. Oh,
noble souls! Oh, ye of great heart! I salute you from a safe distance,
and wish you the most uncomfortable beds in the most intolerable wards
set apart for scurvy patients, in any hospital of your choosing,
throughout the world.




THIRST FOR GLORY


Fame, success, popularity, the illusion of being known, admired and
esteemed, appeal in different ways to authors. To Salvador Rueda, glory
is a triumphant entrance into Tegucigalpa, where he is taken to the
Spanish Casino, and crowned with a crown of real laurel. To Unamuno,
glory is the assurance that people will be interested in him at least a
thousand years after he is dead. And to others the only glory worth
talking about is that courted by the French writer, Rabbe, who busied
himself in Spain with la _gloire argent comptant_. Some yearn for a
large stage with pennons and salvos and banners, while others are
content with a smaller scene.

Ortega y Gasset says that to me glory reduces itself to the proportions
of an agreeable dinner, with good talk across the table.

And he is right. To mingle with pleasant, intelligent, cordial persons
is one of the more alluring sorts of fame.

There is something seductive and ingratiating about table talk when it
is spirited. A luxurious dining room, seating eight or ten guests, of
whom three or four are pretty women, one of whom should be a foreigner;
as many men, none of them aristocrats--generally speaking, aristocrats
are disagreeable--nor shall we admit artists, for they are in the same
class as the aristocrats; one's neighbour, perhaps, is a banker, or a
Jew of aquiline feature, and then the talk touches on life and on
politics, relieved with a little gallantry toward the ladies, from time
to time allowing to each his brief opportunity to shine--all this,
beyond doubt, is most agreeable.

I like, too, to spend an afternoon conversing with a number of ladies in
a comfortable drawing room, which is well heated. I visualize the
various rewards which are meted out by fame as being housed invariably
under a good roof. What is not intimate, does not appeal to me.

I have often seen Guimera in a cafe on the Rambla in Barcelona, drinking
coffee at a table, alone and forlorn, in the midst of a crowd of shop
clerks and commercial travellers.

"Is that Guimera?" I asked a Catalan journalist.

"Yes."

And then he told me that they had tendered him a tremendous testimonial
some months previously, which had been attended by I don't know how many
hundreds of societies, all marching with their banners.

I have no very clear idea of just what Guimera has done, as it is many
years since I have gone to the theatre, but I know that he is considered
in Catalonia to be one of the glories of the country.

I should not care for an apotheosis, and then find myself left forlorn
and alone to take my coffee afterwards with a horde of clerks.

I may never write anything that will take the world by storm--most
probably not; but if I do, and it occurs to my fellow townsmen to
organize one of these celebrations with flags, banners and choral
societies, they need not count upon my attendance. They will not be able
to discover me even with the aid of Sherlock Holmes.

When I am old, I hope to take coffee with pleasant friends, whether it
be in a palace or a porter's lodge. I neither expect nor desire flags,
committees, nor waving banners.

Laurel does not seduce me, and you cannot do it with bunting.




ELECTIVE ANTIPATHIES


As I have expressed my opinions of other authors sharply, making them
public with the proper disgust, others have done the same with me, which
is but logical and natural, especially in the case of a writer such as
myself, who holds that sympathy and antipathy are of the very essence of
art.

My opponents and myself differ chiefly in the fact that I am more
cynical than they, and so I disclose my personal animus quite
ingenuously, which my enemies fail to do.

I hold that there are two kinds of morality; morality of work and
morality of play. The morality of work is an immoral morality, which
teaches us to take advantage of circumstances and to lie. The morality
of play, for the reason that it deals with mere futilities, is finer and
more chivalrous.

I believe that in literature and in all liberal arts, the morality
should be the morality of play, while my opponents for the most part
hold that the morality of literature should be the morality of work. I
have never, consciously at least, been influenced in my literary
opinions by practical considerations. My ideas may have been capricious,
and they are,--they may even be bad,--but they have no ulterior
practical motive.

My failure to be practical, together, perhaps, with an undue obtuseness
of perception, brings me face to face with critics of two sorts: one,
esthetic; the other, social.

My esthetic critics say to me:

"You have not perfected your style, you have not developed the technique
of your novels. You can scarcely be said to be literate."

I shrug my shoulders and reply: "Are you sure?"

My social critics reproach me for my negative and destructive views. I
do not know how to create anything, I am incapable of enthusiasm, I
cannot describe life, and so on.

This feeling seems logical enough, if it is sincere, if it is honest,
and I accept it as such, and it does not offend me.

But, as some of my esthetic critics tell me: "You are not an artist, you
do not know how to write," without feeling any deep conviction on the
subject, but rather fearing that perhaps I may be an artist after all
and that at last somebody may come to think so, so among my critics who
pose as defenders of society, there are those who are influenced by
motives which are purely utilitarian.

I am reminded of servants shouting at a man picking flowers over the
garden wall, or an apple from the orchard as he passes, who raise their
voices as high as possible so as to make their officiousness known.

They shout so that their masters will hear.

"How dare that rascal pick flowers from the garden? How dare he defy us
and our masters? Shall a beggar, who is not respectable, tell us that
our laws are not laws, that our honours are not honours, and that we are
a gang of accomplished idiots?"

Yes, that is just what I tell them, and I shall continue to do so as
long as it is the truth.

Shout, you lusty louts in gaudy liveries, bark you little lap-dogs,
guard the gates, you government inspectors and carabineers! I shall look
into your garden, which is also my garden, I shall make off with
anything from it that I am able, and I shall say what I please.




TO A MEMBER OF SEVERAL ACADEMIES


A certain Basque writer, one Senor de Loyarte, who is a member of
several academies, and Royal Commissioner of Education, assails me
violently upon social grounds in a book which he has published, although
the attack is veiled as purely literary.

Senor de Loyarte is soporific as a general rule, but in his polite
sortie against me, he is more amusing than is usual. His malice is so
keen that it very nearly causes him to appear intelligent.

In literature, Senor de Loyarte--and why should Senor de Loyarte not be
associated with literature--presents the figure of a fat, pale, flabby
boy in a priests' school, skulking under the skirts of a Jesuit Father.

Senor de Loyarte, like those little, chubby-winged cherubs on sacristy
ceilings, shakes his arrowlet at me and lets fling a _billet doux_.

Senor de Loyarte says I smack of the cadaver, that I am a plagiarist, an
atheist, anti-religious, anti-patriotic, and more to boot.

I shall not reply for it may be true. Yet it is also true that Senor de
Loyarte's noble words will please his noble patrons, from whom, perhaps,
he may receive applause even more substantial than the pat on the
shoulder of a Jesuit Father, or the smile of every good Conservative,
who is a defender of the social order. His book is an achievement which
should induct Senor de Loyarte into membership in several more
academies. Senor de Loyarte is already a Corresponding Member of the
Spanish Academy, or of the Academy of History, I am not quite sure
which; but they are all the same. Speaking of history, I should be
interested to know who did first introduce the sponge.

Senor de Loyarte is destined to be a member, a member of academies all
his life.




IV

ADMIRATIONS AND INCOMPATIBILITIES


Diogenes Laertius tells us that when Zeno consulted the oracle as to
what he should do in order to attain happiness in life, the deity
replied that he should assimilate himself with the dead. Having
understood, he applied himself exclusively to the study of books.

Thus speaks Laertius, in the translation of Don Jose Ortiz y Sanz. I
confess that I should not have understood the oracle. However, without
consulting any oracle, I have devoted myself for some time to reading
books, whether ancient and modern, both out of curiosity and in order to
learn something of life.




CERVANTES, SHAKESPEARE, MOLIERE


For a long time, I thought that Shakespeare was a writer who was unique
and different from all others. It seemed to me that the difference
between him and other writers was one of quality rather than of
quantity. I felt that, as a man, Shakespeare was of a different kind of
humanity; but I do not think so now. Shakespeare is no more the
quintessence of the world's literature than Plato and Kant are the
quintessence of universal philosophy. I once admired the philosophy and
characters of the author of Hamlet; when I read him today, what most
impresses me is his rhetoric, and, above all, his high spirit.

Cervantes is not very sympathetic to me. He is tainted with the perfidy
of the man who has made a pact with the enemy (with the Church, the
aristocracy, with those in power), and then conceals the fact.
Philosophically, in spite of his enthusiasm for the Renaissance, he
appears vulgar and pedestrian to me, although he towers above all his
contemporaries on account of the success of a single invention, that of
Don Quixote and Sancho, which is to literature what the discovery of
Newton was to Physics.

As for Moliere, he is a poor fellow, who never attains the exuberance of
Shakespeare, nor the invention that immortalizes Cervantes. But his
taste is better than Shakespeare's and he is more social, more modern
than Cervantes. The half-century or more that separates the work of
Cervantes from that of Moliere, is not sufficient to explain this
modernity. Between the Spain of _Quixote_ and the France of _Le
Bourgeois Gentilhomme_, lies something deeper than time. Descartes
and Gassendi had lived in France, while, on the other hand, the seed of
Saint Ignatius Loyola lay germinating in the Spain of Cervantes.




THE ENCYCLOPEDISTS


A French journalist who visited my house during the summer, remarked:

"The ideas were great in the French Revolution; it was not the men." I
replied: "I believe that the men of the French Revolution were great,
but not the ideas."

Of all the philosophical literature of the pre-revolutionary period,
what remains today?

What books exert influence? In France, excerpts from Montesquieu,
Diderot and Rousseau are still read in the schools, but outside of
France, they are read nowhere.

Only an extraordinary person would go away for the summer with
Montesquieu's _Esprit des Lois_, or Jean Jacques Rousseau's
_Emile_ in his grip. Montesquieu is demonstration of the fact that
a book cannot live entirely by virtue of correctness of style.

Of all the writers who enjoyed such fame in the eighteenth century, the
only one who will bear reading today is Voltaire--the Voltaire of the
_Dictionnaire Philosophique_ and of the novels.

Diderot, whom the French consider a great man, is of no interest
whatsoever to the modern mind, at least to the mind which is not French.
He is almost as dull as Rousseau. _La Religieuse_ is an utterly
false little book. Some years ago I loaned a copy to a young lady who
had just come from a convent. "I have never seen anything like this,"
she said to me. "It is a fantasy with no relation to the truth." That
was my idea. _Jacques, le fataliste_ is tiresome; _Le Neveu de
Rameau_ gives at first the impression that it is going to amount to
something, to something powerful such as the _Satiricon_ of
Petronius, or _El Buscon_ of Quevedo; but at the end, it is
nothing.

The only writer of the pre-revolutionary period who can be read today
with any pleasure--and this, perhaps, is because he does not attempt
anything--is Chamfort. His characters and anecdotes are sufficiently
highly flavoured to defy the action of time.




THE ROMANTICISTS


_Goethe_

If a militia of genius should be formed on Parnassus, Goethe would be
the drum-major. He is so great, so majestic, so serene, so full of
talent, so abounding in virtue, and yet, so antipathetic!

_Chateaubriand_

A skin of Lacrymae Christi that has turned sour. At times the good
Viscount drops molasses into the skin to take away the taste of vinegar;
at other times, he drops in more vinegar to take away the sweet taste of
the molasses. He is both moth-eaten and sublime.

_Victor Hugo_

Victor Hugo, the most talented of rhetoricians! Victor Hugo, the most
exquisite of vulgarians! Victor Hugo--mere common sense dressed up as
art.

_Stendhal_

The inventor of a psychological automaton moved by clock work.

_Balzac_

A nightmare, a dream produced by indigestion, a chill, rare acuteness,
equal obtuseness, a delirium of splendours, cheap hardware, of pretence
and bad taste. Because of his ugliness, because of his genius, because
of his immorality, the Danton of printers' ink.

_Poe_

A mysterious sphinx who makes one tremble with lynx-like eyes, the
goldsmith of magical wonders.

_Dickens_

At once a mystic and a sad clown. The Saint Vincent de Paul of the
loosened string, the Saint Francis of Assisi of the London Streets.
Everything is gesticulation, and the gesticulations are ambiguous. When
we think he is going to weep, he laughs; when we think he is going to
laugh, he cries. A remarkable genius who does everything he can to make
himself appear puny, yet who is, beyond doubt, very great.

_Larra_ [Footnote: A Spanish poet and satirist (1809-37), famous
under the pseudonym of Figaro. He committed suicide. The poet Zorrilla
first came into prominence through some verses read at his tomb.]

A small, trained tiger shut up in a tiny cage. He has all the tricks of
a cat; he mews like one, he lets you stroke his back, and there are
times when his fiercer instincts show in his eyes. Then you realize that
he is thinking: "How I should love to eat you up!"




THE NATURALISTS


_Flaubert_

Flaubert is a heavy-footed animal. It is plain that he is a Norman. All
his work has great specific gravity. He disgusts me. One of Flaubert's
master strokes was the conception of the character of Homais, the
apothecary, in _Madame Bovary_. I cannot see, however, that Homais
is any more stupid than Flaubert himself, and he may even be less so.

_The Giants_

The good Zola, vigorous, dull and perspiring, dubbed his contemporaries,
the French naturalistic novelists, "Giants." What an imagination was
possessed by Zola!

These "Giants" were none other than the Goncourts, whose insignificance
approached at times imbecility, and in addition, Alphonse Daudet, with
the air of a cheap comedian and an armful of mediocre books--a truly
French diet, feeble, but well seasoned. These poor Giants, of whom Zola
would talk, have become so weak and shrunken with time, that nobody is
able any longer to make them out, even as dwarfs.




THE SPANISH REALISTS


The Spanish realists of the same period are the height of the
disagreeable. The most repugnant of them all is Pereda. When I read him,
I feel as if I were riding on a balky, vicious mule, which proceeds at
an uncomfortable little trot, and then, all of a sudden, cuts stilted
capers like a circus horse.




THE RUSSIANS


_Dostoievski_

One hundred years hence Dostoievsky's appearance in literature will be
hailed as one of the most extraordinary events of the nineteenth
century. Among the spiritual fauna of Europe, his place will be that of
the Diplodocus.

_Tolstoi_

A number of years ago I was in the habit of visiting the Ateneo, and I
used to argue there with the habitues, who in general have succeeded in
damming up the channels through which other men receive ideas.

"To my mind, Tolstoi is a Greek," I observed. "He is serene, clear, his
characters are god-like; all they think of are their love affairs, their
passions. They are never called upon to face the acute problem of
subsistence, which is fundamental with us."

"Utter nonsense! There is nothing Greek about Tolstoi," declared
everybody.

Some years later at a celebration in honour of Tolstoi, Anatole France
chanced to remark: "Tolstoi is a Greek."

When this fell from Anatole France, the obstruction in the channels
through which these gentlemen of the Ateneo received their ideas ceased
for the moment to exist, and they began to believe that, after all,
Tolstoi might very well have something of the Greek in him.




THE CRITICS


_Sainte Beuve_

Sainte Beuve writes as if he had always said the last word, as if he
were precisely at the needle of the scales. Yet I feel that this writer
is not as infallible as he thinks. His interest lies in his anecdote, in
his malevolent insinuation, in his bawdry. Beyond these, he has the same
Mediterranean features as the rest of us.

_Taine_

Hippolyte Taine is also one of those persons who think they understand
everything. And there are times when he understands nothing. His
_History of English Literature_, which makes an effort to be broad
and generous, is one of the pettiest, most niggardly histories ever
written anywhere. His articles on Shakespeare, Walter Scott and Dickens
have been fabricated by a French professor, which is to say that they
are among the most wooden productions of the universities of Europe.

_Ruskin_

He impresses me as the Prince of Upstarts, grandiloquent and at the same
time unctuous, a General in a Salvation Army of Art, or a monk who is a
devotee of an esthetic Doctrine which has been drawn up by a Congress of
Tourists.

_Croce_

The esthetic theory of Benedetto Croce has proved another delusion to
me. Rather than an esthetic theory, it is a study of esthetic theories.
As in most Latin productions, the fundamental question is not discussed
therein, but the method of approaching that question.

_Clarin_ [Footnote: Pseudonym of Leopoldo Alas, a Spanish critic
and novelist of the transition, born in Asturias, whose influence was
widely felt in Spanish letters. He died in 1905.]

I have a poor opinion of Clarin, although some of my friends regard him
with admiration. As a man, he must have been envious; as a novelist, he
is dull and unhappy; as a critic, I am not certain that he was ever in
the right.




V

THE PHILOSOPHERS


A thirst for some knowledge of philosophy resulted in consulting Dr.
Letamendi's book on pathology during my student days. I also purchased
the works of Kant, Fichte, and Schopenhauer in the cheap editions which
were published by Zozaya. The first of these that I read was Fichte's
_Science of Knowledge_, of which I understood nothing. It stirred
in me a veritable indignation against both author and translator. Was
philosophy nothing but mystification, as it is assumed to be by artists
and shop clerks?

Reading _Parerga and Paralipomena_ reconciled me to philosophy.
After that I bought in French _The Critique of Pure Reason_, _The
World as Will and Idea_, and a number of other books.

How was it that I, who am gifted with but little tenacity of purpose,
mustered up perseverance enough to read difficult books for which I was
without preparation? I do not know, but the fact is that I read them.

Years after this initiation into philosophy, I began reading the works
of Nietzsche, which impressed me greatly.

Since then I have picked at this and that in order to renew my
philosophic store, but without success. Some books and authors will not
agree with me, and I have not dared to venture others. I have had a
volume of Hegel's _Logic_ on my table for a long time. I have
looked at it, I have smelled of it, but courage fails me.

Yet I am attracted to metaphysics more than to any other phase of
philosophy. Political philosophy, sociology and the common sense schools
please me least. Hobbes, Locke, Bentham, Comte and Spencer I have never
liked at all. Even their Utopias, which ought to be amusing, bore me
profoundly, and this has been true from Plato's _Republic_ to
Kropotkin's _Conquest of Bread_ and Wells's _A Modern Utopia_.
Nor could I ever become interested in the pseudo-philosophy of
anarchism. One of the books which have disappointed me the most is Max
Stirner's _Ego and His Own_.

Psychology is a science which I should like to know. I have therefore
skimmed through the standard works of Wundt and Ziehen. After reading
them, I came to the conclusion that the psychology which I am seeking,
day by day and every day, is not to be found in these treatises. It is
contained rather in the writings of Nietzsche and the novels of
Dostoievski. In the course of time, I may succeed, perhaps, in entering
the more abstract domains of the science.




VI

THE HISTORIANS


Miss Blimber, the school teacher in Dickens's _Dombey and Son_,
could have died happily had she known Cicero. Even if such a thing were
possible I should have no great desire to know Cicero, but I should be
glad to listen to a lecture by Zeno in the portico of the Poecile at
Athens, or to Epicurus's meditations in his garden.

My ignorance of history has prevented me from becoming deeply interested
in Greece, although now this begins to embarrass me, as a curiosity
about and sympathy for classical art stirs within me. If I were a young
man and had the leisure, I might even begin the study of Greek.

As it is, I feel that there are two Greeces: one of statues and temples,
which is academic and somewhat cold; the other of philosophers and
tragedians, who convey to my mind more of an impression of life and
humanity.

Apart from the Greek, which I know but fragmentarily, I have no great
admiration for ancient literatures. The _Old Testament_ never
aroused any devotion in me. Except for _Ecclesiastes_ and one or
two of the shorter books, it impresses me as repulsively cruel and
antipathetic.

Among the Greeks, I have enjoyed Homer's _Odyssey_ and the comedies
of Aristophanes. I have read also Herodotus, Plutarch and Diogenes
Laertius. I am not an admirer of academic, well written books, so I
prefer Diogenes Laertius to Plutarch. Plutarch impresses me as having
composed and arranged his narratives; not so Diogenes Laertius. Plutarch
forces the morality of his personages to the fore; Diogenes gives
details of both the good and the bad in his. Plutarch is solid and
systematic; Diogenes is lighter and lacks system. I prefer Diogenes
Laertius to Plutarch, and if I were especially interested in any of the
illustrious ancients of whom they write, I should vastly prefer the
letters of the men themselves, if any existed, or otherwise the gossip
of their tentmakers or washerwomen, to any lives written of them by
either Diogenes Laertius or Plutarch.




THE ROMAN HISTORIANS


When I turned to the composition of historical novels, I desired to
ascertain if the historical method had been reduced to a system. I read
Lucian's _Instructions for Writing History_, an essay with the same
title, or with a very similar one, by the Abbe Mably, some essays by
Simmel, besides a book by a German professor, Ernst Bernheim,
_Lehrbuch der historischen Methode_.

I next read and re-read the Roman historians Julius Caesar, Tacitus,
Sallust and Suetonius.

_Sallust_

All these Roman historians no doubt were worthy gentlemen, but they
create an atmosphere of suspicion. When reading them, you suspect that
they are not always telling the whole truth. I read Sallust and feel
that he is lying; he has composed his narrative like a novel.

In the _Memorial de Sainte Helene_, it is recorded that on March
26, 1816, Napoleon read the conspiracy of Catiline in the _Roman
History_. The Emperor observed that he was unable to understand what
Catiline was driving at. No matter how much of a bandit he may have
been, he must have had some object, some social purpose in view.

The observation of this political genius is one which must occur to all
who read Sallust's book. How could Catiline have secured the support of
the most brilliant men of Rome, among them of Julius Caesar, if his only
plan and object had been to loot and burn Rome? It is not logical.
Evidently Sallust lies, as governmental writers in Spain lie today when
they speak of Lerroux or Ferrer, or as the republican supporters of
Thiers lied in 1871, characterizing the Paris Commune.

_Tacitus_

Tacitus is another great Roman historian who is theatrical,
melodramatic, solemn, full of grand gestures. He also creates an
atmosphere of suspicion, of falsehood. Tacitus has something of the
inquisitor in him, of the fanatic in the cause of virtue. He is a man of
austere moral attitude, which is a pose that a thoroughgoing scamp finds
it easy to assume.

A temperament such as that of Tacitus is fatal to theatrical peoples
like the Italians, Spaniards, and French of the South. From it springs
that type of Sicilian, Calabrian, and Andalusian politician who is a
great lawyer and an eloquent orator, who declaims publicly in the forum,
and then reaches an understanding privately with bandits and thugs.

_Suetonius_

Suetonius, although deficient both in the pomp and sententiousness of
Tacitus, makes no attempt to compose his story, nor to impart moral
instruction, but tells us what he knows, simply. His _Lives of the
Twelve Caesars_ is the greatest collection of horrors in history. You
leave it with the imagination perturbed, scrutinizing yourself to
discover whether you may not be yourself a hog or a wild beast.
Suetonius gives us an account of men rather than a history of the
politics of emperors, and surely this method is more interesting and
veracious. I place more faith in the anecdotes which grow up about an
historical figure than I do in his laws.

Polybius is a mixture of scepticism and common sense. He is what Bayle,
Montesquieu and Voltaire will come to be centuries hence.

As far as Caesar's _Commentaries_ are concerned, in spite of the
fact that they have been manipulated very skilfully, they are one of the
most satisfying and instructive books that can be read.




MODERN AND CONTEMPORARY HISTORIANS


I have very little knowledge of the historians of the Renaissance or of
those prior to the French Revolution. Apart from the chroniclers of
individual exploits, such as Lopez de Ayala, Brantome, and the others,
they are wholly colourless, and either pseudo-Roman or pseudo-Greek.
Even Machiavelli has a personal, Italian side, which is mocking and
incisive--and this is all that is worth while in him--and he has a
pretentious pseudo-Roman side, which is unspeakably tiresome.

Generally considered, the more carefully composed and smoothly varnished
the history, the duller it will be found; while the more personal
revelations it contains, the more engaging. Most readers today, for
example, prefer Bernal Diaz del Castillo's _True History of the
Conquest of New Spain_ to Solis's _History of the Conquest of
Mexico_. One is the book of a soldier, who had a share in the deeds
described, and who reveals himself for what he is, with all his
prejudices, vanities and arrogance; the other is a scholar's attempt to
imitate a classic history and to maintain a monotonous music throughout
his paragraphs.

Practically all the historians who have followed the French Revolution
have individual character, and some have too much of it, as has Carlyle.
They distort their subject until it becomes a pure matter of fantasy, or
mere literature, or sinks even to the level of a family discussion.

Macaulay's moral pedantry, Thiers's cold and repulsive cretinism, the
melodramatic, gesticulatory effusiveness of Michelet are all typical
styles.

Historical bazaars _a la_ Cesare Cantu may be put on one side, as
belonging to an inferior genre. They remind me of those great nineteenth
century world's fairs, vast, miscellaneous and exhausting.

As for the German historians, they are not translated, so I do not know
them. I have read only a few essays of Simmel, which I think extremely
keen, and Stewart Chamberlain's book upon the foundations of the
nineteenth century, which, if the word France were to be substituted for
the word Germany, might easily have been the production of an advanced
nationalist of the _Action Francaise_.




VII

MY FAMILY

FAMILY MYTHOLOGY


The celebrated Vicomte de Chateaubriand, after flaunting an ancestry of
princes and kings in his _Memoires d'outre-tombe_, then turns about
and tells us that he attaches no importance to such matters.

I shall do the same. I intend to furbish up our family history and
mythology, and then I shall assert that I attach no importance to them.
And, what is more, I shall be telling the truth.

My researches into the life of Aviraneta [Footnote: A kinsman of Baroja
and protagonist of his series of historical novels under the general
title of _Memoirs of a Man of Action_.] have drawn me of late to
the genealogical field, and I have looked into my family, which is
equivalent to compounding with tradition and even with reaction.

I have unearthed three family myths: the Goni myth, the Zornoza myth,
and the Alzate myth.

The Goni myth, vouched for by an aunt of mine who died in San Sebastian
at an age of ninety or more, established, according to her, that she was
a descendant of Don Teodosio de Goni, a Navarrese _caballero_ who
lived in the time of Witiza, and who, after killing his father and
mother at the instigation of the devil, betook himself to Mount Aralar
wearing an iron ring about his neck, and dragging a chain behind him,
thus pilloried to do penance. One day, a terrible dragon appeared before
him during a storm.

Don Teodosio lifted up his soul unto God, and thereupon the Archangel
Saint Michael revealed himself to him, in his dire extremity, and broke
his chains, in commemoration of which event Don Teodosio caused to be
erected the chapel of San Miguel in Excelsis on Mount Aralar.

There were those who endeavoured to convince my aunt that in the time of
this supposititious Don Teodosio, which was the early part of the eighth
century, surnames had not come into use in the Basque country, and even,
indeed, that there were at that time no Christians there--in short they
maintained that Don Teodosio was a solar myth; but they were not able to
convince my aunt. She had seen the chapel of San Miguel on Aralar, and
the cave in which the dragon lived, and a document wherein Charles V.
granted to Juan de Goni the privilege of renaming his house the Palace
of San Miguel, as well as of adding a dragon to his coat of arms,
besides a cross in a red field, and a _broken_ chain.

The Zornoza myth was handed down through my paternal grandmother of that
name.

I remember having heard this lady say when I was a child, that her
family might be traced in a direct line to the chancellor Pero Lopez de
Ayala, and, I know not through what lateral branches, also to St.
Francis Xavier.

My grandmother vouched for the fact that her father had sold the
documents and parchments in which these details were set forth, to a
titled personage from Madrid.

The Zornozas boast an escutcheon which is embellished with a band, a
number of wolves, and a legend whose import I do not recall.

Indeed, wolves occur in all the escutcheons of the Baroja, Alzate and
Zornoza families, in so far as I have been able to discover, and I take
them to be more or less authentic. We have wolves passant, wolves
rampant, and wolves mordant. The Goni escutcheon also displays hearts.
If I become rich, which I do not anticipate, I shall have wolves and
hearts blazoned on the doors of my dazzling automobile, which will not
prevent me from enjoying myself hugely inside of it.

Turning to the Alzate myth, it too runs back to antiquity and the
primitive struggles of rival families of Navarre and Labourt. The
Alzates have been lords of Vera ever since the fourteenth century.

The legend of the Alzates of Vera de Navarra relates that one Don
Rodrigo, master of the village in the fifteenth century, fell in love
with a daughter of the house of Urtubi, in France, near Urruna, and
married her. Don Rodrigo went to live in Urtubi and became so thoroughly
gallicized that he never cared to return to Spain, so the people of Vera
banded together, dispossessed him of his honours and dignity, and
sequestrated his lands.

In the early part of the nineteenth century, my great-grandfather,
Sebastian Ignacio de Alzate, was among those who assembled at Zubieta in
1813 to take part in the rebuilding of San Sebastian, and this great-
grandfather was uncle to Don Eugenio de Aviraneta, a good relative of
mine, protagonist of my latest books.

St. Francis Xavier, Don Teodosio de Goni, Pero Lopez de Ayala,
Aviraneta--a saint, a revered worthy, an historian, a conspirator--these
are our family gods.

Now let me take my stand with Chateaubriand as attaching no importance
to such things.




OUR HISTORY


Baroja is a hamlet in the province of Alava in the district of
Penacerrada. According to Fernandez Guerra, it is an Iberian name
derived from Asiatic Iberia. I believe that I have read in Campion that
the word Baroja is compounded from the Celtic _bar_, meaning
mountain, and the Basque _otza, ocha_ meaning cold. In short, a
cold mountain.

The district of Penacerrada, which includes Baroja, is an austere land,
covered with intricate mountain ranges which are clad with trees and
scrub live oaks.

Hawks abound. In his treatise on falconry, Zuniga mentions the Bahari
falcon, propagated principally among the mountains of Penacerrada.

My ancestors originally called themselves Martinez de Baroja. One Martin
had a son who was known as Martinez. This Martinez (son of Martin)
doubtless left the village, and as there were others of the name
Martinez (sons of Martin), they dubbed him the Martinez of Baroja, or
Martinez de Baroja.

The Martinez de Barojas lived in that country for many years; they were
hidalgos, Christians of old stock. And there is still a family of the
name in Penacerrada.

One Martinez de Baroja, by name Juan, who lived in the village of
Samiano, upon becoming outraged because of an attempt to force him to
pay tribute to the Count of Salinas--in those days a very natural source
of offence--took an appeal in the year 1616 from a ruling of the
Prosecuting Attorney of His Majesty and the Alcaldes and Regidors of the
Earldom of Trevino, and he was sustained by the Chamber of Hidalgos at
Valladolid, which decided in his favour in a decree dated the eighth day
of the month of August, 1619.

This same hidalgo, Juan Martinez de Baroja, moved the enforcement of
this decree, as is affirmed by a writ of execution which is inscribed on
forty-five leaves of parchment, to which is attached a leaden seal
pendant from a cord of silk, at the end of which may be found the
stipulations of the judgment entered against the Municipality and
Corporation of the Town and Earldom of Trevino and the Village of
Samiano.

The Martinez de Barojas, despite the fact that they sprang from the land
of the falcon and the hawk, in temper must have been dark, heavy, rough.
They were members of the Brotherhood of San Martin de Penacerrada, which
apparently was of great account in those regions, besides being regidors
and alcaldes of the Santa Hermandad, a rural police and judicial
organization which extended throughout the country.

In the eighteenth century, one of the family, my great-grandfather
Rafael, doubtless possessing more initiative, or having more of the hawk
in him than the others, grew tired of ploughing up the earth, and left
the village, turning pharmacist, setting up in 1803 at Oyarzun, in
Guipuzcoa. This Rafael shortened his name and signed himself Rafael de
Baroja.

Don Rafael must have been a man of modern sympathies, for he bought a
printing press and began to issue pamphlets and even occasional books.

Evidently Don Rafael was also a man of radical ideas. He published a
newspaper at San Sebastian in 1822 and 1823, which he called _El
Liberal Guipuzcoano_. I have seen only one copy of this, and that was
in the National Library.

That this newspaper was extremely liberal, may be judged by the articles
that were reprinted from it in _El Espectador_, the Masonic journal
published at Madrid during the period. Don Rafael had connections both
with constitutionalists and members of the Gallic party. There must have
been antecedents of a liberal character in our family, as Don Rafael's
uncle, Don Juan Jose de Baroja, at first a priest at Pipaon and later at
Vitoria, had been enrolled in the Basque _Sociedad Economica_.

Don Rafael had two sons, Ignacio Ramon and Pio. They settled in San
Sebastian as printers. Pio was my grandfather.

My second family name, Nessi, as I have said before, comes out of
Lombardy and the city of Como.

The Nessis of Como fled from Austrian rule, and came to Spain, probably
peddling mousetraps and _santi boniti barati_.

One of the Nessis, who survived until a short time ago, always said that
the family had been very comfortably off in Lombardy, where one of his
relatives, Guiseppe Nessi, a doctor, had been professor in the
University of Pavia during the eighteenth century, besides being major
in the Austrian Army.

As mementos of the Italian branch of the family, I still preserve a few
views of Lake Como in my house, a crude image of the Christ of the
Annunziatta, stamped on cloth, and a volume of a treatise on surgery by
Nessi, which bears the _imprimatur_ of the Inquisition at Venice.




VIII

MEMORIES OF CHILDHOOD

SAN SEBASTIAN


I was born in San Sebastian on the 28th of December, 1872. So I am not
only a Guipuzcoan but a native of San Sebastian. The former I regard as
an honour, but the latter means very little to me.

I should prefer to have been born in a mountain hamlet or in a small
coast town, rather than in a city of summer visitors and hotel keepers.

Garat, who was a most conventional person who lived in Bayonne, always
used to maintain that he came from Ustariz. I might say that I am from
Vera del Bidasoa, but I should not deceive myself.

There are several reasons why I dislike San Sebastian:

In the first place, the city is not beautiful, when it might well be so.
It is made up of straight streets which are all alike, together with two
or three monuments that are horrible. The general construction is
miserable and shoddy. Although excellent stone abounds in the
neighbourhood, no one has had the sense to erect anything either noble
or dignified. Cheap houses confront the eye on all sides, whether simple
or pretentious. Whenever the citizens of San Sebastian raise their
hands--and in this they are abetted by the _Madrilenos_--they do
something ugly. They have defaced Monte Igueldo already, and now they
are defacing the Castillo. Tomorrow, they will manage somehow to spoil
the sea, the sky, and the air.

As for the spirit of the city, it is lamentable. There is no interest in
science, art, literature, history, politics, or anything else. All that
the inhabitants think about are the King, the Queen Regent, yachts, bull
fights, and the latest fashions in trousers.

San Sebastian is a conglomeration of parvenus and upstarts from
Pamplona, Saragossa, Valladolid, Chile and Chuquisaca, who are anxious
to show themselves off. Some do this by walking alongside of the King,
or by taking coffee with a famous bull-fighter, or by bowing to some
aristocrat. The young men of San Sebastian are among the most worthless
in Spain. I have always looked upon them as _infra_ human.

As for the ladies, many of them might be taken for princesses in summer,
but their winter tertulias are on a level with a porter's lodge where
they play _julepe_. It is a card game, but the word means dose, and
Madame Recamier would have fainted at the mention of it.

When I observe these parvenus' attempts to shine, I think to myself:
"The ostentation of the freshman year at college. How unfortunate that
some of us have moved on to the doctorate!"

No one reads in San Sebastian. They run over the society news, and then
drop the paper for fear their brains will begin to smoke.

This city, imagining itself to be so cultivated, although it really is a
new town, is under the domination of a few Jesuit fathers, who, like
most of the present days sons of Loyola, are coarse, heavy and wholly
lacking in real ability.

The Jesuit manages the women, which is not a very difficult thing to do,
as he holds the leading strings of the sexual life in his hands. In
addition he influences the men.

He assists the young who are of good social standing, who belong to
distinguished families, and brings about desirable matches. The poor can
do anything they like. They are at liberty to eat, to get drunk, to do
whatever they will except to read. These unhappy, timid, torpid clerks
and hangers-on imagine they are free men whenever they get drunk. They
do not see that they are like the Redskins, whom the Yankees poisoned
with alcohol so as to hold them in check.

I inspected a club installed in a house in the older part of the city
some years ago.

A sign on one door read "Library." When it was opened, I was shown,
laughing, a room filled with bottles.

"If a Jesuit could see this, he would be in ecstasy," I exclaimed. "Yes,
replacing books with wines and liquors! What a business for the sons of
Saint Ignatius!"

In spite of all its display, all its tinsel, all its Jesuitism, all its
bad taste, San Sebastian will become an important, dignified city within
a very few years. When that time comes, the author who has been born
there, will not prefer to hail from some hamlet buried in the mountains,
rather than from the capital of Guipuzcoa. But I myself prefer it. I
have no city, and I hold myself to be strictly extra-urban.




MY PARENTS


My father, Serafin Baroja y Zornoza, was a mining engineer, who wrote
books both in Castilian and Basque, and he, too, came from San
Sebastian. My mother's name is Carmen Nessi y Goni. She was born in
Madrid.

I should be a very good man. My father was a good man, although he was
capricious and arbitrary, and my mother is a good woman, firmer and more
positive in her manifestations of virtue. Yet, I am not without
reputation for ferocity, which, perhaps, is deserved.

I do not know why I believed for a long while that I had been born in
the Calle del Puyuelo in San Sebastian, where we once lived. The street
is well within the old town, and truly ugly and forlorn. The mere idea
of it was and is distasteful to me.

When I complained to my mother about my birthplace and its want of
attractiveness, she replied that I was born in a beautiful house near
the esplanade of La Zurriola, fronting on the Calle de Oquendo, which
belonged to my grandmother and looked out upon the sea, although the
house does so no longer, as a theatre has been erected directly in
front. I am glad that I was born near the sea, because it suggests
freedom and change.

My paternal grandmother, Dona Concepcion Zornoza, was a woman of
positive ideas and somewhat eccentric. She was already old when I knew
her. She had mortgaged several houses which she owned in the city in
order to build the house which was occupied by us in La Zurriola.

Her plan was to furnish it and rent it to King Amadeo. Before Amadeo
arrived at San Sebastian, however, the Carlist war broke out, and the
monarch of the house of Savoy was compelled to abdicate, and my
grandmother to abandon her plans.

My earliest recollection is the Carlist attempt to bombard San
Sebastian. It is a memory which has now grown very dim, and what I saw
has been confused with what I have heard. I have a confused recollection
of the bringing in of soldiers on stretchers, and of having peeped over
the wall of a little cemetery near the city, in which corpses were laid
out, still unburied.

As I have said, my father was a mining engineer, but during the war he
was engaged in teaching natural history at the Institute. I have no idea
how this came about. He was also one of the Liberal volunteers.

I have a vague idea that one night I was taken from my bed, wrapped up
in a mantle, and carried to a chalet on the Concha, belonging to one
Errazu, who was a relative of my mother's. We lived there for a time in
the cellar of the chalet.

Three shells, which were known in those days as cucumbers, dropped on
the house, and wrecked the roof, making a great hole in the wall which
separated our garden from the next.




MONSIGNOR, THE CAT


Monsignor was a handsome yellow cat belonging to us while we were living
in the cellar of Senor Errazu's chalet.

From what I have since learned, his name was a tribute to the
extraordinary reputation enjoyed at that period by Monsignor Simeoni.

Monsignor--I am referring to the yellow cat--was intelligent. A bell
surmounted the Castillo de la Mota at San Sebastian, by whose side was
stationed a look-out. When the look-out spied the flash of Carlist guns,
he rang the bell, and then the townspeople retired into the doorways and
cellars.

Monsignor was aware of the relation of the bell to the cannonading, so
when the bell rang, he promptly withdrew into the house, even going so
far sometimes as to creep under the beds.

My father had friends who were not above going down into our cellar on
such occasions so as better to observe the manoeuvres of the cat.




TWO LUNATICS


After the war, I used to stroll as a boy with my mother and brothers to
the Castillo de la Mota on Sundays. It was truly a beautiful walk, which
will soon be ruined utterly by the citizens of San Sebastian. We looked
out to sea from the Castillo and then we talked with the guard. We often
met a lunatic there, who was in the care of a servant. As soon as he
caught sight of us children, the lunatic was happy at once, but if a
woman came near him, he ran away and flattened himself against the
walls, kicking and crying out: "Blind dog! Blind dog!"

I remember also having seen a young woman, who was insane, in a great
house which we used to visit in those days at Loyola. She gesticulated
and gazed continually into a deep well, where a half moon of black water
was visible far below. These lunatics, one at the Castillo and the other
in that great house, haunted my imagination as a child.




THE HAWK


My latest recollection of San Sebastian is of a hawk, which we
brought home to our house from the Castillo.

Some soldiers gave us the hawk when it was still very young, and it grew
up and became accustomed to living indoors. We fed it snails, which it
gulped down as if they were bonbons.

When it was full-grown, it escaped to the courtyard and attacked our
chickens, to say nothing of all the cats of the neighbourhood. It hid
under the beds during thundershowers.

When we moved away from San Sebastian, we were obliged to leave the hawk
behind. We carried him up to the Castillo one day, turned him loose, and
off he flew.




IN MADRID


We moved from San Sebastian to Madrid. My father had received an
appointment to the Geographic and Political Institute. We lived on the
Calle Real, just beyond the Glorieta de Bilbao, in a street which is now
a prolongation of the Calle de Fuencarral.

Opposite our house, there was a piece of high ground, which has not yet
been removed, which went by the name of "_La Era del Mico_," or
"The Monkey Field." Swings and merry-go-rounds were scattered all over
it, so that the diversions of "_La Era del Mico_," together with
the two-wheeled calashes and chaises which were still in use in those
days, and the funerals passing continually through the street, were the
amusements which were provided ready-made for us, as we looked down from
our balcony.

Two sensational executions took place while we lived here--those of the
regicide Otero and of Oliva--one following closely on the heels of the
other. We heard the _Salve_, or prayer, which is sung by the
prisoners for the criminal awaiting death, hawked about us then on the
streets.




IN PAMPLONA


From Madrid we went to Pamplona. Pamplona was still a curious city
maintaining customs which would have been appropriate to a state of war.
The draw-bridges were raised at night, only one, or perhaps two, gates
being left open, I am not certain which.

Pamplona proved an amusing place for a small boy. There were the walls
with their glacis, their sentry boxes, their cannon; there were the
gates, the river, the cathedral and the surrounding quarters--all of
them very attractive to us.

We studied at the Institute and committed all sorts of pranks like the
other students. We played practical jokes in the houses of the canons,
and threw stones at the bishop's palace, many of the windows of which
were already paneless and forlorn.

We also made wild excursions to the roof of our house and to those of
other houses in the neighbourhood, prying about the garrets and peering
down over the cornices into the courtyards.

Once we seized a stuffed eagle, cherished by a neighbour, hauled it to
the attic, pulled it through the skylight to the roof, and flung it down
into the street, creating a genuine panic among the innocent passers-by,
when they saw the huge bird drop at their feet.

One of my most vivid memories of Pamplona is seeing a criminal on his
way to execution passing our house, attired in a round cap and yellow
robe.

It was one of the sights which has impressed me most. Later in the
afternoon, driven by curiosity, knowing that the man who had been
garroted must be still on the scaffold, I ventured alone to see him, and
remained there examining him closely for a long time. When I returned
home that night, I was unable to sleep because of the impression he had
made.




DON TIRSO LAREQUI


Many other vivid memories of Pamplona remain with me, never to be
forgotten. I remember a lad of our own age who died, leaping from the
wall, and then there were our adventures along the river.

Another terrible memory was associated with the cathedral. I had begun
my first year of Latin, and was exactly nine at the time.

We had come out of the Institute, and were watching a funeral.
Afterwards, three or four of the boys, among whom were my brother
Ricardo and myself, entered the cathedral. The echo of the responses was
ringing in my ears and I hummed them, as I wandered about the aisles.

Suddenly, a black shadow shot from behind one of the confessionals,
pounced upon me and seized me around the neck with both hands, almost
choking me. I was paralyzed with fear. It proved to be a fat, greasy
canon, by name Don Tirso Larequi.

"What is your name?" he shouted, shaking me vigorously.

I could not answer because of my fright.

"What is his name?" the priest demanded of the other boys.

"His name is Antonio Garcia," replied my brother Ricardo, coolly.

"Where does he live?"

"In the Calle de Curia, Number 14."

There was no such place, of course.

"I shall see your father at once," shouted the priest, and he rushed out
of the cathedral like a bull.

My brother and I then made our escape through the cloister.

This red-faced priest, fat and ferocious, rushing out of the dark to
choke a nine-year-old boy, has always been to me a symbol of the
Catholic religion.

This experience of my boyhood partly explains my anti-clericalism. I
recall Don Tirso with an undying hate, and were he still alive--I have
no idea whether he is or not--I should not hesitate to climb up to the
roof of his house some dark night, and shout down his chimney in a
cavernous voice: "Don Tirso! You are a damned villain!"




A VISIONARY ROWDY


I was something of a rowdy as a boy and rather quarrelsome. The first
day I went to school in Pamplona, I came out disputing with another boy
of my own age, and we fought in the street until we were separated by a
cobbler and the blows of a leather strap, to which he added kicks.
Later, I foolishly quarrelled and fought whenever the other boys set me
on. In our stone-throwing escapades on the outskirts of the town, I was
always the aggressor, and quite indefatigable.

When I began to study medicine, I found that my aggressiveness had
departed completely. One day after quarrelling with another student in
the cloisters of San Carlos, I challenged him to fight. When we got out
on the street, it struck me as foolish to goad him to hit me in the eye
or else to land on my nose with his fist, and I slipped off and went
home. I lost my morale as a bully then and there. Although I was a
fighter from infancy, I was also something of a dreamer, and the two
strains scarcely make a harmonious blend.

Before I was grown, I saw Gisbert's Death of the Comuneros reproduced as
a chromo. For a long, long while, I always seemed to see that picture
hanging in all its variety of colour on the wall before me at night. For
months and months after my vigil with the body of the man who had been
garroted outside of Pamplona, I never entered a dark room but that his
image rose up before me in all its gruesome details. I also passed
through a period of disagreeable dreams. Some time would elapse after I
awoke before I was able to tell where I was, and I was frightened by it.




SARASATE


It was my opinion then, and still is, that a fiesta at Pamplona is among
the most vapid things in the world.

There was a mixture of incomprehension and culture in Pamplona, that was
truly ridiculous. The people would devote several days to going to bull
fights, and then turn about, when evening came, and welcome Sarasate
with Greek fire.

A rude and fanatical populace forgot its orgy of blood to acclaim a
violinist. And what a violinist! He was one of the most effeminate and
grotesque individuals in the world. I can see him yet, strutting along
with his long hair, his ample rear, and his shoes with their little
quarter-heels, which gave him the appearance of a fat cook dressed up in
men's clothes for Carnival.

When Sarasate died he left a number of trinkets which had been presented
to him during his artistic career--mostly match-boxes, cigarette cases,
and the like--which the Town Council of Pamplona has assembled and now
exhibits in glass cases, but which, in the public interest, should be
promptly disposed of at auction.




ROBINSON CRUSOE AND THE MYSTERIOUS ISLAND


During my life in Pamplona, my brother Ricardo imparted his enthusiasm
for two stories to me. These were _Robinson Crusoe_ and Jules
Verne's _The Mysterious Island_, or rather, I should say they were
_The Mysterious Island_ and _Robinson Crusoe_, because we
preferred Jules Verne's tale greatly to Defoe's.

We would dream about desert islands, about manufacturing electric
batteries in the fashion of the engineer Cyrus Harding, and as we were
not very certain of finding any "Granite House" during the course of our
adventures, Ricardo would paint and paint at plans and elevations of
houses which we hoped to construct in its place in those far-off, savage
lands.

He also made pictures of ships which we took care should be rigged
properly.

There were two variations of this dream of adventure--one involving a
snow-house, with appropriate episodes such as nocturnal attacks by
bears, wolves, and the like, and then we planned a sea voyage.

I rebelled a long time at the notion that my life must be like that of
everybody else, but I had no recourse in the end but to capitulate.




IX

AS A STUDENT


I was never more than commonplace as a student, inclining rather to be
bad than good. I had no great liking for study, and, to tell the truth,
I never entertained any clear idea of what I was studying.

For example, I never knew what the word preterite meant until years
after completing my course, although I had repeated over and over again
that the preterite, or past perfect, was thus, while the imperfect was
thus, without having any conception that the word preterite meant past--
that it was a past that was entirely past in the former case, and a past
that was past to a less degree in the latter.

To complete two years of Latin grammar, two of French, and one of German
without having any conception of what preterite meant, demonstrated one
of two things: either my stupidity was very great, or the system of
instruction deplorable. Naturally, I incline toward the second
alternative.

While preparing to take my degree in medicine, when I was studying
chemical analysis, I heard a student, who was already a practising
physician, state that zinc was an element which contained a great deal
of hydrogen. When the professor attempted to extricate him from his
difficulty, it became apparent that the future doctor had no idea of
what an element was. My classmate, who doubtless entertained as little
liking for chemistry as I did for grammar, had not been able throughout
his entire course to grasp the definition of an element, as I had never
been able to comprehend what a preterite might be.

For my part--and I believe that all of us have had the same experience--
I have never been successful in mastering those subjects which have not
interested me.

Doubtless, also, my mental development has been slow.

As for memory, I have always possessed very little. And liking for
study, none whatever. Sacred history, or any other history, Latin,
French, rhetoric and natural history have interested me not at all. The
only subjects for which I cared somewhat, were geometry and physics.

My college course left me with two or three ideas in my head, whereupon
I applied myself to making ready for my professional career, as one
swallows a bitter dose.

In my novel, _The Tree of Knowledge_, I have drawn a picture of
myself, in which the psychological features remain unchanged, although I
have altered the hero's environment, as well as his family relations,
together with a number of details.

Besides the defects with which I have endowed my hero in this book, I
was cursed with an instinctive slothfulness and sluggishness which were
not to be denied.

People would tell me: "Now is the time for you to study; later on, you
will have leisure to enjoy yourself; and after that will come the time
to make money."

But I needed all three times in which to do nothing--and I could have
used another three hundred.




PROFESSORS


I have not been fortunate in my professors. It might be urged that I
have not been in a position, being idle and sluggish, to take advantage
of their instruction. I believe, however, that if they had been good
teachers, now that so many years have passed, I should be able to
acknowledge their merits.

I cannot remember a single teacher who knew how to teach, or who
succeeded in arousing any interest in what he taught, or who had any
comprehension of the student mentality. No one learned how to reason in
the schools of my youth, nor mastered any theory, nor acquired a
practical knowledge of anything. In other words, we learned nothing.

In medicine, the professors adhered to a system that was the most
foolish imaginable. In the two universities in which I studied, subjects
might be taken only by halves, which would have been ridiculous enough
in any branch, but it was even more preposterous in medicine. Thus, in
pathology, a certain number of intending physicians studied the subject
of infection, while others studied nervous disorders, and yet others the
diseases of the respiratory organs. Nobody studied all three. A plan of
this sort could only have been conceived by Spanish professors, who, it
may be said in general, are the quintessence of vacuity.

"What difference does it make whether the students learn anything or
not?" every Spanish professor asks himself continually.

Unamuno says, apropos of the backwardness of Spaniards in the field of
invention: "Other nations can do the inventing." In other words, let
foreigners build up the sciences, so that we may take advantage of them.

There was one among my professors who considered himself a born teacher
and, moreover, a man of genius, and he was Letamendi. I made clear in my
_Tree of Knowledge_ what I thought of this professor, who was not
destitute, indeed, of a certain talent as an orator and man of letters.
When he wrote, he was rococo, like so many Catalans. Sometimes he would
discourse upon art, especially upon painting, in the class-room, but the
ideas he entertained were preposterous. I recall that he once said that
a mouse and a book were not a fit subject for a painting, but if you
were to write the words _Aristotle's Works_ on the book, and then
set the mouse to gnawing at it, what had originally meant nothing would
immediately become a subject for a picture. Yes, a picture to be hawked
at the street fairs!

Letamendi was prolixity and puerile ingenuity personified. Yet Letamendi
was no different from all other Spaniards of his day, including even the
most celebrated, such as Castelar, Echegaray and Valera.

These men read much, they possessed good memories, but I verily believe
that, honestly, they understood nothing. Not one of them had an inkling
of that almost tragic sense of the dignity of culture or of the
obligations which it imposes, which distinguishes the Germans above all
other nationalities. They nearly all revealed an attitude toward science
which would have sat easily upon a smart, sharp-tongued Andalusian young
gentleman.

I recall a profoundly moving letter by the critic Garve, which is
included in Kant's _Prolegomena_.

Garve wrote an article upon _The Critique of Pure Reason_, and sent
it to a journal at Goettingen, and the editor of the journal, in malice
and animosity toward Kant, so altered it that it became an attack on the
philosopher, and then published it unsigned.

Kant invited his anonymous critic to divulge his name, whereupon Garve
wrote to Kant explaining what had taken place, and Kant made a reply.

It would be difficult to parallel in nobility these two letters, which
were exchanged between a comprehensive intellect such as Garve and one
of the most portentous geniuses of the world, as was Kant.

They appear to be two travellers, face to face with the mystery of
Nature and the Unknown. No such feeling for learning and culture is to
be met with among our miserably affected Latin mountebanks.




ANTI-MILITARISM


I am an anti-militarist by inheritance. The Basques have never been good
soldiers in the regular army. My great-grandfather Nessi probably fled
from Italy as a deserter. I have always loathed barracks, messes, and
officers profoundly.

One day, when I was studying therapeutics with Don Benito Hernando, my
brother opened the door of the class-room and motioned for me to come
out.

I did so, at the cost, by the way, of a furious scene with Don Benito,
who shattered several test tubes in his wrath.

The cause of my brother's appearance was to advise me that the Alcaldia
del Centro, or Town Council of the Central District, had given notice to
the effect that if I did not present myself for the draft, I was to be
declared in default. As I had already laid before the Board a copy of a
royal decree in which my name was set down as exempt from the draft
because my father had served as a Liberal Volunteer in the late war, and
because, in addition, I was born in the Basque provinces, I had supposed
that the matter had been disposed of. One of those ill-natured,
dictatorial officials who held sway in the offices of the Board, took it
upon himself to rule that the exemption held good only in the Basque
provinces, but not in Madrid, and so, in fact, for the time it proved to
be. In spite of my furious protests, I was compelled to report and
submit to have my measurements taken, and was well nigh upon the point
of being marched off to the barracks.

"I am no soldier," I thought to myself. "If they insist, I shall run
away."

I went at once from the Alcaldia to the Ministry and called upon a
Guipuzcoan politician, as my father had previously advised me to do; but
the man was a political mastodon, puffed up with huge pretensions, who,
perhaps, might have been a stevedore in any other country. So he did
nothing. Finally, it occurred to me to go and see the Conde de
Romanones, who had just been appointed Alcalde del Centro, having
jurisdiction over the district.

When I entered his office, Romanones appeared to be in a jovial frame of
mind. He wore a flower in his button-hole. Two persons were with him,
one of whom was no other than the Secretary of the Board, my enemy.

I related what had happened to Romanones with great force. The Secretary
then answered.

"The young man is right," said the Count. "Bring me the roll of the
draft."

The roll was brought. Romanones took his pen and crossed my name off
altogether. Then he turned to me with a smile:

"Don't you care to be a soldier?"

"No, sir."

"But what are you, a student?"

"Yes, sir."

"In which branch?"

"Medicine."

"Good! Very good. You may go now."

I would willingly have been anything to have escaped becoming a soldier,
and so be obliged to live in barracks, eat mess, and parade.




TO VALENCIA


I failed in both June and September during the fourth year of my course,
which was a mere matter of luck, as I neither applied myself more nor
less than in previous years.

In the meantime my father had been transferred to Valencia, whither it
seemed wise that I should remove to continue my studies.

I appeared at Valencia in January for a second examination in general
pathology, and failed for the second time.

I began to consider giving up my intended profession.

I found that I had lost what little liking I had for it. As I had no
friends in Valencia, I never left the house; I had nowhere to go. I
passed my days stretched out on the roof, or, else, in reading. After
debating long what I should do, and realizing fully that there was no
one obvious plan to pursue, I determined to finish my course, committing
the required subjects mechanically. After adopting this plan, I never
failed once.

When I came up for graduation, the professors made an effort to put some
obstacles in my way, which, however, were not sufficient to detain me.

Admitted as a physician, I decided next to study for the doctor's degree
at Madrid.

My former fellow-students, when they saw that now I was doing nicely,
all exclaimed:

"How you have changed! Now you pass your examinations."

"Passing examinations, you know, is a combination, like a gambling
game," I told them.

"I have found a combination."




X

AS A VILLAGE DOCTOR


I returned to Burjasot, a small town near Valencia, where my family
lived at the time, a full-fledged doctor. We had a tiny house, besides a
garden containing pear, peach and pomegranate trees.

I passed some time there very pleasantly.

My father was a contributor to the _Voz de Guipuzcoa_ of San
Sebastian, so he always received the paper. One day I read--or it may
have been one of the family--that the post of official physician was
vacant in the town of Cestona.

I decided to apply for the place, and dispatched a letter accompanied by
a copy of my diploma. It turned out that I was the only applicant, and
so the post was awarded to me.

I set out for Madrid, where I passed the night, and then proceeded to
San Sebastian, receiving a letter from my father upon my arrival,
informing me that there was another physician at Cestona who was
receiving a larger salary than that which had been offered to me, and
recommending that perhaps it would be better not to put in appearance
too soon, until I was better advised as to the prospects.

I hesitated.

"In any event," I thought, "I shall learn what the town is like. If I
like it, I shall stay; if not, I shall return to Burjasot."

I took the diligence, which goes by the name of "La Vascongada," and
made the trip from San Sebastian to Cestona, which proved to be long
enough in all conscience, as we were five or six hours late. I got off
at a posada, or small inn, at Alcorta, to get something to eat. I dined
sumptuously, drank bravely, and, encouraged by the good food, made up my
mind to remain in the village. I talked with the other doctor and with
the alcalde, and soon everything was arranged that had to be arranged.

As night was coming on, the priest and the doctor recommended that I go
to board at the house of the Sacristana, as she had a room vacant, which
had formerly been occupied by a notary.




DOLORES, LA SACRISTANA


Dolores, my landlady and mistress of the Sacristy, was an agreeable,
exceedingly energetic, exceedingly hard-working woman, who was a
pronounced conservative.

I have met few women as good as she. In spite of the fact that she soon
discovered that I was not at all religious, she did not hold it against
me, nor did I harbour any resentment against her.

I often read her the _Analejo_, or church calendar, which is known
as the _Gallofa_, or beggars' mite, in the northern provinces, in
allusion to the ancient custom of making pilgrimages to Santiago, and I
cooked sugar wafers over the fire with her on the eve of feast days, at
which times her work was especially severe.

I realized in Cestona my childish ambitions of having a house of my own,
and a dog, which had lain in my mind ever since reading _Robinson
Crusoe_ and _The Mysterious Island_.

I also had an old horse named Juanillo, which I borrowed from a coachman
in San Sebastian, but I never liked horses.

The horse seems to me to be a militaristic, antipathetic animal. Neither
Robinson Crusoe nor Cyrus Harding rode horse-back.

I committed no blunders while I was a village doctor. I had already
grown prudent, and my sceptical temperament was a bar to any great
mistakes.

I first began to realize that I was a Basque in Cestona, and I recovered
my pride of race there, which I had lost.




XI

AS A BAKER


I have been asked frequently: "How did you ever come to go into the
baking business?" I shall now proceed to answer the question, although
the story is a long one.

My mother had an aunt, Juana Nessi, who was a sister of her father's.

This lady was reasonably attractive when young, and married a rich
gentleman just returned from America, whose name was Don Matias Lacasa.

Once settled in Madrid, Don Matias, who deemed himself an eagle, when,
in reality, he was a common barnyard rooster, embarked upon a series of
undertakings that failed with truly extraordinary unanimity. About 1870,
a physician from Valencia by the name of Marti, who had visited Vienna,
gave him an account of the bread they make there, and of the yeast they
use to raise it, enlarging upon the profits which lay ready to hand in
that line.

Don Matias was convinced, and he bought an old house near the Church of
the Descalzas upon Marti's advice. It stood in a street which boasted
only one number--the number 2. I believe the street was, and still is,
called the Calle de la Misericordia.

Marti set up ovens in the old building by the Church of the Descalzas,
and the business began to yield fabulous profits. Being a devotee of the
life of pleasure, Marti died three or four years after the business had
been established, and Don Matias continued his gallinaceous evolutions
until he was utterly ruined, and had pawned everything he possessed,
remaining at last with the bakery as his only means of support.

He succeeded in entangling and ruining that, too, before he died. My
aunt then wrote my mother requesting that my brother Ricardo come up to
Madrid.

My brother remained in Madrid for some time, when he grew tired and
left; then I went, and later we were both there together, making an
effort to improve the business and to push it ahead. Times were bad:
there was no way of pushing ahead. Surely the proverb "Where flour is
lacking, everything goes packing," could never have been applied with
more truth. And we could get no flour.

When the bakery was just about to do better, the Conde de Romanones, who
was our landlord in those days, notified us that the building was to be
torn down.

Then our troubles began. We were obliged to move elsewhere, and to
undertake alterations, for which money was indispensable, but we had no
money. In that predicament, we began to speculate upon the Exchange, and
the Exchange proved a kind mother to us; it sustained us until we were
on our feet again. As soon as we had established ourselves upon another
site, we proceeded to lose money, so we withdrew.

It is not surprising, therefore, that I have always regarded the Stock
Exchange as a philanthropic institution, or that, on the other hand, a
church has always seemed a sombre place in which a black priest leaps
forth from behind a confessional to seize one by the throat in the dark,
and to throttle him.




MY FATHER'S DISILLUSIONMENT


My father was endowed with a due share of the romantic fervour which
distinguished men of his epoch, and set great store by friendship. More
particularly, he was wrapped up in his friends in San Sebastian.

When we discovered that we were in trouble, before throwing ourselves
into the loving arms of the Bourse, my father spoke to two intimate
friends of his who were from San Sebastian. They made an appointment to
meet me in the Cafe Suizo. I explained the situation to them, after
which they made me certain propositions, which were so usurious, so
outrageously extortionate, that they took my breath away. They offered
to advance us the money we needed for fifty per cent of the gross
receipts, while we were to meet the running expenses out of our fifty
per cent, receiving no compensation whatever for our services in taking
care of the business.

I was astonished, and naturally did not accept. The episode was a great
blow to my father. I frequently came face to face with one of our
friends at a later date, but I never bowed to him. He was offended. I
was tempted to approach him and say: "The reason that I do not bow to
you is because I know you are a rascal."

If either of these friends of ours were alive, I should proceed to
mention their names, but, as they are dead, it will serve no useful
purpose.




INDUSTRY AND DEMOCRACY


The bakery has been brandished against me in literature.

When I first wrote, it was said:

"This Baroja is a crusty fellow; naturally, he is a baker."

A certain picturesque academician, who was also a dramatist, and given
to composing stupendous _quintillas_ and _cuartetas_ in his
day, which, despite their flatness, were received with applause, had the
inspiration to add:

"All this modernism has been cooked up in Baroja's oven."

Even the Catalans lost no time in throwing the fact of my being a baker
in my face, although they are a commercial, manufacturing people.
Whether calico is nobler than flour, or flour than calico, I am not
sure, but the subject is one for discussion, as Maeztu would have it.

I am an eclectic myself on this score. I prefer flour in the shape of
bread with my dinner, but cloth will go further with a man who desires
to appear well in public.

When I was serving upon the Town Council, an anonymous publication
entitled "Masks Off," printed the following among other gems: "Pio
Baroja is a man of letters who runs a bake-shop."

A Madrid critic recently declared in an American periodical that I had
two personalities: one that of a writer and the other of a baker. He was
solicitous to let me know later that he intended no harm.

But if I should say to him: "Mr. So and So" is a writer who is
excellently posted upon the value of cloth, as his father sold dry-
goods, it would appeal to his mind as bad taste.

Another journalist paid his respects to me some months ago in _El
Parlamentario_, saying I baked rolls, oppressed the people, and
sucked the blood of the workingman.

It would appear to be more demeaning to own a small factory or a shop,
according to the standards of both literary and non-literary circles,
than it is to accept money from the corruption funds of the Government,
or bounties from the exchequers of foreign Embassies.

When I hear talk nowadays about the dues of the common people, my
propensity to laugh is so great that I am apprehensive that my end may
be like that of the Greek philosopher in Diogenes Laertius, who died of
laughter because he saw an ass eating figs.




THE VEXATIONS OF A SMALL TRADESMAN


The trials and tribulations of the literary life, its feuds and its
backbitings are a common topic of conversation. However, I have never
experienced anything of the kind in literature. The trouble with
literature is that there is very little money in it, which renders the
writer's existence both mean and precarious.

Nothing compares for vexation with the life of the petty tradesman,
especially when that tradesman is a baker. Upon occasion, I have
repeated to my friends the series of outrages to which we were obliged
to submit, in particular at the hands of the municipal authorities.

Sometimes it was through malice, but more often through sheer insentient
imbecility.

When my brother and I moved to the new site, we drew up a plan and
submitted it to the _Ayuntamiento_, or City Government. A clerk
discovered that no provision had been made for a stall for a mule to run
the kneading machine, and so rejected it. When we learned that our
application had not been granted, we inquired the reason and explained
to the clerk that no provision had been made for the mule because we had
no mule, as our kneading machine was operated by an electric motor.

"That makes no difference, no difference whatever," replied the clerk
with the importance and obtuseness of the bureaucrat. "The ordinance
requires that there be a stall for one."

Another of the thousand instances of official barbarity was perpetrated
at our expense while Sanchez de Toca was Alcalde. This gentleman is a
Siamese twin of Maura's when it comes to garrulousness and muddy
thinking, and he had resolved to do away with the distribution of bread
by public delivery, and to license only deliveries by private bakeries.
The order was arbitrary enough, but the manner in which it was put into
effect was a masterpiece. It was reported that plates bearing license
numbers would be given out at the _Ayuntamiento_ to the delivery
men from the bakeries. So we repaired to the _Ayuntamiento_ and
questioned a clerk:

"Where do they give out the numbers?

"There are no numbers."

"What will happen tomorrow then, when we make our deliveries?"

"How do I know?"

The next day when the delivery men began their rounds, a policeman
accosted them:

"Have you your numbers?"

"No, sir; they are not ready yet."

"Well, come with me then, to the police station."

And that was the last of our bread.

The Caid of Mechuar in Morocco favoured his subjects in some such
fashion several years since, but the Moors, being men of spirit, fell on
him one day, and left him at death's door on a dung heap. Meanwhile,
Sanchez de Toca continues to talk nonsense in these parts, and is
considered by some to be one of the bulwarks of the country.

I could spin many a tale of tyranny in high places, and almost as many,
no doubt, of the pettinesses of workingmen. But what is the good? Why
stir up my bile? In progressive incarnations, I have now passed through
those of baker and petty tradesman. I am no longer an employer who
exploits the workingman, nor can I see that I ever did so. If I have
exploited workers merely because I employed them, all that was some time
ago. I support myself by my writings now, although it is quite proper to
state that I live on very little.




XII

AS A WRITER


My pre-literary career was three-fold: I was a student for eight years,
during two a village doctor, and for six more a baker.

These having elapsed, being already close upon thirty, I began to write.

My new course was a wise one. It was the best thing that I could have
done; anything else would have annoyed me more and have pleased me less.
I have enjoyed writing, and I have made some money, although not much,
yet it has been sufficient to enable me to travel, which otherwise I
should not have been able to do.

The first considerable sum which I received was upon the publication of
my novel _The Mayorazgo of Labraz_. Henrich of Barcelona paid me
two thousand pesetas for it. I invested the two thousand pesetas in a
speculation upon the Bourse, and they disappeared in two weeks.

The money which I have received for my other books, I have employed to
better purpose.




BOHEMIA


I have never been a believer in the absurd myth called Bohemia. The idea
of living gaily and irresponsibly in Madrid, or in any other Spanish
city, without taking thought for the morrow, is so preposterous that it
passes comprehension. Bohemia is utterly false in Paris and London, but
in Spain, where life is difficult, it is even more of a cheat.

Bohemia is not only false, it is contemptible. It suggests to me a minor
Christian sect, of the most inconsequential degree, nicely calculated
for the convenience of hangers on at cafes.

Henri Murger was the son of the wife of a _concierge_.

Of course, this would not have mattered had his outlook upon life not
been that of the son of the wife of a _concierge_.




OUR OWN GENERATION


The beginner in letters makes his way up, as a rule, amid a literary
environment which is distinguished by reputations and hierarchies,
all respected by him. But this was not the case with the young writers
of my day. During the years 1898 to 1900, a number of young men suddenly
found themselves thrown together in Madrid, whose only rule was the
principle that the immediate past did not exist for them.

This aggregation of authors and artists might have seemed to have been
brought together under some leadership, and to have been directed to
some purpose; yet one who entertained such an assumption would have been
mistaken.

Chance brought us together for a moment, a very brief moment, to be
followed by a general dispersal. There were days when thirty or forty
young men, apprentices in the art of writing, sat around the tables in
the old Cafe de Madrid.

Doubtless such gatherings of new men, eager to interfere in and to
influence the operations of the social system, yet without either the
warrant of tradition or any proved ability to do so, are common upon a
larger scale in all revolutions.

As we neither had, nor could have had, in the nature of the case, a task
to perform, we soon found that we were divided into small groups, and
finally broke up altogether.




AZORIN


A few days after the publication of my first book, _Sombre Lives_,
Miguel Poveda, who was responsible for printing it, sent a copy to
Martinez Ruiz, who was at that time in Monovar. Martinez Ruiz wrote me a
long letter concerning the book by return mail; on the following day he
sent another.

Poveda handed me the letters to read and I was filled with surprise and
joy. Some weeks later, returning from the National Library, Martinez
Ruiz, whom I knew by sight, came up to me on the Recoletos.

"Are you Baroja?" he asked.

"Yes."

"I am Martinez Ruiz."

We shook hands and became friends.

In those days we travelled about the country together, we contributed to
the same papers, and the ideas and the men we attacked were the same.

Later, Azorin became an enthusiastic partisan of Maura, which appeared
to me particularly absurd, as I have never been able to see anything but
an actor of the grand style in Maura, a man of small ideas. Next he
became a partisan of La Cierva, which was as bad in my opinion as being
a Maurista. I am unable to say at the moment whether he is contemplating
any further transformations.

But, whether he is or not, Azorin will always remain a master of
language to me, besides an excellent friend who has a weakness for
believing all men to be great who talk in a loud voice and who pull
their cuffs down out of their coat sleeves with a grand gesture whenever
they appear upon the platform.




PAUL SCHMITZ


Another friendship which I found stimulating was that of Paul Schmitz, a
Swiss from Basle, who had come to Madrid because of some weakness of the
lungs, spending three years among us in order to rehabilitate himself.
Schmitz had studied in Switzerland and in Germany, and also had lived
for a long time in the north of Russia.

He was familiar with what in my judgment are the two most interesting
countries of Europe.

Paul Schmitz was a timid person of an inquiring turn of mind, whose
youth had been tempestuous. I made a number of excursions with Schmitz
to Toledo, to El Paular and to the Springs of Urbion; a year or two
later we visited Switzerland several times together.

Schmitz was like an open window through which I looked out upon an
unknown world. I held long conversations with him upon life, literature,
art and philosophy.

I recall that I took him one Sunday afternoon to the home of Don Juan
Valera.

When Schmitz and I arrived, Valera had just settled down for the
afternoon to listen to his daughter, who was reading aloud one of the
latest novels of Zola.

Valera, Schmitz and I sat chatting for perhaps four or five hours. There
was no subject that we could all agree upon. Valera and I were no sooner
against the Swiss than the Swiss and Valera were against me, or the
Swiss and I against Valera, and then each flew off after his own
opinion.

Valera, who saw that the Swiss and I were anarchists, said it was beyond
his comprehension how any man could conceive of a state of general well
being.

"Do you mean to say that you believe," he said to me, "that there will
ever come a time when every man will be able to set a bowl of oysters
from Arcachon upon his table and top it off with a bottle of champagne
of first-rate vintage, besides having a woman sitting beside him in a
Worth gown?"

"No, no, Don Juan," I replied. "In the eyes of the anarchist, oysters,
champagne, and Worth are mere superstitions, myths to which we attach no
importance. We do not spend our time dreaming about oysters, while
champagne is not nectar to our tastes. All that we ask is to live well,
and to have those about us live well also."

We could not convince each other. When Schmitz and I left Valera's house
it was already night, and we found ourselves absorbed in his talents and
his limitations.




ORTEGA Y GASSET


Ortega y Gasset impresses me as a traveller who has journeyed through
the world of culture. He moves upon a higher level, which it is
difficult to reach, and upon which it is still more difficult to
maintain oneself.

It may be that Ortega has no great sympathy for my manner of living,
which is insubordinate; it may be that I look with unfriendly eye upon
his ambitious and aristocratic sympathies; nevertheless, he is a master
who brings glad news of the unknown--that is, of the unknown to us.

Doctor San Martin was fond of telling how he was sitting one day upon a
bench in the Retiro, reading.

"Are you reading a novel?" inquired a gentleman, sitting down beside
him.

"No, I am studying."

"What! Studying at your age?" exclaimed the gentleman, amazed.

The same remark might be made to me: "What! Sitting under a master at
your age?"

As far as I am concerned, every man who knows more than I do is my
master.

I know very well that philosophy and metaphysics are nothing to the
great mass of physicians who pick up their science out of foreign
reviews, adding nothing themselves to what they read; nor, for that
matter, are they to most Spanish engineers, who are skilled in doing
sufficiently badly today what was done in England and Germany very well
thirty years ago; and the same thing is true of the apothecaries. The
practical is all that these people concede to exist, but how do they
know what is practical? Considering the matter from the practical point
of view, there can be no doubt but that civilization has attained a high
development wherever there have been great metaphysicisms, and then with
the philosophers have come the inventors, who between them are the glory
of mankind. Unamuno despises inventors, but in this case it is his
misfortune. It is far easier for a nation which is destitute of a
tradition of culture to improvise an histologist or a physicist, than a
philosopher or a real thinker.

Ortega y Gasset, the only approach to a philosopher whom I have ever
known, is one of the few Spaniards whom it is interesting to hear talk.




A PSEUDO-PATRON


Although a man may never have amounted to anything, and will probably
continue in much the same case, that is to say never amounting to
anything, yet there are persons who will take pride in having given him
his start in the world--in short, upon having made him known. Senor
Ruiz Contreras has set up some such absurd claim in regard to me.
According to Ruiz Contreras, he brought me into public notice through a
review which he published in 1899, under the title _Revista Nueva_.
Thus, according to Ruiz Contreras, I am known, and have been for
eighteen years! Although it may seem scarcely worth while to expose such
an obvious joke, I should like to clear up this question for the benefit
of any future biographers. Why should I not indulge the hope of having
them?

In 1899, Ruiz Contreras invited my co-operation in a weekly magazine, in
which I was to be both stockholder and editor. Those days already seem a
long way off. At first I refused, but he insisted; at length we agreed
that I should write for the magazine and share in meeting the expenses,
in company with Ruiz Contreras, Reparaz, Lassalle and the novelist
Matheu.

I made two or three payments, and moved down some of my pictures and
furniture to the office in consequence, until the time came when I began
to feel that it was humorous for me to be paying for publishing my
articles, when I was perfectly well able to dispose of them to any other
sheet. Upon my cutting off payments, Ruiz Contreras informed me that a
number of the stockholders, among whom was Icaza, who had replaced
Reparaz, took the position that if I did not pay, I should not be
permitted to write for the magazine.

"Very well, I shall not write." And I ceased to write.

Previous to my connection with the _Revista Nueva_, I had
contributed articles to _El Liberal_, _El Pais_, _El
Globo_, _La Justicia_, and _La Voz de Guipuzcoa_, as well
as to other publications.

A year after my contributions to the _Revista Nueva_, I brought out
_Sombre Lives_, which scarcely sold one hundred copies, and, then,
a little later, _The House of Aizgorri_, the sale of which fell
short of fifty.

At this time, Martinez Ruiz published a comedy, _The Power of
Love_, for which I provided a prologue, and I went about with the
publisher, Rodriguez Serra, through the bookshops, peddling the book. In
a shop on the Plaza de Santa Ana, Rodriguez Serra asked the proprietor,
not altogether without a touch of malice:

"What do you think of this book?"

"It would be all right," answered the proprietor, who did not know me,
"if anybody knew who Martinez Ruiz was; and who is this Pio Baroja?"

Senor Ruiz Contreras says that he made me known, but the fact is that
nobody knew me in those days; Senor Ruiz Contreras flatters himself that
he did me a great favour by publishing my articles, at a cost to me, at
the very least, of two or three _duros_ apiece.

If this is to be a patron of letters, I should like to patronize half
the planet.

As for literary influence, Ruiz Contreras never had any upon me. He was
an admirer of Arsene Houssage, Paul Bourget, and other novelists with a
sophisticated air, who never meant anything to me. The theatre also
obsessed him, a malady which I have never suffered, and he was a devotee
of the poet, Zorrilla, in which respect I was unable to share his
enthusiasm, nor can I do so today. Finally, he was a political
reactionary, while I am a man of radical tendencies.




XIII

PARISIAN DAYS


For the past twenty years I have been in the habit of visiting Paris,
not for the purpose of becoming acquainted with the city--to see it once
is enough; nor do I go in order to meet French authors, as, for the most
part, they consider themselves so immeasurably above Spaniards that
there is no way in which a self-respecting person can approach them. I
go to meet the members of the Spanish colony, which includes some types
which are most interesting.

I have gathered a large number of stories and anecdotes in this way,
some of which I have incorporated in my books.




ESTEVANEZ


Don Nicolas Estevanez was a good friend of mine. During my sojourns in
Paris, I met him every afternoon in the Cafe de la Fleur in the
Boulevard St. Germain.

When I was writing _The Last of the Romantics_ and _Grotesque
Tragedies_, Estevanez furnished me with data and information
concerning life in Paris under the Second Empire.

When I last saw him in the autumn of 1913, he made a practice of coming
to the cafe with a paper scribbled over with notes, to assist his memory
to recall the anecdotes which he had it in mind to tell.

I can see him now in the Cafe de la Fleur, with his blue eyes, his long
white beard, his cheeks, which were still rosy, his calm and always
phlegmatic air.

Once he became much excited. Javier Bueno and I happened on him in a
cafe on the Avenue d'Orleans, not far from the Lion de Belfort. Bueno
asked some questions about the recent attempt by Moral to assassinate
the King in Madrid, and Estevanez suddenly went to pieces. An anarchist
told me afterwards that Estevanez had carried the bomb which was thrown
by Morral in Madrid, from Paris to Barcelona, at which port he had taken
ship for Cuba, by arrangement with the Duke of Bivona.

I believe this story to have been a pure fabrication, but I feel
perfectly certain that Estevanez knew beforehand that the crime was to
be attempted.




MY VERSATILITY ACCORDING TO BONAFOUX


Speaking of Estevanez, I recall also Bonafoux, whom I saw frequently.
According to Gonzalez de la Pena, the painter, he held my versatility
against me.

"Bonafoux," remarked Pena, "feels that you are too versatile and too
volatile."

"Indeed? In what way?"

"One day you entered the bar and said to Bonafoux that a testimonial
banquet ought to be organized for Estevanez, enlarging upon it
enthusiastically. Bonafoux answered: 'Go ahead and make the
preparations, and we will all get together.' When you came into the cafe
a few nights later, Bonafoux asked: 'How about that banquet?' 'What
banquet?' you replied. It had already passed out of your mind. Now, tell
me: Is this true?" inquired Pena.

"Yes, it is. We all have something of Tartarin in us, more or less. We
talk and we talk, and then we forget what we say."

Other Parisian types return to me when I think of those days. There was
a Cuban journalist, who was satisfactorily dirty, of whom Bonafoux used
to say that he not only ate his plate of soup but managed to wash his
face in it at the same time. There was a Catalan guitar player, besides
some girls from Madrid who walked the tight rope, whom we used to invite
to join us at the cafe from time to time. And then there was a whole
host of other persons, all more or less shabby, down at the heel and
picturesque.





XIV

LITERARY ENMITIES


Making our entrance into the world of letters hurling contradictions
right and left, the young men of our generation were received by the
writers of established reputation with unfriendly demonstrations. As was
natural, this was not only the attitude of the older writers, but it
extended to our contemporaries in years as well, even to those who were
most modern.




THE ENMITY OF DICENTA


Among those who cherished a deadly hatred of me was Dicenta. It was an
antipathy which had its origin in the realm of ideas, and it was
accentuated subsequently by an article which I contributed to _El
Globo_ upon his drama _Aurora_, in which I maintained that
Dicenta was not a man of new or broad ideas, but completely preoccupied
with the ancient conceptions of honesty and honour. One night in the
Cafe Fornos--I am able to vouch for the truth of this incident because,
years afterwards, he told me the story himself--Dicenta accosted a young
man who was sitting at an adjacent table taking supper, and attempted to
draw him into discussion, under the impression that it was I. The young
man was so frightened that he never dared to open his mouth.

"Come," shouted Dicenta, "we shall settle this matter at once."

"I have nothing to settle with you," replied the young man.

"Yes, sir, you have; you have stated in an article that my ideas are not
revolutionary."

"I never stated anything of the kind."

"What is that?"

"No, sir."

"But aren't you Pio Baroja?"

"I am not, sir."

Dicenta turned on his heel and marched back to his seat.

Sometime later, Dicenta and I became friends, although we were never
very intimate, because he felt that I did not appreciate him at his full
worth. And it was the truth.




THE POSTHUMOUS ENMITY OF SAWA


I met Alejandro Sawa one evening at the Cafe Fornos, where I had gone
with a friend.

As a matter of fact, I had never read anything which he had written, but
his appearance impressed me. Once I followed him in the street with the
intention of speaking to him, but my courage failed at the last moment.
A number of months later, I met him one summer afternoon on the
Recoletos, when he was in the company of a Frenchman named Cornuty.
Cornuty and Sawa were conversing and reciting verses; they took me to a
wine-shop in the Plaza de Herradores, where they drank a number of
glasses, which I paid for, whereupon Sawa asked me to lend him three
pesetas. I did not have them, and told him so.

"Do you live far from here?" asked Alejandro, in his lofty style.

"No, near by."

"Very well then, you can go home and bring me the money."

He issued this command with such an air of authority that I went home
and brought him the money. He came to the door of the wine-shop, took it
from me, and then said:

"You may go now."

This was the way in which insignificant bourgeois admirers were treated
in the school of Baudelaire and Verlaine.

Later again, when I brought out _Sombre Lives_, I sometimes saw
Sawa in the small hours of the morning, his long locks flowing, and
followed by his dog. He always gripped my hand with such force that it
did me some hurt, and then he would say to me, in a tragic tone:

"Be proud! You have written _Sombre Lives_."

I took it as a joke.

One day Alejandro wrote me to come to his house. He was living on the
Cuesta de Santo Domingo. I betook myself there, and he made me a
proposition which was obviously preposterous. He handed me five or six
articles, written by him, which had already been published, together
with some notes, saying that if I would add certain material, we should
then be able to make up a book of "Parisian Impressions," which could
appear under the names of us both.

I read the articles and did not care for them. When I went to return
them, he asked me:

"What have you done?"

"Nothing. I think it would be difficult for us to collaborate; there is
no possible bond of unity in what we write."

"How is that?"

"You are one of these eloquent writers, and I am not."

This remark gave great offence.

Another reason for Alejandro's enmity was an opinion expressed by my
brother, Ricardo.

Ricardo wished to paint the portrait of Manuel Sawa in oils, as Manuel
had marked personality at that time, when he still wore a beard.

"But here am I," said Alejandro. "Am I not a more interesting subject to
be painted?"

"No, no, not at all," we all shouted together--this took place in the
Cafe de Lisboa--"Manuel has more character."

Alejandro said nothing, but, a few moments later, he rose, looked at
himself in the glass, arranged his flowing locks, and then, glaring at
us from top to toe, while he pronounced the letter with the utmost
distinctness, he said simply:

"M...." and walked out of the cafe.

Some time passed before Alejandro heard that I had put him into one of
my novels and he conceived a certain dislike for me, in spite of which
we saw each other now and then, always conversing affectionately.

One day he sent for me to come and see him. He was living in the Calle
del Conde Duque. He was in bed, already blind. His spirit was as high as
before, while his interest in literary matters remained the same. His
brother, Miguel, who was present, happened to say during the
conversation that the hat I wore, which I had purchased in Paris a few
days previously, had a flatter brim than was usual. Alejandro asked to
examine it, and busied himself feeling of the brim.

"This is a hat," he exclaimed enthusiastically, "that a man can wear
with long hair." Some months subsequent to his death a book of his,
_Light Among the Shadows_, was published, in which Alejandro spoke
ill of me, although he had a good word for _Sombre Lives_.

He called me a country-man, said that my bones were misshapen, and then
stated that glory does not go hand in hand with tuberculosis. Poor
Alejandro! He was sound at heart, an eloquent child of the
Mediterranean, born to orate in the lands of the sun, but he took it
into his head that it was his duty to make himself over into the
likeness of one of the putrid products of the North.




SEMI-HATRED ON THE PART OF SILVERIO LANZA


A mutual friend, Antonio Gil Campos, introduced me to Silverio Lanza.

Silverio Lanza was a man of great originality, endowed with an enormous
fund of thwarted ambition and pride, which was only natural, as he was a
notably fine writer who had not yet met with success, nor even with the
recognition which other younger writers enjoyed.

The first time that I saw Lanza, I remember how his eyes sparkled when I
told him that I liked his books. Nobody ever paid any attention to him
in those days.

Silverio Lanza was a singular character. At times he seemed benevolent,
and then again there were times when he would appear malignant in the
extreme.

His ideas upon the subject of literature were positively absurd. When I
sent him _Sombre Lives_, he wrote me an unending letter in which he
attempted to convince me that I ought to append a lesson or moral, to
every tale. If I did not wish to write them, he offered to do it
himself.

Silverio thought that literature was not to be composed like history,
according to Quintilian's definition, _ad narrandum_, but _ad
probandum_.

When I gave him _The House of Aizgorri_, he was outraged by the
optimistic conclusion of the book, and advised me to change it.
According to his theory, if the son of the Aizgorri family came to a bad
end, the daughter ought to come to a bad end also.

Being of a somewhat fantastical turn of mind, Silverio Lanza was full of
political projects that were extraordinary.

I remember that one of his ideas was that we ought all to write the King
a personal note of congratulation upon his attaining his majority.

"It is the most revolutionary thing that can be done at such a time,"
insisted Lanza, apparently quite convinced.

"I am unable to see it," I replied. Azorin and myself were of the
opinion that it was a ridiculous proceeding which would never produce
the desired result.

Another of Lanza's hobbies was an aggressive misogyny.

"Baroja, my friend," he would say to me, "you are too gallant and
respectful in your novels with the ladies. Women are like laws, they are
to be violated."

I laughed at him.

One day I was walking with my friend Gil Campos and my cousin Goni, when
we happened on Silverio Lanza, who took us to the Cafe de San Sebastian,
where we sat down in the section facing the Plazuela del Angel. It was a
company that was singularly assorted.

Silverio reverted to the theme that women should be handled with the
rod. Gil Campos proceeded to laugh, being gifted with an ironic vein,
and made fun of him. For my part, I was tired of it, so I said to Lanza:

"See here, Don Juan" (his real name was Juan Bautista Amoros), "what you
are giving us now is literature, and poor literature at that. You are
not, and I am not, able to violate law and women as we see fit. That may
be all very well for Caesars and Napoleons and Borgias, but you are a
respectable gentleman who lives in a little house at Getafe with your
wife, and I am a poor man myself, who manages as best he may to make a
living. You would tremble in your boots if you ever broke a law, or even
a municipal ordinance, and so would I. As far as women are concerned, we
are both of us glad to take what we can get, if we can get anything, and
I am afraid that neither of us is ever going to get very much, despite
the fact"--I added by way of a humorous touch--"that we are two of the
most distinguished minds in Europe."

My cousin Goni replied to this with the rare tact that was
characteristic of him, arguing that within the miserable sphere of
tangible reality I was right, while Lanza moved upon a higher plane,
which was more ideal and more romantic. He went on to add that Lanza and
he were both Berbers, and so violent and passionate, while I was an
Aryan, although a vulgar Aryan, whose ideas were simply those which were
shared by everybody.

Lanza was not satisfied with my cousin's explanation and departed with a
marked lack of cordiality.

Since that time, Silverio has regarded me with mixed emotions, half
friendly, half the reverse, although in one of his latest books, _The
Surrender of Santiago_, he has referred to me as a great friend and a
great writer. I suspect, however, that he does not love me.




XV

THE PRESS

OUR NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS


I have always been very much interested in the newspaper and periodical
press, and in everything that has any connection with printing. When my
father, my grandfather, and great grandfather set up struggling papers
in a provincial capital, it may be said that they were not printers in
vain.

Because of my fondness for newspapers and magazines, it is a grief to me
that the Spanish press should be so weak, so poor, so pusillanimous and
stiff-jointed.

Of late, while the foreign press has been expanding and widening its
scope, ours has been standing still.

There is, of course, an economic explanation to justify our deficiency,
but this is valid only in the matter of quantity, and not as to quality.
Comparing our press with that of the rest of the world, a rosary of
negation might easily be made up in this fashion:

Our press does not concern itself with what is of universal interest.

Our press does not concern itself with what is of national interest.

Our press does not concern itself with literature.

Our press does not concern itself with philosophy.

And so on to infinity.

Corpus Barga has told me that when Senor Groizard, a relative of his,
was ambassador to the Vatican, Leo XIII once inquired of him, in a
jargon of Italo-Spanish, in the presence of the papal secretary,
Cardinal Rampolla:

"Does the Senor Ambasciatore speak Italian?"

"No, not Italian, although I understand it a little."

"Does the Senor Ambasciatore speak English?"

"No, not English, I do not speak that," replied Groizard.

"Does the Senor Ambasciatore speak German?"

"No German, no Dutch; not at all."

"No doubt then the Senor Ambasciatore speaks French?"

"French? No. I am able to translate it a little, but I do not speak it."

"Then what does the Senor Ambasciatore speak?" asked Leo XIII, smiling
that Voltairian smile of his at his secretary.

"Then Senor Ambasciatore speaks a heavy back-country dialect called
Extramaduran," replied Rampolla del Tindaro, bending over to His
Holiness's ear.

The Spanish press has made a resolution, now of long standing, to speak
nothing but a back-country dialect called Extramaduran.

_Our Journalists_

Our journalists supply the measure of our journals. When the great names
are those of Miguel Moya, Romeo, Rocamora and Don Pio, what are we to
think of the little fellows?

Speaking generally, the Spanish journalist is interested in politics, in
theatres, in bull fights, and in nothing else; whatever is beyond these,
does not concern him. Not even the _feuilleton_ attracts his
attention. A wooden, highly mannered phrase sponsored by Maura, is much
more stimulating to his mind than the most sensational piece of news.

The Spanish newspaper man is endowed with an extraordinary lack of
imagination and of curiosity. I recall having given a friend, who was a
journalist, a little book of Nietzsche's to read, which he returned with
the remark that he had not been able to get through it, as it was
insufferable drivel. I have heard the same opinion, or similar ones,
expressed by journalists of Ibsen, Schopenhauer, Dostoievsky, Stendhal
and all the most stimulating minds of Europe.

The wretched Saint Aubin, wretched certainly as a critic, used to
ridicule Tolstoi and the illness which resulted in his death,
maintaining that it was nothing more than an advertisement. The most
benighted vulgarity reigns in our press.

Upon occasion, vulgarity goes hand in hand with an ignorance which is
astounding. I remember going to a cafe on the Calle de Alcala known as
la Maison Doree one afternoon with Regoyos. Felipe Trigo, the novelist,
sat down at our table with a friend of his, a journalist, I believe,
from America. I have never been a friend of Trigo's, and could never
take any interest either in the man or his work, which to my mind is
tiresome and commercially erotic, besides being absolutely devoid of all
charm.

Regoyos, who is effusive by nature, soon became engaged in conversation
with them, and the talk turned upon artistic subjects, in which he was
interested, and then to his travels abroad.

Trigo put in his oar and uttered a number of preposterous statements. In
particular, he described a ship which had unloaded at Milan. When
Regoyos pointed out that Milan was not a seaport, he replied:

"Probably it was some other place then. What is the difference?"

He continued with a string of geographical and anthropological blunders,
which were concurred in by the journalist, while Regoyos and I sat by in
amazement.

When we left the cafe, Regoyos inquired:

"Could they have been joking?"

"No; nonsense. They do not believe that such things are worth knowing.
They think they are petty details which might be useful to railway
porters. Trigo imagines that he is a magician, who understands the
female mind."

"Well, does he?" asked Regoyos, with naive innocence.

"How can he understand anything? The poor fellow is ignorant. His other
attainments are on a par with his geography."

The ignorance of authors and journalists is accompanied as a matter of
course by a total want of comprehension. A number of years ago, a rich
young man called at my house, intending to found a review. During the
conversation, he explained that he was a Murcian, a lawyer and a
follower of Maura.

Finally, after expounding his literary ideas, he informed me that
Ricardo Leon, who at that time had just published his first novel,
would, in his opinion, come to be acknowledged as the first novelist of
Europe. He also assured me that Dickens's humour was absolutely vulgar,
cheap and out of date.

"I am not surprised that you should think so," I said to him. "You are
from Murcia, you are a lawyer and a Maurista; naturally, you like
Ricardo Leon, and it is equally natural that you should not like
Dickens."

Persons who imagine that it is of no consequence whether Milan is a
seaport or not, who believe that Nietzsche is a drivelling ass, and who
make bold to tell us that Dickens is a cheap author--in one word, young
gentlemen lawyers who are partisans of Maura, are the people who provide
copy for our press. How can the Spanish press be expected to be
different from what it is?




AMERICANS


Unquestionably, Spaniards suffer much from the uncertainty of
information and narrowness of view inevitable to those who live apart
from the main currents of life.

In comparison with the English, the Germans, or the French, whether we
like it or not, we appear provincial. We are provincials who possess
more or less talent, but nevertheless we are provincials.

So it is that an Italian, a Russian, or a Swede prefers to read a book
by a mediocre Parisian, such as Marcel Prevost, to one by a writer of
genuine talent, such as Galdos; it also explains why the canvases of
second rate painters such as David, Gericault, or Ingres are more highly
esteemed in the market than those of a painter of genius like Goya.

To be provincial has its virtues as well as its defects. At times the
provincial are accompanied by universal elements, which blend and form a
masterpiece. This was the case with _Don Quixote_, with the
etchings of Goya and the dramas of Ibsen. Similarly, among new peoples,
provincial stupidity will often form a blend with an obtuseness which is
world-wide. The aridness and infertility characteristic of the soil
combine with the detritus of fashion and the follies of the four
quarters of the globe. The result is a child-like type, petulant, devoid
of virtue, and utterly destitute of a single manly quality. This is the
American type. America is _par excellence_ the continent of
stupidity.

The American has not yet outgrown the monkey in him and remains in the
imitative stage.

I have no particular reason to dislike Americans. My hostility towards
them arises merely from the fact that I have never known one who had the
air of being anybody, who impressed me as a man.

You frequently meet a man in the interior of Spain, in some small
village, perhaps, whose conversation conveys the impression that he is a
real man, wrought out of the ore that is most human and most noble. At
such times one becomes reconciled to one's country, for all its
charlatans and hordes of sharpers.

An American never appears to be calm, serene and collected. There are
plenty who seem to be wild, impulsive creatures, driven on by sanguinary
fury, while others disclose the vanity of the chorus girl, or a self-
conceit which is wholly ridiculous.

My lack of sympathy for Spanish-Americans extends to their literary
productions. Everything that I have read by South Americans, and I bear
in mind the not disinterested encomiums of Unamuno, I have found to be
both poor and deficient in substance.

Beginning with Sarmiento's _Facundo_, which is heavy, cheap, and
uninteresting, and coming down to the latest productions of Ingenieros,
Manuel Ugarte, Ricardo Rojas and Contreras, this is true without
exception.

What a deluge of shoddy snobbery and vulgar display pours out of
America!

It is often argued that Spaniards should eulogize South Americans for
political reasons. This is one of many recommendations which proceed
from the craniums of gentlemen who top themselves off with silk hats and
who carry a lecture inside which is in demand by Ibero-American
societies.

I have no faith that this brand of politics will be productive of
results.

Citizens of old, civilized countries are still sensible to flattery and
compliment, but what are you to tell an Argentine who is fully convinced
that Argentina is a more important country than England or Germany,
because she raises a large quantity of wheat, to say nothing of a great
number of cows?

Whenever Unamuno writes he decries Kant, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, and
then promptly eulogizes the mighty General Anibal Perez and the great
poet Diocleciano Sanchez, who hail from the pampas. To these fellows,
such praise seems grudging enough. Salvador Rueda himself must appear
tame to these hide-stretchers.




XVI

POLITICS


I have always been a liberal radical, an individualist and an anarchist.
In the first place, I am an enemy of the Church; in the second place, I
am an enemy of the State. When these great powers are in conflict I am a
partisan of the State as against the Church, but on the day of the
State's triumph, I shall become an enemy of the State. If I had lived
during the French Revolution, I should have been an internationalist of
the school of Anacarsis Clootz; during the struggle for liberty, I
should have been one of the _Carbonieri_.

To the extent in which liberalism has been a destructive force, inimical
to the past, it enthralls me. The fight against religious prejudice and
the aristocracy, the suppression of religious communities, inheritance
taxes--in short, whatever has a tendency to pulverize completely the
ancient order of society, fills me with a great joy. On the other hand,
insofar as liberalism is constructive, as it has been for example in its
advocacy of universal suffrage, in its democracy, and in its system of
parliamentary government, I consider it ridiculous and valueless as
well.

Even today, wherever it is obliged to take the aggressive, it seems to
me that the good in liberalism is not exhausted; but wherever it has
become an accomplished fact, and is accepted as such, it neither
interests me nor enlists my admiration.




VOTES AND APPLAUSE


In our present day democracy, there are only two effective sanctions:
votes and applause.

Those are all. Just as in the old days men committed all sorts of crimes
in order to please their sovereign, now they commit similar crimes in
order to satisfy the people.

And this truth has been recognized from Aristotle to Burke.

Democracy ends in histrionism.

A man who gets up to talk before a crowd must of necessity be an actor.
I have wondered from time to time if I might not have certain histrionic
gifts myself; however, when I have put them to the test, I have found
that they were not sufficient. I have made six or seven speeches during
my brief political career. I spoke in Valencia, in a pelota court, and I
delivered an address at Barcelona in the Casa del Pueblo, in both of
which places I was applauded generously. Nevertheless the applause
failed to intoxicate me; it produced no impression upon me whatever. It
seemed too much like mere noise--noise made by men's hands, and having
nothing to do with myself.

I am not good enough as an actor to be a politician.




POLITICIANS


I have never been able to feel any enthusiasm for Spanish politicians.
We hear a great deal about Canovas. Canovas has always impressed me as
being as bad an orator as he was a writer. When I first read his _Bell
of Huesca_, I could not contain myself for laughing. As far as his
speeches are concerned, I have also read a few, and find them horribly
heavy, diffuse, monotonous and deficient in style. I hear that Canovas
is a great historian, but if so, I am not acquainted with that side of
him.

Castelar was unquestionably a man of exceptional gifts as a writer, but
he failed to take advantage of them, and they were utterly dissipated.
He lacked what most Spaniards of the 19th Century lacked with him; that
is, reserve.

When Echegaray was made Minister of Finance, he was already an old man.
A reporter called one day to interview him at the Ministry, and
Echegaray confessed that he was without any very clear idea as to just
what the duties of his office were to be. When the reporter took leave
of the dramatist, he remarked:

"Don Jose, you are not going to be comfortable here; it is cold in the
building. Besides, the air is too fresh."

Echegaray replied:

"Yes, and your description suits me exactly."

This cynically cheap joke might have fallen appropriately from the
tongues of the majority of Spanish politicians. Among these male
_bailarinas_, nearly all of whom date back to the Revolution of
September, we may find, indeed, some men of austere character: Salmeron,
Pi y Margall and Costa. Salmeron was an inimitable actor, but an actor
who was sincere in his part. He was the most marvellous orator that I
have ever heard.

As a philosopher, he was of no account, and as a politician he was a
calamity.

Pi y Margall, whom I met once in his own home where I went in company
with Azorin, was no more a politician or a philosopher than was
Salmeron. He was a journalist, a popularizer of other men's ideas,
gifted with a style at once clear and concise. Pi y Margall was sincere,
enamoured of ideas, and took but little thought of himself.

As to Costa, I confess that he was always antipathetic to me. Like
Nakens, he was a man who lived upon the estimation in which he was held
by others, pretending all the while that he attached no importance to it
whatever. Aguirre Metaca once told me that while he was connected with a
paper in Saragossa, he had solicited an interview with Costa, and
thereupon Costa wrote the interview himself, referring to himself here
and there in it as the Lion of Graus. I cannot accept Costa as a modern
European, intellectually. He was a figure for the Cortes of Cadiz,
solemn, pompous, becollared and rhetorical. He was one of those actors
who abound in southern countries, who are laid to rest in their graves
without ever having had the least idea that their entire lives have been
nothing but stage spectacles.




REVOLUTIONISTS


Whether politicians or authors, the Spanish revolutionists always smack
to my mind of the property room, and especially is this true of the
authors. Zozaya, Morote and Dicenta have passed for many years now as
terrible men, both destructive and great innovators. But how ridiculous!
Zozaya, like Dicenta, has never done anything but manipulate the
commonplace, failing to impart either lightness or novelty to it, as
have Valera and Anatole France, succeeding only on the other hand in
making it more plumbeous and indigestible.

Speaking of Luis Morote, against whom I urge nothing as a man, he has
always been a bugbear to me, the personification of dullness, of
vulgarity, of everything that lacks interest and charm. I can conceive
nothing lower than an article by Morote.

"What talent that man has! What a revolutionary personality!" they used
to say in Valencia, and once the janitor at the Club added: "To think I
knew that man when he was only this high!" And he held out his hand
about a metre above the ground.

Spain has never produced any revolutionists. Don Nicolas Estevanez, who
imagined himself an anarchist, would fly into a rage if he read an
article which concealed a gallicism in it.

"Do not bother your head about gallicisms," I used to say to him. "What
do they matter, anyway?"

No, we have never had any revolutionists in Spain. That is, we have had
only one: Ferrer.

He was certainly not a man of great mind. When he talked, he was on the
level of Morote and Zozaya, which is nothing more nor less than the
level of everybody else; but when it came to action, he did amount to
something, and that something was dangerous.




LERROUX


My only experience in politics was gained with Lerroux.

One Sunday, seven or eight years ago, on coming out of my house and
crossing the Plaza de San Marcial, I observed that a great crowd had
gathered.

"What is the matter?" I asked.

"Lerroux is coming," they told me.

I delayed a moment and happened on Villar, the composer, among the
crowd. We fell to talking of Lerroux and what he might accomplish. A
procession was soon formed, which we followed, and we found ourselves in
front of the editorial offices of _El Pais_.

"Shall we go in?" asked Villar. "Do you know Lerroux?"

I had met Lerroux in the days when _El Progreso_ was still
published, having called once with Maeztu at his office; afterwards I
saw him in Barcelona in a large shed, which, if I recall rightly, went
by the name of "La Fraternidad Republicana," and then I was accompanied
by Azorin and Junoy.

Villar and I went upstairs and greeted Lerroux in the offices of _El
Pais_.

"Estevanez has spoken of you to me," he said. "Is he well?"

"Yes, very well."

A few days later, Lerroux invited me to dinner at the Cafe Ingles.
Lerroux, Fuente and I dined together, and then fell to talking. Lerroux
asked me to join his party, whereupon I pointed out the qualifications
which were lacking in me, which were necessary to a politician. Shortly
after, I was nominated as a candidate for the City Council, and I
addressed a number of meetings, although always coldly, and never at
high tension.

While I was with Lerroux, I was never treated save with consideration.

Why did I leave his party? Chiefly because of differences as to ideas
and as to tactics. Lerroux wished to organize his party into a party of
law and order, so that it might be capable of governing, and also to
have it friendly with the Army. I was of the opinion that it ought to be
a revolutionary party, not in the sense that I was thinking of erecting
barricades, but I wished it to contest, to upset things, and to protest
against injustice.

What Lerroux wanted was a party of orators who could speak at public
meetings, a party of office-holders, councillors, provincial deputies
and the like, while I held, and still hold, that the only efficacious
revolutionary weapon is the printed page. Lerroux was anxious to
transform the radical party into something aristocratic and Castilian; I
desired to see it retain its Catalan character, and continue to wear
blouses and rope-soled shoes.

I withdrew from the party for these reasons, to which I may add
Lerroux's attitude of indifference upon the occasion of the execution of
the stoker of the "Numancia."

Not many months after, I met him on the Carrera de San Jeronimo, and he
said to me:

"I have read your diatribes."

"They were not directed against you, but against your politics. I shall
never speak ill of you, because I have no cause."

"Yes," he replied, "I know that at heart you are one of my friends."




AN OFFER


A number of years ago, when the Conservatives were in power and Dato was
President of the Ministry, Azorin brought me word that Sanchez Guerra,
then Minister of the Interior, wished to see me and to have a little
talk, as perhaps some way might be arranged by which I might be made
deputy. During the afternoon, I accompanied Azorin to the Ministry, and
we saw the Minister.

He informed me that he would like to have me enter the Congress.

"I should like to myself," I replied, "but it would appear to me rather
difficult."

"But is there not some town where you are well known, and where you have
influence?"

"No, none whatever."

"How would you like then to be deputy to represent the Government?"

"As a regular?"

"Yes."

"As a Conservative?"

"Yes."

I thought a moment and said: "No, I can never be a Conservative, however
it might suit my interest to be so. Try as hard as I might, I should
never succeed."

"That is the only way in which we can make you deputy."

"Well, it cannot be helped! I must resign myself then to amount to
nothing."

Thanking the Minister for his kindness. Azorin and I walked out of the
Ministry of the Interior.




SOCIALISTS


As for Socialists, I have never cared to have anything to do with them.
One of the most offensive things about Socialists, which is more
offensive than their pedantry, than their charlatanry, than their
hypocrisy, is their inquisitorial instinct for prying into other
people's lives. Whether Pablo Iglesias travels first or third class, has
been for years one of the principal topics of dispute between Socialists
and their opponents.

Fifteen years ago I was in Tangier, where I had been sent by the
_Globo_, and, upon my return, a newspaper man who had socialistic
ideas, reproached me:

"You talk a great deal about the working man, but I see you were living
in the best hotel in Tangier."

I answered: "In the first place, I have never spoken of the workingman
with any fervour. Furthermore, I am not such a slave as to be too
cowardly to take what life offers as it comes, as you are. I take what I
can that I want, and when I do not take it, it is because I cannot get
it."




LOVE OF THE WORKINGMAN


To gush over the workingman is one of the commonplaces of the day which
is utterly false and hypocritical. Just as in the 18th century sympathy
was with the simple hearted citizen, so today we talk about the
workingman. The term workingman can never be anything but a grammatical
common denominator. Among workingmen, as among the bourgeoisie, there
are all sorts of people. It is perfectly true that there are certain
characteristics, certain defects, which may be exaggerated in a given
class, because of its special environment and culture. The difference in
Spanish cities between the labouring man and the bourgeoisie is not very
great. We frequently see the workingman leap the barrier into the
bourgeoisie, and then disclose himself as a unique flower of knavery,
extortion and misdirected ingenuity. Deep down in the hearts of our
revolutionists, I do not believe that there is any real enthusiasm for
the workingman.

When the bookshop of Fernando Fe was still fin the Carrera de San
Jeronimo, I once heard Blasco Ibanez say with the cheapness that is his
distinguishing trait, laughing meanwhile ostentatiously, that a republic
in Spain would mean the rule of shoemakers and of the scum of the
streets.




THE CONVENTIONALIST BARRIOVERO


Barriovero, a conventionalist, according to Grandmontagne--yes, and how
keen the scent of this American for such matters!--attended the opening
of a radical club in the Calle del Principe with a party of friends. We
were all drinking champagne. Like other revolutionists and parvenus
generally, Lerroux is a victim of the superstition of champagne.

"Aha, suppose those workingmen should see us drinking champagne!"
suggested some one.

"What of it?" asked another.

"I only wish for my part," Barriovero interrupted with a show of
sentiment, "that the workingman could learn to drink champagne."

"Learn to drink it?" I burst out, "I see no difficulty about that. He
could drink champagne as well as anything else."

"Not at all," said Barriovero the conventionalist, very gravely. "He has
the superstition of the peasant; he thinks he must leave enough wine to
cover the bottom of the glass."

I doubt whether this observation will attract the attention of any
future Plutarch, although it might very well do so, as it expresses most
I clearly the distinction which exists in the minds of our
revolutionists between the workingman and the young gentleman.




ANARCHISTS


I have had a number of acquaintances among anarchists. Some of them are
dead; the majority of the others have changed their ideas. It is
apparent nowadays that the anarchism of Reclus and Kropotkin is out of
date, and entirely a thing of the past. The same tendencies will
reappear under other forms, and present new aspects. Among anarchists, I
have known Elysee Reclus, whom I met in the editorial offices of a
publication called _L'Humanite Nouvelle_, which was issued in Paris
in the Rue des Saints-Peres. I have also met Sebastien Faure during a
mass meeting organized in the interests of one Guerin, who had taken
refuge in a house in the Rue de Chabrol some eighteen or twenty years
ago. I have had relations with Malatesta and Tarrida del Marmol. As a
matter of fact, both these anarchists escorted me one afternoon from
Islington, where Malatesta lived, to the door of the St. James Club, one
of the most aristocratic retreats in London, where I had an appointment
to meet a diplomat.

As for active anarchists, I have known a number, two or three of whom
have been dynamiters.




THE MORALITY OF THE ALTERNATING PARTY SYSTEM


The only difference between the morality of the Liberal party and that
of the Conservative party is one of clothes. Among Conservatives the
most primitive clout seems to be slightly more ample, but not noticeably
so.

The preoccupations of both are purely with matters of style. The only
distinction is that the Conservatives make off with a great deal at
once, while the Liberals take less, but do it often.

This is in harmony with the law of mechanics according to which what is
gained in force is lost in velocity and what is gained in intensity is
lost in expansion. After all, no doubt morality in politics should be a
negligible quantity. Honest, upright men who hearken only to the voice
of conscience, never get on in politics, neither are they ever
practical, nor good for anything.

To succeed in politics, a certain facility is necessary, to which must
be added ambition and a thirst for glory. The last is the most innocent
of the three.




ON OBEYING THE LAW


It is safe, it seems to me, to assume the following axioms: First, to
obey the law is in no sense to attain justice; second, it is not
possible to obey the law strictly, thoroughly, in any country in the
world.

That obeying the law has nothing to do with justice is indisputable, and
this is especially true in the political sphere, in which it is easy to
point to a rebel, such as Martinez Campos, who has been elevated to the
plane of a great man and who has been immortalized by a statue upon his
death, and then to a rebel such as Sanchez Moya, who Was merely shot.
The only difference between the men was in the results attained, and in
the manner of their exit.

Hence I say that Lerroux was not only base, but obtuse and absurdly
wanting in human feeling and revolutionary sympathy, when he concurred
in the execution of the stoker of the "Numancia."

If law and justice are identical and to comply with the law is
invariably to do justice, then what can be the distinction between the
progressive and the conservative? On the other hand, the revolutionist
has no alternative but to hold that law and justice are not the same,
and so he is obliged to subscribe to the benevolent character of all
crimes which are altruistic and social in their purposes, whether they
are reactionary or anarchistic in tendency.

Now the second axiom, which is to the effect that there is no city or
country in the world in which it is possible to obey the law thoroughly,
is also self-evident. A certain class of common crimes, such as robbery,
cheating and swindling, murder and the like, are followed by a species
of automatic punishment in all quarters of the civilized world, in spite
of exceptions in specific cases, which result from the intervention of
political bosses and similar influences; but there are other offenses
which meet with no such automatic punishment. In these pardon and
penalty are meted out in a spirit of pure opportunism.

I was discussing Zurdo Olivares one day with Emiliano Iglesias in the
office of _El Radical_, when I asked him:

"How was it that Zurdo Olivares could save himself after playing such an
active role in the tragic week at Barcelona?"

"Zurdo's salvation was indirectly owing to me," replied Iglesias.

"But, my dear sir!"

"Yes, indeed."

"How did that happen?"

"Very naturally. There were three cases to be tried; one was against
Ferrer, one against Zurdo, and another against me. A friend who enjoyed
the necessary influence, succeeded in quashing the case against me, as a
matter of personal favour, and as it seemed rather barefaced to make an
exception alone in my favour, it was decided to include Zurdo Olivares,
who, thanks to the arrangement, escaped being shot."

"Then, if an influential friend of yours had not been a member of the
Ministry, you would both have been shot in the moat at Montjuich?"

"Beyond question."

And this took place in the heyday of Conservative power.




THE STERNNESS OF THE LAW


There are men who believe that the State, as at present constituted, is
the end and culmination of all human effort. According to this view, the
State is the best possible state, and its organization is considered so
perfect that its laws, discipline and formulae are held to be sacred and
immutable in men's eyes. Maura and all conservatives must be reckoned in
this group, and Lerroux too, appears to belong with them, as he holds
discipline in such exalted respect.

On the other hand, there are persons who believe that the entire legal
structure is only a temporary scaffolding, and that what is called
justice today may be thought savagery tomorrow, so that it is the part
of wisdom not to look so much to the rule of the present as to the
illumination of the future.

Since it is impossible to effect in practice automatic enforcement of
the law, especially in the sphere of political crimes, because of the
unlimited power of pardon vested in the hands of our public men, it
would seem judicious to err upon the side of mercy rather than upon that
of severity. Better fail the law and pardon a repulsive, bloody beast
such as Chato de Cuqueta, than shoot an addle-headed unfortunate such as
Clemente Garcia, or a dreamer like Sanchez Moya, whose hands were
innocent of blood.

It was pointed out a long time ago that laws are like cobwebs; they
catch the little flies, and let the big ones pass through.

How very severe, how very determined our politicians are with the little
flies, but how extremely affable they are with the big ones!




XVII

MILITARY GLORY


No, I have not made up my mind upon the issues of this war. If it were
possible to determine what is best for Europe, I should of course desire
it, but this I do not know, and so I am uncertain. I am preoccupied by
the consequences which may follow the war in Spain. Some believe that
there will be an increase of militarism, but I doubt it.

Many suppose that the crash of the present war will cause the prestige
of the soldier to mount upward like the spray, so that we shall have
nothing but uniforms and clanking of spurs throughout the world very
shortly, while the sole topics of conversation will be mortars,
batteries and guns.

In my judgment those who take this standpoint are mistaken. The present
conflict will not establish war in higher favour.

Perhaps its glories may not be diminished utterly. It may be that man
must of necessity kill, burn, and trample under foot, and that these
excesses of brutality are symptoms of collective health.

Even if this be so, we may be sure that military glory is upon the eve
of an eclipse.

Its decline began when the professional armies became nothing more than
armed militia, and from the moment that it became apparent that a
soldier might be improvised from a countryman with marvellous rapidity.




THE OLD-TIME SOLDIER


Formerly, a soldier was a man of daring and adventure, brave and
audacious, preferring an irregular life to the narrowing restraints of
civil existence.

The old time soldier trusted in his star without scruple and without
fear, and imagined that he could dominate fate as the gambler fancies
that he masters the laws of chance.

Valour, recklessness, together with a certain rough eloquence, a certain
itch to command, lay at the foundation of his life. His inducements were
pay, booty, showy uniforms and splendid horses. The soldier's life was
filled with adventure, he conquered wealth, he conquered women, and he
roamed through unknown lands.

Until a few years ago, the soldier might have been summed up in three
words: he was brave, ignorant and adventurous.

The warrior of this school passed out of Europe about the middle of the
19th Century. He became extinct in Spain at the conclusion of our Second
Civil War.

Since that day there has been a fundamental change in the life of the
soldier.

War has taken on greater magnitude, while the soldier has become more
refined, and it is not to be denied that both war and the fighting man
are losing their traditional prestige.




DOWN GOES PRESTIGE


The causes of this diminution of prestige are various. Some are moral,
such as the increased respect for human life, and the disfavour with
which the more aggressive, crueler qualities have come to be regarded.
Others, however, and perhaps these are of more importance, are purely
esthetic. Through a combination of circumstances, modern warfare,
although more tragic than was ancient warfare, and even more deadly,
nevertheless has been deprived of its spectacular features.

Capacity for esthetic appreciation has its limits. Nobody is able to
visualize a battle in which two million men are engaged; it can only be
imagined as a series of smaller battles. In one of these modern battles,
substantially all the traditional elements which we have come to
associate with war, have disappeared. The horse, which bulks so largely
in the picture of a battle as it presents itself to our minds, scarcely
retains any importance at all; for the most part, automobiles, bicycles
and motor cycles have taken its place. These contrivances may be useful,
but they do not make the same appeal to the popular imagination.




SCIENCE AND THE PICTURESQUE


Upon taking over warfare, science stripped it of its picturesqueness.
The commanding general no longer cavorts upon his charger, nor smiles as
the bullets whistle about him, while he stands surrounded by an
ornamental general staff, whose breasts are covered with ribbons and
medals representing every known variety of hardware, whether monarchical
or republican.

Today the general sits in a room, surrounded by telephones and telegraph
apparatus. If he smiles at all, it is only before the camera.

An officer scarcely ever uses a sword, nor does he strut about adorned
with all his crosses and medals, nor does he wear the resplendent
uniforms of other days. On the contrary, his uniform is ugly and dirt
coloured, and innocent of devices.

This officer is without initiative, he is subordinated to a fixed
general plan; surprises on either one side or the other, are almost out
of the question.

The plan of battle is rigid and detailed. It permits neither originality
nor display of individuality upon the part of the generals, the lesser
officers, or the private soldiers. The individual is swallowed up by the
collective force. Outstanding types do not occur; nobody develops the
marked personality of the generals of the old school.

Besides this, individual bravery, when not reinforced by other
qualities, is of less and less consequence. The bold, adventurous youth
who, years ago, would have been an embryo Murat, Messina, Espartero or
Prim, would be rejected today to make room for a mechanic who had the
skill to operate a machine, or for an aviator or an engineer who might
be capable of solving in a crisis a problem of pressing danger.

The prestige of the soldier, even upon the battle field, has fallen
today below that of the man of science.




WHAT WE NEED TODAY


There are still some persons of a romantic turn of mind who imagine that
none but the soldier who defends his native land, the priest who
appeases the divine wrath and at the same time inculcates the moral law,
and the poet who celebrates the glories of the community, are worthy to
be leaders of the people.

But the man of the present age does not desire any leaders.

He has found that when someone wears red trousers or a black cassock, or
is able to write shorter lines than himself, it is no indication that he
is any better, nor any braver, nor any more moral, nor capable of deeper
feeling than he.

The man of today will have no magicians, no high priests and no
mysteries. He is capable of being his own priest, his own soldier when
it is necessary, and of fighting for himself; he requires no specialists
in courage, in morals, nor in the realm of sentiment and feeling. What
we need today are good men and wise men.




OUR ARMIES


Prussian militarism has been explained upon the theory that it was a
development consequent upon a realization of the benefits which had
accrued to Prussia through war. As a matter of fact, however, it is not
possible to explain all militarism in this way. Certainly in Spain
neither wars nor the army have been of the slightest benefit to the
country.

If we consider the epoch which goes by the name of contemporary history,
that is to say from the French Revolution to the present time, we shall
perceive immediately that we have not been over fortunate.

The French Republic declared war upon us in 1793. A campaign of
astuteness, a tactical warfare was waged by us upon the frontiers, upon
occasion not without success, until finally the French army grew strong
enough to sweep us back, and to cross the Ebro.

We took part in the battle of Trafalgar in 1805. Spain presented a fine
appearance, she made a mighty gesture with her Gravinas, her Churrucas
and her Alavas, but the battle itself was a disaster.

In 1808 the War of Independence broke out, providing another splendid
exhibition of popular fervour. In this war, the regular Army was the
force which accomplished least. The war took its character from the
guerrillas, from the dwellers in the towns. The campaign was directed by
Englishmen. The Spanish army suffered more defeats than it won
victories, while its administrative and technical organization was
deplorable. The intervention of Angouleme followed in 1823. The Army was
composed of liberal officers, but it contained no troops, so that all
they ever did was to retire before the enemy, as he was more numerous
and more powerful.

The Spanish cause in America was hopeless before the fighting began. The
land was enormous, troops were few, and in large measure composed of
Indians. What the English were never able to do in the fulness of their
power, was not to be accomplished by Spaniards in their decadence. Our
First Civil War, which was fierce, terrible, and waged without quarter,
called into being a valorous liberal army, and soldiers sprang up of the
calibre of Espartero, Zurbano and Narvaez, but simultaneously a powerful
Carlist army was organized under leaders of military genius, such as
Zumalacarregui and Cabrera. Victory for either side was impossible, and
the war ended in compromise.

The Second Civil War also resulted in a system of pacts and compromises
far more secret than the Convention of Vergara. The Cuban war and the
war in the Philippines, as afterwards the war with the United States,
were calamitous, while the present campaign in Morocco has not one
redeeming feature.

From the War of the French Revolution to this very day, the African War
has been the only one in which our forces have met with the slightest
success.

Nevertheless, our soldiers aspire to a position of dominance in the
country equal to that attained by the French soldiers subsequent to
Jena, and by the Germans after Sedan.

A WORD FROM KUROKI, THE JAPANESE

"Gentlemen," said General Kuroki, speaking at a banquet tendered to him
in New York, "I cannot aspire to the applause of the world, because I
have created nothing, I have invented nothing. I am only a soldier."

If these are not his identical words, they convey the meaning of them.

This victorious, square-headed Mongolian had gotten into his head what
the dolichocephalic German blond, who, according to German
anthropologists is the highest product of Europe, and the brachycephalic
brunette of Gaul and the Latin and the Slav have never been able to
understand.

Will they ever be able to understand it? Perhaps they never will be
able.




EPILOGUE


When I sat down to begin these pages, somewhat at random, my intention
was to write an autobiography, accompanying it with such comments as
might suggest themselves. Looking continually to the right and to the
left, I have lost my way, and this book is the result.

I have not attempted to correct or embellish it. So many books, trimmed
up nicely and well-padded, go to their graves every year to be forgotten
forever, that it has hardly seemed worth while to bedeck this one. I am
not a believer in _maquillage_ for the dead.

Now one word more as to the subject of the book, which is I.

If I were to live two hundred years at the very least, I might be able
to realize, by degrees, the maximum programme which I have laid down for
my life. As it scarcely seems possible that a man could live to such an
age, which is attained only by parrots, I find myself with no
alternative but to limit myself to a small portion of the introductory
section of my minimum programme, and this, as a matter of fact, I am
content to do.

With hardship and effort, and the scanty means at my command, I have
succeeded in acquiring a house and garden in my own country, a
comfortable retreat which is sufficient for my needs. I have gathered a
small library in the house, which I hope will grow with time, besides a
few manuscripts and some curious prints. I do not believe that I have
ever harmed any man deliberately, so my conscience does not trouble me.
If my ideas are fragmentary and ill-considered, I have done my best to
make them sound, clear, and complete, so that it is not my fault if they
are not so.

I have become independent financially. I not only support myself, but I
am able to travel occasionally upon the proceeds of my pen.

A Russian publishing house, another in Germany, and another in the
United States are bringing out my books, paying me, moreover, for the
right of translation; and I am satisfied. I have friends of both sexes
in Madrid and in the Basque provinces, who seem already like old
friends, because I have grown fond of them. As I face old age, I feel
that I am walking upon firmer ground than I did in my youth.

In a short time, what a few years ago the sociologists used to call
involution--that is, a turning in--will begin to take place in my brain;
the cranial sutures will become petrified, and an automatic limitation
of the mental horizon will soon come.

I shall accept involution, petrification of the sutures and limitation
with good grace. I have never rebelled against logic, nor against
nature, against the lightning or the thunder storm. No sooner does one
gain the crest of the hill of life than at once he begins to descend
rapidly. We know a great deal the moment that we realize that nobody
knows anything. I am a little melancholy now and a little rheumatic; it
is time to take salicylates and to go out and work in the garden--a time
for meditation and for long stories, for watching the flames as they
flare upward under the chimney piece upon the hearth.

I commend myself to the event. It is dark outside, but the door of my
house stands open. Whoever will, be he life or be he death, let him come
in.




PALINODE AND FRESH OUTBURST OF IRE


A few days ago I left the house with the manuscript of this book, to
which I have given the name of _Youth and Egolatry_, on my way to
the post office.

It was a romantic September morning, swathed in thick, white mist. A
blue haze of thin smoke rose upward from the shadowy houses of the
neighbouring settlement, vanishing in the mist. Meanwhile, the birds
were singing, and a rivulet close by murmured in the stillness.

Under the influence of the homely, placid country air, I felt my spirit
soften and grow more humble, and I began to think that the manuscript
which I carried in my hand was nothing more than a farrago of
foolishness and vulgarity.

The voice of prudence, which was also that of cowardice, cautioned me:

"What is the good of publishing this? Will it bring you reputation?"

"Certainly not."

"Have you anything to gain by it?"

"Probably not either."

"Then, why irritate and offend this one and that by saying things which,
after all, are nobody's business?"

To the voice of prudence, however, my habitual self replied:

"But what you have written is sincere, is it not? What do you care,
then, what they think about it?"

But the voice of prudence continued:

"How quiet everything is about you, how peaceful! This is life, after
all, and the rest is madness, vanity and vain endeavour."

There was a moment when I was upon the point of tossing my manuscript
into the air, and I believe I should have done so, could I have been
sure that it would have dematerialized itself immediately like smoke; or
I would have thrown it into the river, if I had felt certain that the
current would have swept it out to sea.

      *       *       *       *       *

This afternoon I went to San Sebastian to buy paper and salicylate of
soda, which is less agreeable.

A number of public guards were riding together in the car on the way
over, along the frontier. They were discussing bull fighters, El Gallo
and Belmonte, and also the disorders of the past few days.

"Too bad that Maura and La Cierva are not in power," said one of them,
who was from Murcia, smiling and exhibiting his decayed teeth. "They
would have made short work of this."

"They are in reserve for the finish," said another, with, the solemnity
of a pious scamp.

Returning from San Sebastian, I happened on a family from Madrid in the
same car. The father was weak, jaundiced and sour-visaged; the mother
was a fat brunette, with black eyes, who was loaded down with jewels,
while her face was made up until it was brilliant white, in colour like
a stearin candle. A rather good looking daughter of between fifteen and
twenty was escorted by a lieutenant who apparently was engaged to her.
Finally, there was another girl, between twelve and fourteen, flaccid
and lively as a still-life on a dinner table. Suddenly the father, who
was reading a newspaper, exclaimed:

"Nothing is going to be done, I can see that; they are already applying
to have the revolutionists pardoned. The Government will do nothing."

"I wish they would kill every one of them," broke in the girl who was
engaged to the lieutenant. "Think of it! Firing on soldiers! They are
bandits."

"Yes, and with such a king as we have!" exclaimed the fat lady, with the
paraffine hue, in a mournful tone. "It has ruined our summer. I wish
they would shoot every one of them."

"And they are not the only ones," interrupted the father. "The men who
are behind them, the writers and leaders, hide themselves, and then they
throw the first stones."

Upon entering the house, I found that the final proofs of my book had
just arrived from the printer, and sat down to read them.

The words of that family from Madrid still rang in my ears: "I wish they
would kill every one of them!"

However one may feel, I thought to myself, it is impossible not to hate
such people. Such people are natural enemies. It is inevitable.

Now, reading over the proofs of my book, it seems to me that it is not
strident enough. I could wish it were more violent, more anti-middle
class.

I no longer hear the voice of prudence seducing me, as it did a few days
since, to a palinode in complicity with a romantic morning of white
mist.

The zest of combat, of adventure stirs in me again. The sheltered
harbour seems a poor refuge in my eyes,--tranquillity and security
appear contemptible.

"Here, boy, up, and throw out the sail! Run the red flag of revolution
to the masthead of our frail craft, and forth to sea!"

Itzea, September, 1917.




APPENDICES


SPANISH POLITICIANS

ON BAROJA'S ANARCHISTS

NOTE




SPANISH POLITICIANS


The Spanish alternating party system has prevailed as a national
institution since the restoration of the monarchy under Alfonso XII.
Ostensibly it is based upon manhood suffrage, and in the cities this is
the fact, but in the more remote districts the balloting plays but small
part in the returns. Upon the dissolution of the Cortes and the
resignation of a ministry, one of the two great parties--the liberal
party and the conservative party--automatically retires from power, and
the other succeeds it, always carrying the ensuing elections by
convenient working majorities.

Spain is a poor country. During the half century previous to the
restoration of the Bourbons, she was a victim of internecine strife and
factional warfare. She is not poor naturally, but her energy has been
drawn off; she has been bled white, and needs time to recuperate. The
Spaniards are a practical people. They realize this condition. Even the
lower classes are tired of fine talking. No people have heard more, and
none have profited less by it. The country is not like Russia, a fertile
field for the agitator; it looks coldly upon reform. Such response as
has been obtained by the radical has come from the labour centres under
the stimulus of foreign influences, and more particularly from
Barcelona, where the problem is political even before it is an
individual one.

For this reason the Spanish Republicans are in large part theorists. The
land has been disturbed sufficiently. They would hesitate to inaugurate
radical reforms, if power were to be placed in their hands, while the
possession of power itself might prove not a little embarrassing. Behind
the monarchy lies the republic of 1873, behind Canovas and Castelar, Pi
y Margall; the republic has merged into and was, in a sense, the
foundation of the constitutional system of today. Even popular leaders
such as Lerroux are quick to recognize this fact, and govern themselves
accordingly. The lack of general education today, would render any
attempt at the establishment of a thorough-going democracy insecure.

Francisco Ferrer, although idealized abroad, has been no more than a
symptom in Spain. Such men even as Angel Guimera, the dramatist, a
Catalan separatist who has been under surveillance for years, or Pere
Aldavert, who has suffered imprisonment in Barcelona because of his
opinions, while they speak for the proletariat, nevertheless have had
scant sympathy for Ferrer's ideas. It would be interesting to know just
to what extent these commend themselves to Pablo and Emiliano Iglesias
and the professed political Socialists.

Of the existing parties, the Liberal, being more or less an association
of groups tending to the left, is the least homogeneous. Its most
prominent leader of late years has been the Conde de Romanones, who may
scarcely be said to represent a new era. He has shared responsibility
with Eduardo Dato.

Among Conservatives, the chief figure has long been Antonio Maura. He is
not a young man. Politically, he represents very much what the cordially
detested Weyler did in the military sphere. But Maurism today is a very
different thing from the Maurism of fifteen years ago, or of the moat of
Montjuich. The name of Maura casts a spell over the Conservative
imagination. It is the rallying point of innumerable associations of
young men of reactionary, aristocratic and clerical tendencies
throughout the country, while to progressives it symbolizes the
oppressiveness of the old regime.




ON BAROJA'S ANARCHISTS


Baroja's memoirs afford convincing proof of his contact with radicals of
all sorts and classes, from stereotyped republicans such as Barriovero,
or the Argentine Francisco Grandmontagne, correspondent of _La
Prensa_ of Buenos Aires, to active anarchists of the type of Mateo
Morral.

Morral was an habitue of a cafe in the Calle de Alcala at Madrid, where
Baroja was accustomed to go with his friends to take coffee, and, in the
Spanish phrase, to attend his _tertulia_. Morral would listen to
these conversations. After his attempt to assassinate the King and Queen
in the Calle Mayor on their return from the Royal wedding ceremony,
Baroja went to view Morral's body, but was refused admittance. A drawing
of Morral was made at the time, however, by Ricardo Baroja.

In this connection, Jose Nakens, to whom the author pays his compliments
on an earlier page, was subjected to an unusual experience. Nakens, who
was a sufficiently mild gentleman, had taken a needy radical into his
house, and had given him shelter. This personage made a point of
inveighing to Nakens continually against Canovas del Castillo, proposing
to make way with him. When the news of the assassination of Canovas was
cried through the city, Nakens knew for the first that his visitor had
been in earnest. He was none other than the murderer Angiolillo.

This anecdote became current in Madrid. Years afterwards when the prime
minister Canalejas was shot to death, the assassin recalled it to mind,
and repaired to the house of Nakens, who saw in dismay for the second
time his radical theories put to violent practical proof. The incident
proved extremely embarrassing.

The crime of Morral forms the basis of Baroja's novel _La Dama
Errante_. He has also dealt with anarchism in _Aurora Roja_ (Red
Dawn).

The mutiny on the ship "Numancia," referred to in the text, was an
incident of the same period of unrest, which was met with severe
repressive measures.




NOTE


The Madrid Ateneo is a learned society maintaining a house on the Calle
del Prado, in which is installed a private library of unusual
excellence. It has been for many years the principal depository of
modern books in Spain, and a favourite resort of scholars and research-
workers of the capital.




THE WORKS OF PIO BAROJA


Pio Baroja, recognized by the best critics as the foremost living
Spanish novelist, is without doubt the chief exponent of that ferment of
political and social thought in Spain which had its inception in the
cataclysm of 1898, and which gave rise to the new movement in Spanish
literature.

Of course this "modern movement" was not actually born in 1898. It dates
back as far as Galdos, who is in spirit a modern. But it marked the
turning point. Benavente the dramatist, Azorin the critic, Ruben Dario
the poet, Pio Baroja the novelist, all date from this period, belonging
to and of the new generation, and, together with the Valencian Blasco
Ibanez, form the A B C of modern Spanish culture.

"Baroja stands for the modern Spanish mind at its most enlightened,"
says H. L. Mencken. "He is the Spaniard of education and worldly wisdom,
detached from the mediaeval imbecilities of the old regime and yet aloof
from the worse follies of the demagogues who now rage in the country ...
the Spaniard who, in the long run, must erect a new structure of society
upon the half archaic and half Utopian chaos now reigning in the
peninsular."

Pio Baroja was born in 1872 at San Sebastian, the most fashionable
summer resort of Spain, the Spanish "Summer Capital." Baroja's father
was a noted mining engineer, and while without reputation as a man of
letters he was an occasional contributor to various periodicals and
dailies. He had destined his son for the medical profession, and Pio
studied at Valencia and Madrid, where he received his degree. He started
practice in the small town of Cestona, the type of town which figures
largely in his novels.

But the young doctor soon wearied of his profession, and laying aside
his stethoscope forever, he returned to Madrid, where, in partnership
with an older brother, he opened a bakery. However he was no more
destined to be a cook than a doctor, so, encouraged by interested
friends, he succeeded in getting a few articles and stories accepted by
various Madrid papers. It was not long before he won distinction as a
journalist, and he presently abandoned baking entirely, devoting all his
energies to writing.

His first novel, _Camino de Perfeccion_, published in 1902, was
received with but little enthusiasm. However he closely followed it with
several others, and Spain soon realized that she had a new writer of
unusual merit. Today he is pre-eminent among contemporary Spanish
authors. His books have been translated into French, German, Italian and
English.

Alfred A. Knopf, Senor Baroja's authorized publisher in the English-
speaking countries, has published to date two of the novels:

THE CITY OF THE DISCREET. Translated by Jacob S. Fassett, Jr. $2.00 net.
Around Cordova, the fascinating and romantic "city of the discreet,"
Baroja has spun an adventurous tale. He gives you a vivid picture of the
city with her tortuous streets, ancient houses with their patios and
tiled roofs and of her "discreet" inhabitants. In a style that is
polished where Ibanez' is crudely vigorous, and with sympathy and
understanding, he portrays Quentin, the natural son of a Marquis and a
woman of humble birth; Pacheco, the ambitious bandit chief; Don Gil
Sabadia, the garrulous and convivial antiquarian, and a host of other
characters.

"Unforgettable pictures are spread in a rich background for the action--
Cordova at twilight, with its spires showing against the violet sky, the
narrow streets with white houses leaning toward each other, its squares
with sturdy beggars squatting around and its gardens heavy with the
scent of orange blossoms, where old fountains quietly drip."--
_Indianapolis News_.

"This fine novel ... shows us the best features of the modern Spanish
realistic school."--_The Bookman_.

CAESAR OR NOTHING. Translated by Louis How. $2.00 net.

This is the story of Caesar Moncada, a brilliantly clever young
Spaniard, who sets out to reform his country, to modernize it and its
government. In depicting Caesar's preparation in Rome, where his uncle
is a Cardinal, for the career he has planned for himself, Senor Baroja
etches vividly and entertainingly a typical cosmopolitan society--witty,
worldly, prosperous and cynical. The second part of the book describes
Caesar's political fight in Castro Duro.

"Not only Spain's greatest novelist, but his greatest book. It is the
most important translation that has come out of Spain in our time in the
field of fiction and it will be remembered as epochal."--JOHN GARRETT
UNDERHILL, Representative in America of the Society of Spanish Authors
of Madrid.

"Ranks Baroja as a master of fiction, with a keen sense of character,
constructive power and an active, dynamic style."--_Philadelphia
Ledger_.

"I read _Caesar or Nothing_ with a profound admiration for its
power and skill. It is a great novel, which you deserve our thanks for
publishing."--HAROLD J. LASKI, of Harvard University.

"A brilliant book--amazingly clever and humorous in its earlier
chapters, gradually accumulating depth as it moves along until it
becomes the stuff of tragedy at the close. The character he has created
in Caesar Moncada is one of the few really notable portrayals in recent
fiction."--_Chicago Post_.

Translations of three other novels by Baroja are in preparation in the
competent hands of Dr. Isaac Goldberg. The first, _LA DAMA
ERRANTE_, will be ready in the Fall of 1920. Probable price, $2.00.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Youth and Egolatry, by Pio Baroja





Produced by Eric Eldred, David Widger,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




[ILLUSTRATION: "WHAT'S THAT?" SAID MRS. SEVERANCE SHARPLY] YOUNG PEOPLE'S
PRIDE

_A NOVEL_

BY STEPHEN VINCENT BENET

ILLUSTRATIONS BY HENRY RALEIGH COPYRIGHT, 1922

BY

HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

_First printing, August 1922_ _TO ROSEMARY

  If I were sly, I'd steal for you that cobbled hill, Montmartre,
  Josephine's embroidered shoes, St. Louis' oriflamme,
  The river on grey evenings and the bluebell-glass of Chartes,
  And four sarcastic gargoyles from the roof of Notre Dame.

  That wouldn't be enough, though, enough nor half a part;
  There'd be shells because they're sorrowful, and pansies since
  they're wise,
  The smell of rain on lilac-bloom, less fragrant than your heart,
  And that small blossom of your name, as steadfast as your
  eyes.

  Sapphires, pirates, sandalwood, porcelains, sonnets, pearls,
  Sunsets gay as Joseph's coat and seas like milky jade,
  Dancing at your birthday like a mermaid's dancing curls
  --If my father'd only brought me up to half a decent trade!

  Nothing I can give you--nothing but the rhymes--
  Nothing but the empty speech, the idle words and few,
  The mind made sick with irony you helped so many times,
  The strengthless water of the soul your truthfulness kept true.

  Take the little withered things and neither laugh nor cry
  --Gifts to make a sick man glad he's going out like sand--
  They and I are yours, you know, as long as there's an I.
  Take them for the ages. Then they may not shame your
  hand._

  "... For there groweth in great abundance
  in this land a small flower, much blown about
  by winds, named 'Young People's Pride'..."

DYCER'S _Herbal_
YOUNG PEOPLES PRIDE



I

It is one of Johnny Chipman's parties at the Harlequin Club, and as usual
the people the other people have been asked to meet are late and as usual
Johnny is looking hesitatingly around at those already collected with the
nervous kindliness of an absent-minded menagerie-trainer who is trying to
make a happy family out of a wombat, a porcupine, and two small Scotch
terriers because they are all very nice and he likes them all and he can't
quite remember at the moment just where he got hold of any of them. This
evening he has been making an omelet of youngest. K. Ricky French, the
youngest Harvard playwright to learn the tricks of C43, a Boston exquisite,
impeccably correct from his club tie to the small gold animal on his
watch-chain, is almost coming to blows with Slade Wilson, the youngest San
Francisco cartoonist to be tempted East by a big paper and still so new to
New York that no matter where he tries to take the subway, he always finds
himself buried under Times Square, over a question as to whether La Perouse
or Foyot's has the best _hors-d'oeuvres_ in Paris.

The conflict is taking place across Johnny's knees, both of which are
being used for emphasis by the disputants till he is nearly mashed like a
sandwich-filling between two argumentative slices of bread, but he is quite
content. Peter Piper, the youngest rare-book collector in the country, who,
if left to himself, would have gravitated naturally toward French and
a devastating conversation in monosyllables on the pretty failings of
prominent debutantes, is gradually warming Clark Stovall, the youngest
star of the Provincetown Players out of a prickly silence, employed in
supercilious blinks at all the large pictures of celebrated Harlequins
by discreet, intelligent questions as to the probable future of Eugene
O'Neill.

Stovall has just about decided to throw Greenwich Village omniscience
overboard and admit privately to himself that people like Peter can be both
human and interesting even if they do live in the East Sixties instead of
Macdougal Alley when a page comes in discreetly for Johnny Chipman. Johnny
rises like an agitated blond robin who has just spied the very two worms he
was keeping room for to top off breakfast. "Well" he says to the world at
large. "They're only fifteen minutes late apiece this time."

He darts out into the hall and reappears in a moment, a worm on either
side. Both worms will fit in easily with the youthful assortment already
gathered--neither can be more than twenty-five.

Oliver Crowe is nearly six feet, vividly dark, a little stooping, dressed
like anybody else in the Yale Club from hair parted in the middle to low
heavyish brown shoes, though the punctured patterns on the latter are a
year or so out of date. There is very little that is remarkable about
his appearance except the round, rather large head that shows writer or
pugilist indifferently, brilliant eyes, black as black warm marble under
heavy tortoise-shell glasses and a mouth that is not weak in the least
but somehow burdened by a pressure upon it like a pressure of wings, the
pressure of that kind of dream which will not release the flesh it inhabits
always and agonizes often until it is given perfect body and so does not
release it until such flesh has ceased. At present he is not the
youngest anything, except, according to himself 'the youngest failure in
advertising,' but a book of nakedly youthful love-poetry, which in gloomy
moments he wishes had never been written, although the _San Francisco
Warbler_ called it as 'tensely vital as the Shropshire Lad,' brought him
several column reviews and very nearly forty dollars in cash at twenty-one
and since then many people of his own age and one or two editors have
considered him "worth watching."

Ted Billett is dark too, but it is a ruddy darkness with high clear color
of skin. He could pass anywhere as a College Senior and though his clothes
seem to have been put on anyhow with no regard for pressing or tailoring
they will always raise a doubt in the minds of the uninstructed as to
whether it is not the higher carelessness that has dictated them rather
than ordinary poverty--a doubt that, in many cases, has proved innocently
fortunate for Ted. His hands are a curious mixture of square executive
ability and imaginative sensitiveness and his surface manners have often
been described as 'too snotty' by delicate souls toward whom Ted
was entirely unconscious of having acted with anything but the most
disinterested politeness. On the other hand a certain even-tempered
recklessness and capacity for putting himself in the other fellow's place
made him one of the few popularly lenient officers to be obeyed with
discipline in his outfit during the war. As regards anything Arty or Crafty
his attitude is merely appreciative--he is finishing up his last year of
law at Columbia.

Johnny introduces Oliver and Ted to everybody but Peter--the three were
classmates--shepherds his flock with a few disarmingly personal insults to
prevent stiffness closing down again over the four that have already got to
talking at the arrival of the two newcomers, and marshals them out to the
terrace where they are to have dinner. Without seeming to try, he seats
them so that Ted, Peter and Oliver will not form an offensive-defensive
alliance against the three who are strangers to them by retailing New Haven
anecdotes to each other for the puzzlement of the rest and starts the ball
rolling with a neat provocative attack on romanticism in general and Cabell
in particular.




II

"Johnny's strong for realism, aren't you, Johnny?"

"Well, yes, Ted, I am. I think 'Main Street' and 'Three Soldiers' are
two of the best things that ever happened to America. You can say it's
propaganda--maybe it is, but at any rate it's real. Honestly, I've gotten
so tired, we all have, of all this stuff about the small Middle Western
Town being the backbone of the country--"

"Backbone? Last vertebra!"

"As for 'Main Street,' it's--"

"It's the hardest book to read through without fallin' asleep where you
sit, though, that I've struck since the time I had to repeat Geology."
Peter smiles. "But, there, Johnny, I guess I'm the bone-head part of the
readin' public--"

"That's why you're just the kind of person that ought to read books like
that, Peter. The reading public in general likes candy laxatives, I'll
admit--Old Nest stuff--but you--"

"'Nobody else will ever have to write the description of a small Middle
Western Town'" quotes Oliver, discontentedly. "Well, who ever wanted to
write the description of a small Middle Western Town?" and from Ricky
French, selecting his words like flowers for a _boutonniere_.

"The trouble with 'Main Street' is not that it isn't the truth but that it
isn't nearly the whole truth. Now Sherwood Anderson--"

"Tennyson. Who _was_ Tennyson? He died young."

"Well, if _that_ is Clara Stratton's idea of how to play a woman who did."

The two sentences seem to come from no one and arrive nowhere. They are
batted out of the conversation like toy balloons.

"Bunny Andrews sailed for Paris Thursday," says Ted Billett longingly. "Two
years at the Beaux Arts," and for an instant the splintering of lances
stops, like the hush in a tournament when the marshal throws down the
warder, at the shine of that single word.

"All the same, New York is the best place to be right now if you're going
to do anything big," says Johnny uncomfortably, too much as if he felt he
just had to believe in it, but the rest are silent, seeing the Seine wind
under its bridges, cool as satin, grey-blue with evening, or the sawdust of
a restaurant near the quais where one can eat Rabelaisiantly for six francs
with wine and talk about anything at all without having to pose or explain
or be defensive, or the chimneypots of La Cite branch-black against winter
sky that is pallor of crimson when the smell of roast chestnuts drifts idly
as a student along Boulevard St. Germain, or none of these, or all, but for
each one nostalgic aspect of the city where good Americans go when they die
and bad ones while they live--to Montmartre.

"New York _is_ twice as romantic, really," says Johnny firmly.

"If you can't get out of it," adds Oliver with a twisted grin.

Ted Billett turns to Ricky French as if each had no other friend in the
world.

"You were over, weren't you?" he says, a little diffidently, but his voice
is that of Rachel weeping for her children.

"Well, there was a little cafe on the Rue Bonaparte--I suppose you wouldn't
know--"




III

The party has adjourned to Stovall's dog-kennel-sized apartment on
West Eleventh Street with oranges and ice, Peter Piper having suddenly
remembered a little place he knows where what gin is to be bought is
neither diluted Croton water nor hell-fire. The long drinks gather
pleasantly on the table, are consumed by all but Johnny, gather again. The
talk grows more fluid, franker.

"Phil Sellaby?---oh, the great Phil's just had a child--I mean his wife
has, but Phil's been having a book all winter and it's hard not to get 'em
mixed up. Know the girl he married?"

"Ran Waldo had a necking acquaintance with her at one time or another, I
believe. But now she's turned serious, I hear--_tres serieuse--tres bonne
femme_--"

"I bet his book'll be a cuckoo, then. Trouble with women. Can't do any
art and be married if you're in love with your wife. Instink--instinct of
creation--same thing in both cases--use it one way, not enough left
for other--unless, of course, like Goethe, you--" "Rats! Look at
Rossetti--Browning---Augustus John--William Morris--"

_"Browning!_ Dear man, when the public knows the _truth_ about the
Brownings!"

Ricky French is getting a little drunk but it shows itself only in a desire
to make every sentence unearthly cogent with perfect words.

"Unhappy marriage--ver' good--stimula-shion," he says, carefully but
unsteadily, "other thing--tosh!"

Peter Piper jerks a thumb in Oliver's direction.

"Oh, beg pardon! Engaged, you told me? Beg pardon--sorry--very. Writes?"

"Uh-huh. Book of poetry three years ago. Novel now he's trying to sell."

"Oh, yes, yes, yes. Remember. 'Dancers' Holiday'--he wrote that? Good
stuff, damn good. Too bad. Feenee. Why will they get married?"

The conversation veers toward a mortuary discussion of love. Being young,
nearly all of them are anxious for, completely puzzled by and rather afraid
of it, all at the same time. They wish to draw up one logical code to
cover its every variation; they look at it, as it is at present with the
surprised displeasure of florists at a hollyhock that will come blue when
by every law of variation it should be rose. It is only a good deal later
that they will be able to give, not blasphemy because the rules of the game
are always mutually inconsistent, but tempered thanks that there are any
rules at all. Now Ricky French especially has the air of a demonstrating
anatomist over an anesthetized body. "Observe, gentlemen--the carotid
artery lies here. Now, inserting the scalpel at this point--"

"The trouble with Art is that it doesn't pay a decent living wage unless
you're willing to commercialize--"

"The trouble with Art is that it never did, except for a few chance lucky
people--"

"The trouble with Art is women."

"The trouble with women is Art."

"The trouble with Art--with women, I mean--change signals! What do I mean?"




IV

Oliver is taking Ted out to Melgrove with him over Sunday for suburban
fresh-air and swimming, so the two just manage to catch the 12.53 from the
Grand Central, in spite of Slade Wilson's invitation to talk all night and
breakfast at the Brevoort. They spend the rattling, tunnel-like passage to
125th Street catching their breath again, a breath that seems to strike
a florid gentlemen in a dirty collar ahead of them with an expression of
permanent, sorrowful hunger. Then Ted remarks reflectively,

"Nice gin."

"Uh-huh. Not floor varnish anyway like most of this prohibition stuff. What
think of the people?"

"Interesting but hardly conclusive. Liked the Wilson lad. Peter, of course,
and Johnny. The French person rather young Back Bay, don't you think?"

Oliver smiles. The two have been through Yale, some of the war and much of
the peace together, and the fact has inevitably developed a certain quality
of being able to talk to each other in shorthand.

"Well, Groton plus Harvard--it always gets a little inhuman especially
Senior year--but gin had a civilizing influence. Lucky devil!"

"Why?"

"Baker's newest discovery--yes, it does sound like a patent medicine. Don't
mean that, but he has a play on the road--sure-fire, Johnny says--Edward
Sheldon stuff--Romance--"

"The Young Harvard Romantic. An Essay Presented to the Faculty of Yale
University by Theodore Billett for the Degree of--"

"Heard anything about your novel, Oliver?"

"Going to see my pet Mammon of Unrighteousness about it in a couple of
weeks. Oh _Lord!_"

"Present--not voting."

"Don't be cheap, Ted. If I could only make some money."

"Everybody says that there is money in advertising," Ted quotes
maliciously. "Where _have_ I heard that before?"

_"That's_ what anybody says about anything till they try it. Well, there
is--but not in six months for a copy-writer at Vanamee and Co. Especially
when the said copy-writer has to have enough to marry on." "And will write
novels when he ought to be reading, 'How I Sold America on Ossified Oats'
like a good little boy. Young people are _so_ impatient."

"Well, good Lord, Ted, we've been engaged eight months already and we
aren't getting any furtherer--"

"Remember the copybooks, my son. The love of a pure, good woman and the
one-way pocket--that's what makes the millionaires. Besides, look at
Isaac."

"Well, I'm no Isaac. And Nancy isn't Rebekah, praises be! But it is
an--emotional strain. On both of us."

"Well, all you have to do is sell your serial rights. After that--pie."

"I know. The trouble is, I can see it so plain if everything happens
right--and then--well--"

Ted is not very consoling.

"People get funny ideas about each other when they aren't close by. Even
when they're in love," he says rather darkly; and then, for no apparent
reason, "Poor Billy. See it?"

Oliver has, unfortunately--the announcement that the engagement between
Miss Flavia Marston of Detroit and Mr. William Curting of New York has
been broken by mutual consent was an inconspicuous little paragraph in the
morning papers. "That was all--just funny ideas and being away. And then
this homebred talent came along," Ted muses.

"Well, you're the hell of a--"

Ted suddenly jerks into consciousness of what he has been saying.

"Sorry" he says, completely apologetic, "didn't mean a word I said, just
sorry for Billy, poor guy. 'Fraid it'll break him up pretty bad at first."
This seems to make matters rather worse and he changes the subject
abruptly. "How's Nancy?" he asks with what he hopes seems disconnected
indifference.

"Nancy? All right. Hates St. Louis, of course."

"Should think she might, this summer. Pretty hot there, isn't it?"

"Says it's like a wet furnace. And her family's bothering her some."

"Um, too bad."

"Oh, _I_ don't mind. But it's rotten for her. They don't see the point
exactly--don't know that I blame them. She could be in Paris, now--that
woman was ready to put up the money. My fault."

"Well, she seems to like things better the way they are--God knows why,
my antic friend! If it were _my_ question between you and a year studying
abroad! Not that you haven't your own subtle attractions, Ollie." Ted has
hoped to irritate Oliver into argument by the closing remark, but the
latter only accepts it with militant gloom.

"Yes, I've done her out of that, too," he says abysmally, "as well as
sticking her in St. Louis while I stay here and can't even drag down enough
money to support her--"

"Oh, Ollie, snap out of it! That's only being dramatic. You know darn well
you will darn soon. I'll be saying 'bless you, my children, increase and
multiply,' inside a month if your novel goes through."

"If! Oh well. Oh hell. I think I've wept on your shoulder long enough for
tonight, Ted. Tell me your end of it--things breaking all right?"

Ted's face sets into lines that seem curiously foreign and aged for the
smooth surface.

"Well--you know my trouble," he brings out at last with some difficulty.
"You ought to, anyhow--we've talked each other over too much when we
were both rather planko for you not to. I'm getting along, I think. The
work--_ca marche assez bien_. And the restlessness--can be stood. That's
about all there is to say."

Both are completely serious now.

"Bon. Very glad," says Oliver in a low voice.

"I can stand it. I was awful afraid I couldn't when I first got back. And
law interests me, really, though I've lost three years because of the war.
And I'm working like a pious little devil with a new assortment of damned
and when you haven't any money you can't go on parties in New York unless
you raise gravy riding to a fine art. Only sometimes--well, you know how it
is--"

Oliver nods.

"I'll be sitting there, at night especially, in that little tin Tophet of a
room on Madison Avenue, working. I _can_ work, if I do say it myself--I'm
hoping to get through with school in January, now. But it gets pretty
lonely, sometimes when there's nobody to run into that you can really talk
to--the people I used to play with in College are out of New York for the
summer--even Peter's down at Southampton most of the time or out at
Star Bay--you're in Melgrove--Sam Woodward's married and working in
Chicago--Brick Turner's in New Mexico--I've dropped out of the Wall Street
bunch in the class that hang out at the Yale Club--I'm posted there
anyhow, and besides they've all made money and I haven't, and all they want
to talk about is puts and calls. And then you remember things.

"The time my pilot and I blew into Paris when we thought we were hitting
somewhere around Nancy till we saw that blessed Eiffel Tower poking out
of the fog. And the Hotel de Turenne on Rue Vavin and getting up in the
morning and going out for a cafe cognac breakfast, and everything being
amiable and pleasant, and kidding along all the dear little ladies that sat
on the _terrasse_ when they dropped in to talk over last evening's affairs.
I suppose I'm a sensualist--"

"Everybody is." from Oliver.

"Well, that's another thing. Women. And love. Ollie, my son, you don't know
how very damn lucky you are!"

"I think I do, rather," says Oliver, a little stiffly.

"You don't. Because I'd give everything I have for what you've got and
all you can do is worry about whether you'll get married in six months or
eight."

"I'm worrying about whether I'll ever get married at all," from Oliver,
rebelliously.

"True enough, which is where I'm glowingly sympathetic for you, though you
may not notice it. But you're one of the few people I know--officers at
least--who came out of the war without stepping all through their American
home ideas of morality like a clown through a fake glass window. And
I'm--Freuded--if I see how or why you did."

"Don't myself--unless you call it pure accident" says Oliver, frankly.
"Well, that's it--women. Don't think I'm in love but the other thing pulls
pretty strong. And I want to get married all right, but what girls I know
and like best are in Peter's crowd and most of them own their own Rolls
Royces--and I won't be earning even a starvation wage for two, inside of
three or four years, I suppose. And as you can't get away from seeing and
talking to women unless you go and live in a cave--well, about once every
two weeks or oftener I'd like to chuck every lawbook I have out of the
window on the head of the nearest cop--go across again and get some sort of
a worthless job--I speak good enough French to do it if I wanted--and go to
hell like a gentleman without having to worry about it any longer. And I
won't do that because I'm through with it and the other thing is worth
while. So there you are."

"So you don't think you're in love--eh Monsieur Billett?" Oliver puts
irritatingly careful quotation marks around the verb. Ted twists a little.

"It all seems so blamed impossible," he says cryptically.

"Oh, I wouldn't call Elinor Piper _that_ exactly." Oliver grins. "Even if
she is Peter's sister. Old Peter. She's a nice girl."

"_A nice girl?_" Ted begins rather violently. "She's--why she's--" then
pauses, seeing the trap.

"Oh very well--that's all I wanted to know."

"Oh don't look so much like a little tin Talleyrand, Ollie! I'm _not_
sure--and that's rather more than I'd even hint to anybody else."

"Thanks, little darling." But Ted has been stung too suddenly, even by
Oliver's light touch on something which he thought was a complete and
mortuary secret, to be in a mood for sarcasm.

"Oh, well, you might as well know. I suppose you do."

"All I know is that you seem to have been visiting--Peter--a good deal this
summer."

"Well, it started with Peter."

"It does so often."

"Oh Lord, now I've _got_ to tell you. Not that there's
anything--definite--to tell." He pauses, looking at his hands.

"Well, I've just been telling you how I feel--sometimes. And other
times--being with Elinor--she's been so--kind. But I don't know, Ollie,
honestly I don't, and that's that."

"You see," he begins again, "the other thing--Oh, _Lord_, it's so tangled
up! But it's just this. It sounds--funny--probably--coming from me--and
after France and all that--but I'm not going to--pretend to myself I'm in
love with a girl--just because I may--want to get married--the way lots of
people do. I can't. And I couldn't with a girl like Elinor anyway--she's
too fine."

"She is rather fine," says Oliver appreciatively. "Selective reticence--all
that."

"Well, don't you see? And a couple of times--I've been nearly sure. And
then something comes and I'm not again--not the way I want to be. And
then--Oh, if I were, it wouldn't be much--use--you know--"

"Why not?"

"Well, consider our relative positions--"

"Consider your grandmother's cat! She's a girl--you're a man. She's a
lady--you're certainly a gentleman--though that sounds like Jane Austen.
And--"

"And she's--well, she isn't the wealthiest young lady in the country, but
the Pipers _are_ rich, though they never go and splurge around about it.
And I'm living on scholarships and borrowed money from the family--and even
after I really start working I probably won't make enough to live on for
two or three years at least. And you can't ask a girl like that--"

"Oh, Ted, this is the twentieth century! I'm not telling you to hang up
your hat and live on your wife's private income--" "That's fortunate," from
Ted, rather stubbornly and with a set jaw.

"But there's no reason on earth--if you both really loved each other and
wanted to get married--why you couldn't let her pay her share for the first
few years. You know darn well you're going to make money sometime--"

"Well--yes."

"Well, then. And Elinor's sporting. She isn't the kind that needs six
butlers to live--she doesn't live that way now. That's just pride, Ted,
thinking that--and a rather bum variety of pride when you come down to it.
I hate these people who moan around and won't be happy unless they can do
everything themselves--they're generally the kind that give their wives a
charge account at Lucile's and ten dollars a year pocket money and go into
blue fits whenever poor spouse runs fifty cents over her allowance."

Ted pauses, considering. Finally,

"No, Ollie--I don't think I'm quite that kind of a fool. And almost thou
convincest me--and all that. But--well--that isn't the chief difficulty,
after all."

"Well, what _is_?" from Oliver, annoyedly.

Ted hesitates, speaking slowly.

"Well--after the fact that I'm not sure--France," he says at last, and his
mouth shuts after the word as if it never wanted to open again.

Oliver spreads both hands out hopelessly.

"Are you _never_ going to get over that, you ass?"

"You didn't do the things I did," from Ted, rather difficultly. "If you
had--"

"If I had I'd have been as sorry as you are, probably, that I'd knocked
over the apple cart occasionally. But I wouldn't spend the rest of my life
worrying about it and thinking I wasn't fit to go into decent society
because of what happened to most of the A.E.F. Why you sound as if you'd
committed the unpardonable sin. And it's nonsense."

"Well--thinking of Elinor--I'm not too darn sure I didn't," from Ted,
dejectedly.

"That comes of being born in New England and that's all there is to it.
Anyhow, it's over now, isn't it?"

"Not exactly--it comes back."

"Well, kick it every time it does."

"But you don't understand. That and--people like Elinor--" says Ted
hopelessly.

"I do understand."

"You don't." And this time Ted's face has the look of a burned man.

"Well--" says Oliver, frankly puzzled. "Well, that's it. Oh, it doesn't
matter. But if there was another war--"

"Oh, leave us poor people that are trying to write a couple of years before
you dump us into heroes' graves by the Yang tse Kiang!"

"Another war--and bang! into the aviation." Ted muses, his face gone thin
with tensity. "It could last as long as it liked for me, providing I got
through before it did; you'd be living anyhow, living and somebody, and
somebody who didn't give a plaintive hoot how things broke."

He sighs, and his face smooths back a little.

"Well, Lord, I've no real reason to kick, I suppose," he ends. "There are
dozens of 'em like me--dozens and hundreds and thousands all over the
shop. We had danger and all the physical pleasures and as much money as we
wanted and the sense of command--all through the war. And then they come
along and say 'it's all off, girls,' and you go back and settle down and
play you've just come out of College in peace-times and maybe by the time
you're forty you'll have a wife and an income if another scrap doesn't come
along. And then when we find it isn't as easy to readjust as they think,
they yammer around pop-eyed and say 'Oh, what wild young people--what
naughty little wasters! They won't settle down and play Puss-in-the-corner
at all--and, oh dear, oh dear, how they drink and smoke and curse 'n
everything!'"

"I'm awful afraid they might be right as to what's the trouble with us,
though," says Oliver, didactically. "We _are_ young, you know."

"Melgrove!" the conductor howls, sleepily. "Melgrove! Melgrove!"




V

The Crowe house was both small and inconveniently situated--it was twenty
full minutes walk from the station and though a little box of a garage had
been one of the "all modern conveniences" so fervidly painted in the real
estate agent's advertisement, the Crowes had no car. It was the last house
on Undercliff Road that had any pretense to sparse grass and a stubbly
hedge--beyond it were sand-dunes, delusively ornamented by the signs
of streets that as yet only existed in the brain of the owner of the
"development," and, a quarter of a mile away, the long blue streak of the
Sound.

Oliver's key clicked in the lock--this was fortunately one of the times
when four-year-old Jane Ellen, who went about after sunset in a continual,
piteous fear of "black men wif masks," had omitted to put the chain on the
door before being carried mutinously to bed. Oliver switched on the hall
light and picked up a letter and a folded note from the card tray.

"Ted, Ollie and Dickie will share that little bijou, the sleeping porch,
unless Ted prefers the third-story bathtub," the note read. "Breakfast at
convenience for those that can get it themselves--otherwise at nine. And
DON'T wake Dickie up.

MOTHER."

Oliver passed it to Ted, who read it, grinned, and saluted, nearly knocking
over the hatrack.

"For _God's_ sake!" said Oliver in a piercing whisper, "Jane Ellen will
think that's Indians!"

Both listened frantically for a moment, holding their breath. But there was
no sound from upstairs except an occasional soft rumbling. Oliver had often
wondered what would happen if the whole sleeping family chanced to breathe
in and out in unison some unlucky night. He could see the papery walls
blown apart like scraps of cardboard--Aunt Elsie falling, falling with her
bed from her little bird-house under the eaves, giving vent to one deaf,
terrified "Hey--what's that?" as she sank like Lucifer cast from Heaven
inexorably down into the laundry stove, her little tight, white curls
standing up on end....

Ted had removed his shoes and was making for the stairs with the
exaggerated caution of a burglar in a film.

"'Night!" called Oliver softly.

"G' night! Where's my bed--next the wall? Good--then I won't step on
Dickie. And if you fall over me when you come in, I'll bay like a
bloodhound!"

"I'll look out. Be up in a minute myself. Going to write a letter."

"So I'd already deduced, Craig Kennedy, my friend. Well, give her my love!"

He smiled like a bad little boy and disappeared round the corner. A stair
creaked--they were the kind of stairs that always creaked like old women's
bones, when you tried to go up them quietly. There was the sound of
something soft stubbing against something hard and a muffled "_Sonofa--_"

"What's matter?"

"Oh, nothing. Blame near broke my toe on Jane Ellen's doll's porcelain
head. 'S all right. 'Night."

"'Night." Then in an admonitory sotto-voce, "Remember, if you wake Dickie,
you've got to tell him stories till he goes to sleep again, or he'll wake
up everybody else!"

"If he wakes, I'll garotte him. 'Night."

"'Night."

Oliver paused for a few minutes, waiting for the crash that would proclaim
that Ted had stumbled over something and waked Dickie beyond redemption.
But there was nothing but a soft gurgling of water from the bathroom and
then, after a while, a slight but definite addition to the distant beehive
noises of sleep in the house. He smiled, moved cautiously into the dining
room, sat down at the small sharp-cornered desk where all the family
correspondence was carried on and from which at least one of the family a
day received a grievous blow in the side while attempting to get around it;
lit the shaded light above it and sat down to read his letter.

It was all Nancy, that letter, from the address, firm and straight as any
promise she ever gave, but graceful as the curl of a vine-stem, gracile as
her hands, with little unsuspected curlicues of humor and fancy making
the stiff "t's" bend and twisting the tails of the "e's," to the little
scrunched-up "Love, Nancy" at the end, as if she had squeezed it there to
make it look unimportant, knowing perfectly that it was the one really
important thing in the letter to him. Both would take it so and be thankful
without greediness or a longing for sentimental "x's," with a sense that
the thing so given must be very rich in little like a jewel, and always
newly rediscovered with a shiver of pure wonder and thanking, or neither
could have borne to have it written so small.

It was Nancy just as some of her clothes were Nancy, soft clear blues and
first appleblossom pinks, the colors of a hardy garden that has no need for
the phoenix-colors of the poppy, because it has passed the boy's necessity
for talking at the top of its voice in scarlet and can hold in one shaped
fastidious petal, faint-flushed with a single trembling of one serene
living dye, all the colors the wise mind knows and the soul released into
its ecstasy has taken for its body invisible, its body of delight most
spotless, as lightning takes bright body of rapture and agony from the
light clear pallor that softens a sky to night.

Oliver read the letter over twice--it was with a satisfaction like that
when body and brain are fed at once, invisibly, by the same lustre of
force, that he put it away. One part of it, though, left him humanly
troubled enough.

"Miss Winters, the old incubus, came around and was soppy to mother as
usual yesterday--the same old business--I might be studying in Paris, now,
instead of teaching drawing to stupid little girls, if I hadn't 'formed'
what she will call 'that unfortunate attachment.' Not that I minded,
really, though I was angry enough to bite her when she gave a long
undertaker's list of Penniless Authors' Brides. But it worries mother--and
that worries me--and I wish she wouldn't. Forgive me, Ollie--and then
that Richardson complex of mother's came up again--"

"Waiting hurts, naturally,--and I'm the person who used to wonder about
girls making such a fuss about how soon they got married--but, then, Ollie,
of course, I never really wanted to get married before myself and somehow
that seems to make a difference. But that's the way things go--and the only
thing I wish is that I was the only person to be hurt. We will, sooner or
later, and it will be all the better for our not having grabbed at once--at
least that's what all the old people with no emotions left are always so
anxious to tell you. But they talk about it as if anybody under thirty-five
who wanted to get married was acting like a three-year-old stealing
jam--and that's annoying. And anyhow, it wouldn't be bad, if I weren't so
silly, I suppose--"

"Waiting hurts, naturally," and that casual sentence made him chilly
afraid. For to be in love, though it may force the lover to actions of
impossible courage does not make him in the least courageous of himself,
but only drives him by the one large fear of losing this love like a
soldier pricked from behind by a bayonet over the bodies of smaller fears,
or like a thief who has stolen treasure, and, hearing the cry at his heels,
scales a twenty foot wall with the agile gestures of a madman. All the
old-wives' and young men's club stories of everything from broken
engagements to the Generic and Proven Unfaithfulness of the Female Sex
brushed like dirty cobwebs for an instant across his mind. They tightened
about it like silk threads--a snaky web--and for one scared instant he
had a sense of being smothered in dusty feathers, whispering together and
saying, "When you're a little older and a great deal wiser. When you've
come to my age and know that all girls are the same. When you realize that
long engagements seldom mean marriage. When--"

He put the cobwebs aside with a strain of will, for he was very tired in
body, and settled himself to write to Nancy. It was not the cobwebs that
hurt. The only thing that mattered was that she had been hurt on his
account--was being hurt now on his account--would be hurt, and still and
always on his account, not because he wanted to hurt her but because it was
not within his power, but Life's, to hurt her in that respect or not.

"Oh, felicitous Nancy!" the pen began to scratch. "Your letter--"

Stupid to be so tired when he was writing to Nancy. Stupid not to find the
right things to say at once when you wanted to say them so much. He dropped
the pen an instant, sat back, and tried to evoke Nancy before him like
a small, clear picture seen in a lens, tried to form with his will the
lifeless air in front of him till it began to take on some semblance and
body of her that would be better than the tired remembrances of the mind.

Often, and especially when he had thought about her intensely for a
long time, the picture would not come at all or come with tantalizing
incompleteness, apparently because he wanted it to be whole so much--all he
could see would be a wraith of Nancy, wooden as a formal photograph, with
none of her silences or mockeries about her till he felt like a painter who
has somehow let the devil into his paintbox so that each stroke he makes
goes a little fatally out of true from the vision in his mind till the
canvas is only a crazy-quilt of reds and yellows. Now, perhaps, though, she
might come, even though he was tired. He pressed the back of a hand against
his eyes. She was coming to him now. He remembered one of their walks
together--a walk they had taken some eight months ago, when they had been
only three days engaged. Up Fifth Avenue; Forty-second Street, Forty-third,
Forty-fourth, the crosstown glitter of lights, the reflected glow of
Broadway, spraying the sky with dim gold-dust, begins to die a little
behind them. Past pompous expensive windows full of the things that Oliver
and Nancy will buy when Oliver's novel has gone into its first fifty
thousand, content with the mere touch of each other's hands, they are so
sure of each other now. Past people, dozens of people, getting fewer and
fewer as Forty-sixth Street comes, Forty-seventh, Forty-eighth, always a
little arrogantly because none of the automatic figures they pass have ever
eaten friendly bread together or had fire that can burn over them like
clear salt water or the knowledge that the only thing worth having in life
is the hurt and gladness of that fire. Buses pass like big squares of
honeycomb on wheels, crowded with pale, tired bees--the stars march slowly
from the western slope to their light viewless pinnacle in the center of
the heavens, walking brightly like strong men in silvered armor--the stars
and the buses, the buses and the stars, either and both of as little and
much account--it would not really surprise either Oliver or Nancy if the
next green bus that passes should start climbing into the sky like a clumsy
bird.

The first intoxication is still upon them--they have told nobody except
anyone who ever sees them together--they walk tactfully and never too
close, both having a horror of publicly amatory couples, but like the
king's daughter--or was it Solomon's Temple?--they are all glorious within.
Fifty-fifth, Fifty-sixth, Fifty-seventh--the square in front of the
Plaza--that tall chopped bulky tower lit from within like a model in a
toyshop window--motors purring up to its door like thin dark cats, motors
purring away. The fountain with the little statue--the pool a cool dark
stone cracked with the gold of the lights upon it, and near the trees of
the Park, half-hidden, gold Sherman, riding, riding, Victory striding ahead
of him with a golden palm.

Ahead of them too goes Victory, over fear, over doubt, over littleness, her
gold shoes ring like the noise of a sparkling sword, her steps are
swift. They stand for an instant, hands locked, looking back at the long
roller-coaster swoop of the Avenue, listening to the roll of tired wheels,
the faint horns, the loud horns. They know each other now--their hands grip
tighter--in the wandering instant the whole background of streets and tall
buildings passes like breath from a mirror--for the instant without breath
or clamor, they exist together, one being, and the being has neither flesh
to use the senses too clumsily, nor human thoughts to rust at the will, but
lives with the strength of a thunder and the heedlessness of a wave in a
wide and bright eternity of the unspoken.

"All the same," says Nancy, when the moment passes, lifting a shoe with the
concern of a kitten that has just discovered a thorn in its paw, "New York
pavements are certainly _hard_ on loving feet."




VII

So the picture came. And other pictures like it. And since the living that
had made them was past for a little they were both fainter and in a measure
brighter with more elfin colors than even that living had been which had
made them glow at first. White memory had taken them into her long house of
silence where everything is cool with the silver of Spring rain on leaves,
she had washed from them the human pettiness, the human separateness,
the human insufficiency to express the best that must come in any mortal
relationship that lasts longer than the hour. They were not better in
memory than they had been when lived, for the best remembrance makes only
brilliant ghosts, but they were in their dim measure nearer the soul's
perfection, for the tricks of the sounding board of the mind and the
feckless instrument of the body had been put away. "We've had infinites
already--infinites," thought Oliver, and didn't care about the ludicrous
ineptness of the words. He smiled, turning back to the unwritten letter. If
they hadn't had infinites already--he supposed they wouldn't want more so
badly right now. He smiled, but this time without humor. It had all seemed
so easy at first.

Nancy had been in Paris at fourteen before "business reverses" of the kind
that mild, capable-looking men like Mr. Ellicott seem to attract, as a
gingerbread man draws wasps, when they are about fifty, had reduced him to
a position as chief bookkeeper and taken Nancy out of her first year in
Farmington. Oliver had spent nine months on a graduate scholarship in Paris
and Provence in 1919. Both had friends there and argued long playful hours
planning just what sort of a magnificently cheap apartment on the _Rive
Gauche_ they would have when they went back.

For they were going back--they had been brilliantly sure of it--Oliver had
only to finish his novel that was so much better already than any novel
Nancy had ever read--sell a number of copies of it that seemed absurdly
small in proportion to the population of America--and then they could live
where they pleased and Oliver could compose Great Works and Nancy get ahead
with her very real and delicate talent for etching instead of having to do
fashion-drawings of slinky simperers in Lucile dresses or appetite-arousing
paintings of great cans of tomato soup. But that had been eight months ago.
Vanamee and Company's--the neat vice-president talking to Oliver--"a young
hustler has every chance in the world of getting ahead here, Mr. Crowe. You
speak French? Well, we have been thinking for some time of establishing
branch-offices in Europe." The chance of a stop-gap job in St. Louis for
Nancy, where she could be with her family for a while--she really ought
to be with them a couple of months at least, if she and Oliver were to be
married so soon. The hopeful parting in the Grand Central--"But, Nancy,
you're sure you wouldn't mind going across second-class?"

"Why Ollie, dear, how silly! Why, what would it matter?" "All right, then,
and remember, I'll wire _just_ as soon as things really start to break--"

And then for eight months, nothing at all but letters and letters, except
two times, once in New York, once in St. Louis, when both had spent painful
savings because they simply had to see each other again, since even the
best letters were only doll-house food you could look at and wish you could
eat--and both had tried so hard to make each disappearing minute perfect
before they had to catch trains again that the effort left them tired as
jugglers who have been balancing too many plates and edgy at each other for
no cause in the world except the unfairness that they could only have each
other now for so short a time. And the people, the vast unescapable horde
of the dull-but-nice or the merely dull who saw in their meetings nothing
either particularly spectacular or pitiful or worth applause.

And always after the parting, a little crippled doubt tapping its crutches
along the alleys of either mind. "Do I _really?_ Because if I do, how can I
be so tired sometimes with her, with him? And why can't I say more and do
more and be more when he, when she? And everybody says. And they're older
than we are--mightn't it be true? And--" And then, remorsefully, the next
day, all doubt burnt out by the clear hurt of absence. "Oh how could I!
When it is real--when it is like that--when it is the only thing worth
while in the world!"

But absence and meetings of this sort told on them inescapably, and both
being, unfortunately, of a rather high-strung intelligence and youth,
recognized it, no matter how much consciousness might deny it, and wondered
sometimes, rather pitiably, why they couldn't be always at one temperature,
like lovers in poetry, and why either should ever worry or hurt the other
when they loved. Any middle-aged person could and did tell them that they
were now really learning something about love--omitting the small fact that
Pain, though he comes with the highest literary recommendations is really
not the wisest teacher of all in such matters--all of which helped the
constant nervous and psychological strain on both as little as a Latin
exorcism would help a fever. For the very reason that they wished to be
true in their love, they said things in their letters that a spoken word or
a gesture would have explained in an instant but that no printed alphabet
could; and so they often hurt each other while meaning and trying to help
all they could.

Not quite as easy as it had seemed at first--oh, not on your life not,
thought Oliver, rousing out of a gloomy muse. And then there was the
writing he wanted to do--and Nancy's etching--"our damn careers" they had
called them--but those _were_ the things they did best--and neither had had
even tolerable working conditions recently--

Well, sufficient to the day was the evil thereof--that was one of those
safe Bible-texts you seemed to find more and more use for the older you
grew. Bible-texts. It was lucky tomorrow was Sunday when slaves of the
alarm-clock had peace. Oliver straightened his shoulders unconsciously and
turned back to the blank paper. He did love Nancy. He did love Nancy. That
was all that counted.

  "Oh, felicitous Nancy!
  Your letter was--"




VIII

The water was a broken glass of blue, sunstruck waves--there were few
swimmers in it where the two friends went in next morning, for the beach
proper with its bath-houses and float was nearly a quarter of a mile down.
Oliver could see Margaret's red cap bobbing twenty yards out as he tried
the water cautiously with curling toes, and, much farther out, a blue cap
and the flash of an arm going suddenly under. Mrs. Severance, the friend
Louise had brought out for the week-end, he supposed; she swam remarkably
for a woman. He swam well enough himself and couldn't give her two yards in
the hundred. Ted stood beside him, both tingling a little at the fresh of
the salt air. "Wow!" and they plunged.

A mock race followed for twenty yards--then Oliver curved off to duck
Margaret, already screaming and paddling at his approach, while Ted kept
on.

He swam face deep, catching short breaths under the crook of his arm,
burying himself in the live blue running sparkle, every muscle stretched as
if he were trying to rub all the staleness that can come to the mind and
the restless pricklings that will always worry the body clean from him,
like a snake's cast skin, against the wet rough hands of the water.
There--it was working--the flesh was compact and separate no longer--he
felt it dissolve into the salt push of spray--become one with that long
blue body of wave that stretched fluently radiant for miles and miles
till it too was no more identity but only sea, receiving the sun, without
thought, without limbs, without pain. He sprinted with the last breath
he had in him to annihilation in that light lustrous firmament. Then his
flung-out hand struck something firm and smooth. With the momentary twinge
of a jarred toe, he stopped in the middle of a stroke, grabbed at the firm
thing unthinkingly, felt it slip away from him, trod water and came up
gasping.

"Oh, I'm _horribly_ sorry!" Gurgle and choke at water gone the wrong way.
"Honestly--what a dumb-bell trick! but I didn't see you at _all_ and with
the whole Sound to swim in I thought I was safe--"

He rubbed the water out of his eyes. A woman in a blue cap. Pretty,
too--not one of the pretty kind that look like drenched paper-dolls in
swimming.

"Don't apologize--it's all my fault, really. I should have heard you
coming, I suppose, but I was floating and my ears were under water--and
this cap! You did scare me a little, though; I didn't know there was anyone
else in miles--"

She smiled frankly. Ted got another look at her and decided that pretty was
hardly right. Beautiful, perhaps, but you couldn't tell with her hair that
way under her cap.

"You're Mr. Billett, aren't you? Louise said last night that her brother
was bringing a friend over Sunday. She also said that she'd introduce
us--but we seem to have done that."

"Rather. Introduction by drowning. The latest cleverness in Newport
circles--see 'Mode.' And you're Mrs. Severance."

"Yes. Nice water."

"Perfect."

A third look--a fairly long one--left Ted still puzzled. Age--thirty?
thirty-five? Swims perfectly. On "Mode." Wide eyes, sea-blue, sea-changing.
An odd nose that succeeded in being beautiful in spite of itself. A rather
full small mouth, not loose with sense nor rigid with things controlled,
but a mouth that would suck like a bee at the last and tiniest drop of any
physical sweet which the chin and the eyes had once decided to want. The
eyes measure, the mouth asks, the cleft chin finds the way. A face neither
content, nor easily to be contented--in repose it is neither happy nor
unhappy but only matured. Louise's friend--that was funny--Louise had such
an ideal simplicity of mind. Well--

"If you float--after a while you don't know quite where you're floating,"
said Mrs. Severance's voice detachedly.

Ted made no answer but turned over, spreading out his arms. For a few
moments they lay like corpses on the blue swelling round of the water
looking straight through infinite distance into the thin faint vapor of the
sky.

"Yes, I see what you mean."

"We might be clouds, almost, mightn't we?" with a slow following note of
laughter.

Ted looked deeper into the sky, half-closing his eyelids. It seemed to take
his body from him completely, to leave him nothing but a naked soothed
consciousness, rising and falling, a petal on a swinging bough, in the
heart of blue quietude like the quiet of an open place in a forest empty
with evening.

"Clouds," said Mrs. Severance's voice, turning the word to a sound breathed
lightly through the curled and husky gold of a forest-horn.

Through the midst of his sea-drowsiness a queer thought came to Ted. This
had happened before, in sleep perhaps, in a book he had read--Oliver's
novel, possibly, he thought and smiled. Lying alone on a roof of blue
water, and yet not lying alone, for there was that slow warm voice that
talked from time to time and came into the mind on tiptoe like the creeping
of soft-shoed, hasteless, fire. You stretched your hands to the fire and
let it warm you and soon your whole body was warm and pleased and alive.
That was when you were alive past measure, when all of you had been made
warm as a cat fed after being hungry, and the cat arose from its warmth and
went walking on velvet paws, stretching sleek legs, sleek body, slowly
and exquisitely under the firelight, heavy with warmth, but ready at the
instant signal of the small burning thing in its mind to turn like a black
butterfly and dance a slow seeking dance with the shadows of the fire that
flickered like leaves in light wind, desirable, impalpable and wavering,
never to be quite torn down from the wall and eaten and so possessed. But
there was an odd thirsty satisfaction in trying to tear the shadows.

Fantastic. He had not been so fantastic for a long time.

"And tomorrow there's 'Mode.' And fashion-plates. _And_ Greenwich
Villagers," said the voice of Mrs. Severance. He made some reply
impatiently, disliking the sound of his own voice--hers fitted with the
dream. When had he been this before?

The Morte d'Arthur--the two with a sword between.

He sank deeper, deeper, into the glow of that imagined firelight--the flame
was cooler than water to walk through--that time he had almost taken a
turning shadow into his hand. The sword between--only here there was no
sword. If he reached out his hand he knew just how the hand that he touched
would feel, cool and firm, like that flame. Cool and silent.

There must have been something, somewhere, to make him remember....

He remembered.

A minute later Oliver had splashed up to them, shouting "A rescue! A
rescue! Guests Drown While Host Looks On Smilingly! What's the matter, Ted,
you look as if you wanted to turn into a submarine? Got cramp?"




IX

Mrs. Crowe relaxed a little for the first tired minute of her day. Sunday
dinner was nearly over, and though, in one way, the best meal in the week
for her because all her children were sure to be at home, it was apt to be
pure purgatory on a hot day, with Sheba dawdling and grumbling and Rosalind
spilling pea-soup on her Sunday dress, and Aunt Elsie's deafness increased
by the weather to the point of mild imbecility.

She had been a little afraid today, especially with two guests and the
grandchildren rampant after church, and the extra leaf in the table that
squeezed Colonel Crowe almost into the sideboard and herself nearly out of
the window and made the serving of a meal a series of passings of over-hot
plates from hand to hand, exposed to the piracies of Jane Ellen. But it
had gone off better than she could have hoped. Colonel Crowe had not
absent-mindedly begun to serve vegetables with a teaspoon, Aunt Elsie had
not dissolved in tears and tottered away from the table at some imagined
rudeness of Dickie's, and Jane Ellen had not once had a chance to take off
her drawers.

"Ice tea!" said the avid voice of Jane Ellen in her ear. "Ice tea!"

Mrs. Crowe filled the glass and submitted a request for "please"
mechanically. She wondered, rather idly, if she would spend her time in
purgatory serving millions of Jane Ellens with iced tea.

"Ahem!" That was Colonel Crowe. "But you should have known us in the days
of our greatness, Mrs. Severance. When I was king of Estancia--"

"I'd rather have you like this, Colonel Crowe, really. I've always wanted
big families and never had one to live in--"

"Heard from Nancy recently, Oliver?" from Margaret, slightly satiric.

"Why yes, Margie, now and then. Not as often as you've heard from Stu
Winthrop probably but--"

"Motha, can I have some suga on my booberrish? Motha, can I have some suga
on my booberrish? Motha--_peesh!_"

"Oh, hush a minute, Rosalind dear. I don't know, Oliver. I'll speak to Mr.
Field about it if you like. I should think they'd take little sketches like
a couple of those Nancy showed you--though they aren't quite smart-alecky
enough for 'Mode'--" "Grandfather, Grandfather! How old would you be if you
were as old as Methusaleh? Are you older than he is? _Grandfather!_"

Entrance and exit of a worried Sheba with the empty dish of blueberries,
marred only by Jane Ellen's sudden cries of "Stop thief!"

Mrs. Crowe tried to think a little ahead. Tomorrow. Ice. Butter. Laundry.
Oliver's breakfast early again. Louise--poor Louise--two years and a
half since Clifford Lychgate died. How curious life was; how curious and
careless and inconsecutive. The thought of how much she hoped Oliver's
novel would succeed and the question as to whether the Thebes grocer who
delivered by motor-truck would be cheaper than the similar Melgrove bandit
in the long run mixed uneasily in her mind.

Rosalind had seemed droopy that morning--more green crab-apples probably.
Aunt Elsie's gout. Oliver's marriage--she had been so relieved about Nancy
ever since she had met her, though it had been hard to reconcile domestic
virtues with Nancy's bobbed hair. She would make Oliver happy, though,
and that was the main thing. She was really sweet--a sweet girl. Long
engagements. Too bad, too bad. Something _must_ be done about the stair
carpet, the children were tearing it to pieces. "Ice tea! Ice tea!"

"No, Jane Ellen."

"Yash."

"No, darling."

"Peesh yash?"

"No. Now be a good little girl and run out and play quietly, not right in
the middle of the broiling sun."

"And so Lizzie said, 'Very well, but if I do take that medicine my death
will be wholly on your responsibility!'" with a sense of climax.

"But I really would like to, Mrs. Severance, if you can ever spare the
time."

Ted and Louise's friend seemed to be getting along very well. That was
nice--so often Oliver's friends and Louise's didn't. It seemed odd that
Mrs. Severance should be working on "Mode"--surely a girl of her obvious
looks and intelligence left with no children to support--some nice man--A
lady, too, by her voice, though there was a trifle of something--

She only hoped Mrs. Severance didn't think them all too crowded and noisy.
It was a little hard on the three children to have such an--intimate--home
when they brought friends.

"I think we'd better have coffee out on the porch, don't you?" That meant
argument with Sheba later but an hour's cool and talk without having to
shout across the dear little children was worth the argument.

Everybody got up, Ted being rather gallant to Mrs. Severance. Oliver looked
worried today, worried and tired. She hoped it wasn't about Nancy and the
engagement. What a miserable thing money was to make so much difference.

"Mrs. Severance--"

"Mr. Billett--"

Louise's friend was certainly attractive. That wonderful red-gold
hair--"setter color" her sister had always called it of her own. She must
write her sister. Mrs. Severance--an odd name. She rather wished, though,
that her face wouldn't turn faintly hard like that sometimes.

"No, Dickie. No chocolate unless your mother says you can have it. No,
Rosalind, if mother says not, you _certainly_ cannot go over and play at
the Rogers',--they have a paralytic grandmother who is very nervous."

Well, that was over. And now, for a few brief instants there would be
quiet and a chance to relax and really see something of Oliver. Mrs. Crowe
started moving slowly towards the door. Ted and Mrs. Severance blocked the
way, talking rather intimately, she thought, for people who had only known
each other a few hours; but then that was the modern way. Then Ted saw her
and seemed to wake up with a jump from whatever mild dream possessed him,
and Mrs. Severance turned toward her.

"It's so _comfortable_ being out here, always," she said very naturally and
kindly, but Mrs. Crowe did not reply at once to the pretty speech. Instead
she flushed deeply and bent over something small and white on the chair
with the dictionary in it that had been next to hers. Jane Ellen had
finally succeeded in taking off her drawers.




X

Ted and Oliver were down at the beach at Southampton two Sundays
later--week-end guests of Peter Piper--the three had been classmates at
Yale and the friendship had not lapsed like so many because Peter happened
to be rich and Ted and Oliver poor. And then there was always Elinor,
Peter's sister--Ted seemed, to Oliver's amused vision, at least, to
be looking at Elinor with the hungry eyes of a man seeing a delicate,
longed-for dream made flesh just at present instead of a girl he had known
since she first put up her hair. How nice that would be if it happened,
thought Oliver, match-makingly--how very nice indeed! Best thing in
the world for Ted--and Elinor too--if Ted would only get away from his
curiously Puritan idea that a few minor lapses from New England morality in
France constituted the unpardonable sin, at least as far as marrying a nice
girl was concerned. He stretched back lazily, digging elbows into the warm
sand.

The day had really been too hot for anything more vigorous than "just lying
around in the sun like those funny kinds of lizards," as Peter put it, and
besides, he and Oliver had an offensive-defensive alliance of The Country's
Tiredest Young Business Men and insisted that their only function in life
was to be gently and graciously amused. And certainly the spectacle about
them was one to provide amusement in the extreme for even the most mildly
satiric mind.

It was the beach's most crowded hour and the short strip of sand in front
of the most fashionable and uncomfortable place to bathe on Long Island
was gay as a patch of exhibition sweet-peas with every shade of vivid or
delicate color. It was a triumph of women--the whole glittering, moving
bouquet of stripes and patterns and tints that wandered slowly from one
striped parasol-mushroom to the next--the men, in their bathing suits or
white flannels seemed as unimportant if necessary furniture as slaves in
an Eastern court. The women dominated, from the jingle of the bags in the
hands of the dowagers and the faint, protesting creak of their corsets as
they picked their way as delicately as fat, gorgeous macaws across the
sand, to the sound of their daughters' voices, musical as a pigeon-loft,
as they chattered catchwords at each other and their partners, or
occasionally, very occasionally, dipped in for a three-minute swim.
Moreover, and supremely, it was a triumph of ritual, and such ritual
as reminded Oliver a little of the curious, unanimous and apparently
meaningless movements of a colony of penguins, for the entire assemblage
had arrived around, twelve o'clock and by a quarter past one not one of
them would be left. That was law as unwritten and unbreakable as that law
which governs the migratory habits of wild geese. And within that little
more than an hour possibly one-third of them would go as far as wetting
their hands in the water--all the rest had come for the single reason of
seeing and being seen. It was all extremely American and, on the whole,
rather superb, Oliver thought as he and Peter moved over nearer to the
parasol that sheltered Elinor and Ted.

"I wish it was Egypt," said Peter languidly. "Any more peppermints left,
El? No--well, Ted never could restrain himself when it came to food. I wish
it was Egypt," he repeated, making Elinor's left foot a pillow for his
head.

"Well, it's hot enough," from Oliver, dozingly. "Ah--oo--it's _hot_!"

"I know, but just think," Peter chuckled. "Clothes," he explained
cryptically, "Mrs. Willamette in a Cleopatra nightie--what sport! And
besides, I should make a magnificent Egyptian. Magnificent." He yawned
immensely. "In the first place, of course, I should paint myself a
brilliant orange--"

The Egyptians. An odd wonder rose in Ted--a wonder as to whether one of
those stripped and hook-nosed slaves of the bondage before Moses had ever
happened to stand up for a moment to wipe the sweat out of his eyes before
he bent again to his task of making bricks without straw and seen a
princess of the Egyptians carried along past the quarries.

"Tell us a story, El," from Oliver in the voice of one who is
sleep-walking. "A nice quiet story--the Three Bears or Giant the Jack
Killer--oh heaven, I _must_ be asleep--but you know, anything like that--"

"You really want a story?" Elinor's voice was reticently mocking. "A story
for good little boys?"

"Oh, _yes!_" from Peter, his clasped hands stretched toward her in an
attitude of absurd supplication. "All in nice little words of one syllable
or we won't understand."

"Well, once there were three little girls named Elsie, Lacie and Tillie and
they lived in the bottom of a well."



[ILLUSTRATION: "WELL, ONCE THERE WERE THREE LITTLE GIRLS"] "What _kind_ of
a well?" Oliver had caught the cue at once.

"A treacle well--"

       *       *       *       *       *

She went on with the Dormouse's Tale, but Ted, for once, hardly heard
her--his mind was too busy with its odd, Egyptological dream.

The princess who looked like Elinor. Her slaves would come first--a fat
bawling eunuch, all one black glisten like new patent-leather, striking
with a silver rod to clear dogs and crocodiles and Israelites out of the
way. Then the litter--and a flash between curtains blown aside for an
instant--and Hook Nose gazing and gazing--all the fine fighting curses of
David on the infidel, that he had muttered sourly under breath all day,
blowing away from him like sand from the face of a sphinx.

Pomp sounding in brass and cries all around the litter like the boasting
color of a trumpet--but in the litter not pomp but fineness passing.
Fineness of youth untouched, from the clear contrast of white skin and
crow-black hair to the hands that had the little stirrings of moon-moths
against the green robe. Fineness of mind that will not admit the
unescapable minor dirts of living, however much it may see them, a mind
temperate with reticence and gentleness, seeing not life itself but its own
delighted dream of it, a heart that had had few shocks as yet, and never
the ones that the heart must be mailed or masked to withstand. The thing
that passed had been continually sheltered, exquisitely guarded from the
stronger airs of life as priests might guard a lotus, and yet it was
neither tenderly unhealthy nor sumptuously weak. A lotus--that was it--and
Hook Nose stood looking at the lotus--and because it was innocent he filled
his eyes with it. And then it passed and its music went out of the mind.

"_Ted_!"

"What? What? Oh, yeah--sorry, Elinor, I wasn't paying proper attention."

"You mean you were asleep, you big cheese!" from Peter.

"I wasn't--just thinking," and seeing that this only brought raucous mirth
from both Peter and Oliver, "Oh, shut up, you apes! Were you asking me
something, El?"

It was rather a change to come back from Elinor in scarab robes being
carried along in a litter to Elinor sitting beside him in a bathing suit.
But hardly an unpleasant change.

"I've forgotten how it goes on--the Dormouse--after 'Well in.' Do you
remember?"

"Nope. Look it up when we get back. And anyhow--" "What?"

"Game called for to-day. The Lirrups have started looking important--that
means it's about ten minutes of, they always leave on the dot. Well--"
and Peter rose, scattering sand. "We must obey our social calendar, my
prominent young friends--just think how awful it would be if we were the
last to go. Race you half-way to the float and back, Ted."

"You're on," and the next few minutes were splashingly athletic.

Going back to the bath-house, though, Ted laughed at himself rather
whimsically. That extraordinary day-dream of the slave and the
Elinor Princess! It helped sometimes, to make pictures of the very
impossible--even of things as impossible as that. If Elinor had only been
older before the war came along and changed so much.

He saw another little mental photograph, the kind of photograph, he mused,
that sleekly shabby Frenchmen slip from under views of the Vendome
Column and Napoleon's Tomb when they are trying to sell tourists picture
post-cards outside the Cafe de la Paix. Judged by American standards the
work would be called rather frank. It was all interior--the interior of a
room in a Montmartre hotel--and there were two people in it to help out
the composition--and the face of one seemed somehow to be rather deathly
familiar--

That, and Elinor. Why, Hook Nose could "reform" all the rest of his life in
accordance with the highest dictionary standards--and still he wouldn't be
fit to look at his princess, even from inside a cage.

Also, if you happened to be of a certain analytic temperament you could see
what was happening to yourself all the while quite plainly--oh, much too
plainly!--and yet that seemed to make very little difference in its going
on happening. There was Mrs. Severance, for instance. He had been seeing
quite a good deal of Mrs. Severance lately.

"Oh, Ted!" from Peter next door. "Snap it up, old keed, or we'll all of us
be late for lunch."

They had just sat down to lunch and Peter was complaining that the whipped
cream on the soup made him feel as if he were eating cotton-batting, when a
servant materialized noiselessly beside Oliver's chair.

"Telephone for you, Mr. Crowe. Western Union calling."

Oliver jumped up with suspicious alacrity. "Oh, love, love, love!" crooned
Peter. "Oh, love, love, love!" Oliver flushed. "Don't swipe all my butter,
you simple cynic!" He knew what it was, of course.

"This is Oliver Crowe talking. Will you give me the telegram?"

Nancy and Oliver, finding Sunday mails of a dilatory unsatisfactoriness,
had made a compact to use the wire on that day instead. And even now Oliver
never listened to the mechanical buzz of Central's voice in his ear without
a little pulse of the heart. It seemed to bring Nancy nearer than letters
could, somehow. Nancy had an imperial contempt for boiling down attractive
sentences to the necessary ten or twenty words. This time, though, the
telegram was short.

"Mr. Oliver Crowe, care Peter Piper, Southampton," clicked Central
dispassionately. "I hate St. Louis. I would give anything in the world if
we could only see each other for twenty-four hours. Love. Signed, Nancy."

And Oliver, after hanging up the receiver, went back to the dining-room
with worry barking and running around his mind like a spoiled puppy,
wondering savagely why so many rocking-chair people took a _crepey_
pleasure in saying it was good for young people in love to have to wait.




XI

Tea for two at the Gondolier, that newest and quotation-marked "Quaintest"
of Village tea rooms. The chief points in the Gondolier's "quaintness" seem
to be that it is chopped up into as many little partitions as a roulette
wheel and that all food has to be carried up from a cellar that imparts
even to orange marmalade a faint persuasive odor of somebody else's wash.
Still, during the last eight months, the Gondolier has been a radical
bookstore devoted to bloody red pamphlets, a batik shop full of strange
limp garments ornamented with decorative squiggles, and a Roumanian
Restaurant called "The Brodska" whose menu seemed to consist almost
entirely of old fish and maraschino cherries.

The wispy little woman from Des Moines who conducts the Gondolier at
present in a series of timid continual flutters at actually leading the
life of the Bohemian untamed, and who gives all the young hungry-looking
men extra slices of toast because any one of them might be Vachel Lindsay
in disguise, will fail in another six weeks and then the Gondolier may turn
into anything from a Free Verse Tavern to a Meeting Hall for the Friends of
Slovak Freedom. But at present, the tea is much too good for the price in
spite of its inescapable laundry tang, and there is a flat green bowl full
of Japanese iris bulbs in the window--the second of which pleases Mrs.
Severance and the first Ted.

Besides like most establishments on the verge of bankruptcy, it is such
a quiet place to talk--the only other two people in it are a boy with
startled hair and an orange smock and a cigaretty girl called Tommy, and
she is far too busy telling him that that dream about wearing a necklace
of flying-fish shows a dangerous inferiority complex even to comment
caustically on strangers from uptown who _will_ intrude on the dear
Village.

"Funny stuff--dreams," says Ted uneasily, catching at overheard phrases for
a conversational jumping-off place. His mind, always a little on edge now
with work and bad feeding, has been too busy since they came in comparing
Rose Severance with Elinor Piper, and wondering why, when one is so like a
golden-skinned August pear and the other a branch of winter blackberries
against snow just fallen, it is not as good but somehow warmer to think of
the first against your touch than the second, to leave him wholly at ease.

"Yes--funny stuff," Mrs. Severance's voice is musically quiet. "And then
you tell them to people who pretend to know all about what they mean--and
then--" She shrugs shoulders at the Freudian two across the shoulder-high
partition.

"But you don't believe in all this psycho-analysis tosh, do you?"

She hesitates. "A little, yes. Like the old woman and ghosts. I may not
believe in it but I'm afraid of it, rather."

She gives him a steady look--her eyes go deep. It is not so much the
intensity of the look as its haltingness that makes warmth go over him.

"Shall we tell our dreams--the favorite ones, I mean? Play fair if we do,
remember," she adds slowly.

"Not if you're really afraid."

"I? But it's just because I am afraid that I really should, you know. Like
going into a dark room when you don't want to."

"But they can't be as scary as _that_, surely." Ted's voice is a little
false. Both are watching each other intently now--he with a puzzled sense
of lazy enveloping firelight.

"Well, shall I begin? After all this _is_ tea in the Village."

"I should be very much interested indeed, Mrs. Severance," says Ted rather
gravely. "Check!" "How official you sound--almost as if you had a lot of
those funny little machines all the modern doctors use and were going to
mail me off to your pet sanatorium at once because you'd asked me what
green reminded me of and I said 'cheese' instead of 'trees.' And anyhow, I
never have any startling dreams--only silly ones--much too silly to tell--"

"Please go on." Ted's voice has really become quite clinical.

"Oh very well. They don't count when you only have them once--just when
they keep coming back and back to you--isn't that it?"

"I believe so."

Mrs. Severance's eyes waver a little--her mouth seeking for the proper kind
of dream.

"It's not much but it comes quite regularly--the most punctual,
old-fashioned-servant sort of a dream.

"It doesn't begin with sleep, you know--it begins with waking. At least
it's just as if I were in my own bed in my own apartment and then gradually
I started to wake. You know how you can feel that somebody else is in the
room though you can't see them--that's the feeling. And, of course being a
normal American business woman, my first idea is--burglars. And I'm very
cowardly for a minute. Then the cowardice passes and I decide to get up and
see what it is.

"It _is_ somebody else--or something--but nobody I think that I ever
really knew. And at first I don't want to walk toward it--and then I do
because it keeps pulling me in spite of myself. So I go to it--hands out
so I won't knock over things.

"And then I touch it--or him--or her--and I'm suddenly very, very happy.

"That's all.

"And now, Dr. Billett, what would you say of my case?"

Ted's eyes are glowing--in the middle of her description his heart has
begun to knock to a hidden pulse, insistent and soft as the drum of gloved
fingers on velvet. He picks words carefully.

"I should say--Mrs. Severance--that there was something you needed and
wanted and didn't have at present. And that you would probably have it--in
the end."

She laughs a little. "Rather cryptic, isn't that, doctor? And you'd
prescribe?"

"Prescribe? 'It's an awkward matter to play with souls.'"

"'And trouble enough to save your own,'" she completes the quotation. "Yes,
that's true enough--though I'm sorry you can't even tell me to use this
twice a day in half a glass of water and that other directly after each
meal. I think I'll have to be a little more definite when it comes to your
turn--if it does come."

"Oh it will." But instead of beginning, he raises his eyes to her again.
This time there is a heaviness like sleep on both, a heaviness that draws
both together inaudibly and down, and down, as if they were sinking through
piled thickness on thickness of warm, sweet-scented grass. Odd faces come
into both minds and vanish as if flickered off a film--to Rose Severance,
a man narrow and flat as if he were cut out of thin grey paper, talking,
talking in a voice as dry and rattling as a flapping windowblind of their
"vacation" together and a house with a little garden where she can sew and
he can putter around,--to Ted, Elinor Piper, the profile pure as if it were
painted on water, passing like water flowing from the earth in springs,
in its haughty temperance, its retired beauty, its murmurous quiet--other
faces, some trembling as if touched with light flames, some calm, some
merely grotesque with longing or too much pleasure--all these pass. A great
nearness, fiercer and more slumbrous than any nearness of body takes their
place. It wraps the two closer and closer, a spider spinning a soft web out
of petals, folding the two with swathes and swathes of its heavy, fragrant
silk.

"Oh--mine--isn't anything," says Ted rather unsteadily, after the moment.
"Only looking at firelight and wanting to take the coals in my hands."

Rose's voice is firmer than his but her mouth is still moved with content
at the thing it has desired being brought nearer.

"I really can't prescribe on as little evidence as that," she says with
music come back to her voice in the strength of a running wave. "I can
only repeat what you told me. That there was something you needed--and
wanted"--she is mocking now--"and didn't have at present. And that you
would probably--what was it?--oh yes--have it, in the end."

The wispy little woman has crept up to Ted's elbow with an illegible bill.
Rose has spoken slowly to give her time to get there--it is always so much
better to choose your own most effective background for really affecting
scenes.

"And now I really must be getting back," she cuts in briskly, her fingers
playing with a hat that certainly needs no rearrangement, when Ted, after
absent-mindedly paying the bill, is starting to speak in the voice of one
still sleep-walking.

"But it _was_ delightful, Mr. Billett--I love talking about myself and you
were really very sweet to listen so nicely." She has definitely risen. Ted
must, too. "We must do it again some time soon--I'm going to see if there
aren't any of those books with long German names drifting around 'Mode'
somewhere so that I'll be able to simply stun you with my erudition the
next time we talk over dreams."

They are at the door now, she guiding him toward it as imperceptibly and
skillfully as if she controlled him by wireless.

"And it isn't fair of me to let you give all the parties--it simply isn't.
Couldn't you come up to dinner in my little apartment sometime--it really
isn't unconventional, especially for anyone who's once seen my pattern of
an English maid--"

Sunlight and Minetta Lane again--and whatever Ted may want to say out of
his walking trance--this is certainly no place where any of it can be said.




XII

Oliver Crowe, at his desk in the copy-department of Vanamee and Co.'s,
has been spending most of the afternoon twiddling pencils and reading and
rereading two letters out of his pocket instead of righteously thinking up
layouts for the new United Steel Frame Pulley Campaign. He realizes that
the layouts are important--that has been brought to his attention already
by several pink memoranda from Mr. Delier, the head of the department--but
an immense distaste for all things in general and advertising in particular
has overwhelmed him all day. He looks around the big, brightly lighted room
with a stupefied sort of loathing--advertising does not suit him--he is
doing all he can at it because of Nancy--but he simply does not seem to get
the hang of the thing even after eight months odd and he is conscious
of the fact that the Powers that be are already looking at him with
distrustful eyes, in spite of his occasional flashes of brilliance. If he
could only get _out_ of it--get into something where his particular kind of
mind and training would be useful--oh well--he grunts and turns back to his
private affairs.

The letter from Easten of Columbiac Magazines--kindly enough--but all
hope of selling the serial rights of his novel gone glimmering because of
it--Easten was the last chance, the last and the best. "If you could see
your way to making short stories out of the incidents I have named, I
should be very much interested--" but even so, two short stories
won't bring in enough to marry on, even if he can do them to Easten's
satisfaction--and the novel couldn't come out as a book now till late
spring--and Oliver has too many friends who dabble in writing to have any
more confidence in book royalties than he would have in systems for beating
the bank at roulette. Well, _that's_ over--and a year's work with it--and
all the dreams he and Nancy had of getting married at once.

Those pulley layouts have to be fixed up sometime. What can you say about a
pulley--what _can_ you say? "The United Steel Frame Pulley--Oh Man, There's
a Hog for Work!" Oliver turns the cheap phrase in his mind, hating its
shoddiness, hating the fact that such shoddiness is the only stuff with
which he can deal.

Sanely considered, he supposes he hasn't any business using up a month's
meagre savings and three small checks for poems that he has hoarded since
April in going out to St. Louis Friday. Mr. Alley wasn't too pleased with
letting him take Saturday and half Monday off to do it, too. But then there
was that telegram ten days ago. "I'd give anything in the world if we could
only see each other--" and after other letters unsatisfactorily brief, the
letter that came Monday "I have such grand news, Ollie dear, at least it
may be grand if it works out--but oh, dear, I do want to see you about it
without tangling it up in letters that don't really explain. Can't you make
it--even a few hours would be long enough to talk it all over--and I do so
want to see you and really talk! Please wire me, if you can."

Grand news--what kind he wondered--and dully thought that he couldn't see
her, of course, and then suddenly knew that he must. After all, there
didn't seem to be much use in saving for the sake of saving when all the
saving you could possibly do didn't bring you one real inch nearer to what
you really wanted. _Apres moi le deluge--apres ca le deluge_--it might even
come to that this time, they were both so tired--and he viewed the prospect
as a man mortally hurt might view the gradual failing of sun and sky above
him, with hopelessness complete as a cloud in that sky, but with heart and
brain too beaten now to be surprised with either agony or fear. They must
see each other--they were neither of them quiet people who could love
forever at a distance without real hope. Great Lord, if he and Nancy could
ever have one definite basis to work on, one definite hope of money in the
future no matter how far off that was--But the present uncertainty--They
couldn't keep on like this--no two people in the world could be expected to
keep on.

Nancy. He is seeing Nancy, the way she half-lifts her head when she has
been teasing and suddenly becomes remorseful and wants him to know how much
she does love him instead.




XIII

A hot night in the Pullman---too hot to sleep in anything but a series of
uneasy drowsings and wakings. Smell of blankets and cinders and general
unwashedness--noise of clacketing wheels and a hysterical whistle--anyhow
each sweaty hour brings St. Louis and Nancy nearer. St. _Nancy_, St.
_Nancy_, St. _Nancy_, says the sleepless racket of the wheels, but the
peevish electric fan at the end of the corridor keeps buzzing to itself
like a fly caught in a trap. "And then I got married you see--and then I
got married you see--and when you get married you aren't a free lance--you
aren't a free lance--you're _settled_!"

It will have to be pretty grand news indeed that Nancy has to make up for
this last week and the buzz of the electric fan, thinks Oliver, twisting
from one side of his stuffy berth to the other like an uneasy sardine.




XIV

"More beans, Oliver," says Mrs. Ellicott in a voice like thin syrup, her
"generous" voice. The generous voice is used whenever Mrs. Ellicott wants
to show herself a person of incredibly scrupulous fairness before that
bodiless assemblage of old women in black that constitute the They who
Say--and so it is used to Oliver nearly all the time.

"No thank you, Mrs. Ellicott." Oliver manages to look at her politely
enough as he speaks but then his eyes go straight back to Nancy and stay
there as if they wished to be considered permanent attachments. All Oliver
has been able to realize for the last two hours is the mere declarative
fact that she is _there_.

"Nancy!"

"No, thanks, mother."

And Nancy in her turn looks once swiftly at her mother, sitting there at
the end of the table like a faded grey sparrow whose feathers make it
uncomfortable. It isn't feathers, though, really--its only Oliver. Why
can't mother get reconciled to Oliver--why _can't_ she--and if she can't,
why doesn't she come out and say so instead of trying to be generous to
Oliver when she doesn't want to while he's there and then saying mean
things when he's away because she can't help it?

"Stanley?"

"Why, no, my dear--no--yes, a few, perhaps--I might reconsider--only a few,
my dear,"--his voice does not do anything as definite as cease--it merely
becomes ineffectual as Mrs. Ellicott heaps his plate. He then looks at the
beans as if he hadn't the slightest idea where they came from but supposes
as long as they are there they must be got away with somehow, and starts
putting them into his mouth as mechanically as if they were pennies and he
a slot-machine.

It is hot in the Ellicotts' dining-room--the butter was only brought in a
little while ago, but already it is yellow mush. There are little drops on
the backs of Mr. Ellicott's hands. Oliver wants to help Nancy take away the
dishes and bring in the fruit--they have started to make a game out of it
already when Mrs. Ellicott's voice enforces order.

"No, Oliver. No, please. Please sit still. It is so seldom we have a
_guest_ that Nancy and I are apt to forget our _manners_--"

Oliver looks to Nancy for guidance, receives it and subsides into his
chair. That's just the trouble, he thinks rather peevishly--if only Mrs.
Ellicott would stop acting as if he were a guest--and not exactly a guest
by choice at that but one who must be the more scrupulously entertained in
public, the less he is liked in private.

The fruit. Mrs. Ellicott apologizing for it--her voice implies that she is
quite sure Oliver doesn't think it good enough for him but that he ought
to feel himself very lucky indeed that it isn't his deserts instead. Mr.
Ellicott absent-mindedly squirting orange juice up his sleeve. Oliver and
Nancy looking at each other.

"Are you the same?" say both kinds of eyes, intent, absorbed with the wish
that has been starved small through the last three months, but now grows
again like a smoke-tree out of a magicked jar, "Really the same and really
loving me and really glad to be here?" But they can get no proper sort of
answer now--there are too many other Ellicotts around, especially Mrs.
Ellicott.

Dinner is over with coffee and cigarettes that Mrs. Ellicott has bought for
Oliver because no one shall ever say she failed in the smallest punctilio
of hospitality, though she offers them to him with a gesture like that of a
missionary returning his baked-mud idol to a Bushman too far gone in sin
to reclaim. Mr. Ellicott smoked cigarettes before his marriage. For twenty
years now he has been a contributing member of the Anti-Tobacco League.

And now all that Oliver knows is that unless he can talk to Nancy soon
and alone, he will start being very rude. It is not that he wants to be
rude--especially to Nancy's family--but the impulse to get everyone but
Nancy away by any means from sarcasm to homicidal mania is as reasonless
and strong as the wish to be born. After all he and Nancy have not seen
each other wakingly for three months--and there is still her "grand news"
to tell, the grandness of which has seemed to grow more and more dubious
the longer she looked at Oliver. Now is the time for Mr. and Mrs. Ellicott
to disappear as casually and completely as clouds over the edge of the sky
and first of all, not to mention the fact that they are going. But Mrs.
Ellicott has far too much tact ever to be understanding.

She puts Mr. Ellicott's hat on for him and takes his arm as firmly as if
she were police, and he accepts the grasp with the meekness of an old
offender who is not quite sure what particular crime he is being arrested
for this time but has an uncomfortable knowledge that it may be any one of
a dozen.

"Now we old people are going to leave you, children alone for a little
while" she announces, fair to the last, her voice sweeter than ever.
"We know you have such a great many important _affairs_ to talk
over--particularly the _splendid_ offer that has just come to Nancy--my
little girl hasn't told you about it yet, has she, Oliver?'

"No, Mrs. Ellicott."

"Well, her father and myself consider it quite _remarkable_ and we have
been _urging_--very _strongly_--her acceptance, though of course" this with
a glace smile, "we realize that we are only her _parents_. And, as Nancy
knows, it has always been our dearest wish to have her decide matters
affecting her happiness entirely _herself_. But I feel sure that when both
of you have talked it _well_ over, we can trust you both to come to a
most _reasonable_ decision." She breathes heavily and moves with her
appurtenance to the door, secure as an ostrich in the belief that Oliver
thinks her impartial, even affectionate. Her conscientiousness gives her a
good deal of applause for leaving the two young people so soon when they
have all one evening and another morning to be together--but subconsciously
she knows that she has done her best by her recent little speech to make
this talking-it-over a walk through a field full of small pestilent
burrs, for both Oliver and Nancy. They say _au revoir_ very politely--all
four--the door shuts on Mr. Ellicott's meek back.

Mrs. Ellicott is not very happy, going downstairs. She knows what has
undoubtedly happened the moment the door was shut--and a little twinge of
something very like the taste of sour grapes goes through her as she thinks
of those two young people so reprehensibly glad at being even for the
moment in each other's arms.




XV

An hour later and still the grand news hasn't been told. In fact very
little that Mrs. Ellicott would regard as either sensible or reasonable has
happened at all. Though they do not know it the conversation has been oddly
like that of two dried desert-travellers who have suddenly come upon water
and for quite a while afterwards find it hard to think of anything else.
But finally:

"Dearest, dearest, what was the grand news?" says Oliver half-drowsily. "We
must talk it over, dear, I suppose, I guess, oh, we must--oh, but you're so
sweet--" and he relapses again into speechlessness.

They are close together, he and she now. Their lips meet--and meet--with a
sweet touch--with a long pressure--children being good to each other--cloud
mingling with gleaming cloud.

"Ollie dear." Nancy's voice comes from somewhere as far away and still as
if she were talking out of a star. "Stop kissing me. I can't think when you
kiss me, I can only feel you be close. If you want to hear about that news,
that is," she adds, her lips hardly moving.

All that Oliver wants to do is to hold her and be quiet--to make out of
the stuffy room, the nervous rushing of noise under the window, the air
exhausted with heat, a place in some measure peaceful, in some measure
retired, where they can lie under lucent peace for a moment as shells lie
in clear water and not be worried about anything any more. But again, the
time they are to have is too short--Oliver really must be back Monday
afternoon--already he is unpleasantly conscious of the time-table part of
his mind talking trains at him. He takes his arms from around Nancy--she
sits up rubbing her eyes with the back of her hand as if to take the
dream that was so glittering in them away now she and Oliver have to talk
business-affairs.

"Oh, my _hair_--lucky it's bobbed, that's all--I'd have lost all the
hairpins I ever had in it by now--Well, Ollie--"

Her hand goes over to his uneasily, takes hold. For a moment the dream
comes back and she forgets entirely what she was going to say.

"Oh _dear_!"

"Nancy, Nancy, Nancy!"

But she will be firm about their talking. "No, we mustn't really, we
mustn't, or I can't tell you anything at all. Well, it's this.

"I didn't tell you about it at all--didn't even imagine it would come to
anything. But that old geology specimen Mrs. Winters knows the art-editor
of "The Bazaar" and she happened to say so once when she was here being
gloomy with mother, so I wormed a letter out of her to her friend about
me. And I sent some things in and the poor man seemed to be interested--at
least he said he wanted to see more--and then we started having a real
correspondence. Until finally--it was that Friday because I wrote you the
letter right away--he goes and sends me a letter saying to come on to New
York--that I can have a regular job with them if I want to, and if they
like my stuff well enough, after a couple of months they'll send me to
Paris to do fashions over there and pay me a salary I can more than live on
and everything!"

Nancy cannot help ending with a good deal of triumph, though there is
anxiety behind the triumph as well. But to Oliver it seems as if the floor
had come apart under his feet.

When he has failed so ludicrously and completely, Nancy has succeeded and
succeeded beyond even his own ideas of success. She can go to Paris and
have all they ever planned together, now; it has all bent down to her like
an apple on a swinging bough, all hers to take, from lunch at Prunier's
and sunset over the river to that perfect little apartment they know every
window of by heart--and he is no nearer it than he was eight months ago. He
has felt the pride in her voice and knows it as most human and justified,
but because he is young and unreasonable that pride of hers hurts his own.
And then there is something else. All through what she was saying it was
"I" that said, not "we."

"That's fine, Nancy," he says uncertainly. "That's certainly fine!"

But she knows by his voice in a second.

"Oh, Ollie, Ollie, of course I won't take it if it makes you feel that way,
dear. Why, I wouldn't do anything that would hurt you--but Ollie I don't
see how this can, how this could change things any way at all. I only
thought it would bring things nearer--both of us getting jobs and my having
a Paris one and--"

Her voice might be anything else in the world, but it is not wholly
convinced. And its being sure beyond bounds is the only thing that could
possibly help Oliver. He puts his hands on her shoulders.

"I couldn't do anything but tell you to take it, dearest, could I? When
it's such a real chance?" He is hoping with illogical but none the less
painful desperation that she will deny him. But she nods instead.

"Well then, Nancy dear, listen. If you take it, we've got to face things,
haven't we?"

She nods a little rebelliously.

"But why is it so _serious_, Ollie?" and again her voice is not true.

"You know. Because I've failed--God knows when I'll make enough money for
us to get married now--with the novel gone bust and everything. And I
haven't any right to keep you like this when I'm not sure of ever being
able to marry you--and when you've got a job like this and can go right
ahead on the things you've always been crazy to do. Nancy, you _want_ to
take it--even if it meant our not getting married for another year and your
being away--don't you, don't you? Oh, Nancy, you've _got_ to tell me--it'll
only bust everything we've had already if you don't!"

And now they have come to a point of misunderstanding that only a trust as
unreasonable as belief in immortality will help. But that trust could never
be bothered with the truth of what it was saying at the moment--it would
have to reach into something deeper than any transitory feeling--and they
have an unlucky tradition of always trying to tell each other what is
exactly true. And so Nancy nods because she has to, though she couldn't
bear to put what that means into words.

"Well, you take it. And I'm awful sorry we couldn't make it go, dear. I
tried as hard as I could to make it go but I guess I didn't have the stuff,
that's all."

He has risen now and his face seems curiously twisted--twisted as if
something hot and hurtful had passed over it and left it so that it would
always look that way. He can hardly bear to look at Nancy, but she has
risen and started talking hurriedly--fright, amazement, concern and a queer
little touch of relief all mixing in her voice.

"But Ollie, if you can't _trust_ me about something as little as that."

"It isn't that," he says beatenly and she knows it isn't. And knowing,
her voice becomes suddenly frightened--the fright of a child who has let
something as fragile and precious as a vessel of golden glass slip out of
her hands.

"But, Ollie dear! But, Ollie, I never meant it that way. But Ollie, I love
you!"

He takes her in his arms again and they kiss long. This time though there
is no peace in the kiss, only the lost passion of bodies tired beyond
speech. "Do you love me, Nancy?"

Again she has to decide--and the truth that will not matter for more than
the hour wins. Besides, he has hurt her.

"Oh, Ollie, Ollie, yes, but--"

"You're not sure any more?"

"It's different."

"It's not being certain?"

"Not the way it was at first--but, Ollie, we're neither of us the same--"

"Then you _aren't_ sure?"

"I can't--I haven't--oh, Ollie, I don't know, I don't know!"

"That means you know."

Again the kiss but this time their lips only hurt against each
other--Oliver feels for a ghastly instant as if he were kissing Nancy after
she had died. It seems to him that everything in him has made itself into a
question as discordant and unanswered as the tearing cry of a puppy baying
the moon, struck out of his senses by that swimming round silver above him,
ineffably lustrous, ineffably removed, none of it ever coming to touch him
but light too pale to help at all. He is holding a girl in his arms--he can
feel her body against him--but it is not Nancy he is holding--it never will
be Nancy any more. He releases her and starts walking up and down in a
series of short, uneasy strides, turning mechanically to keep out of the
way of chairs. Words come out of him, words he never imagined he could ever
say, he thinks dizzily that it would feel like this if he were invisibly
bleeding to death--that would come the same way in fiery spurts and pauses
that tore at the body.

"Don't you see, dear, don't you _see_? It's been eight months now and we
aren't any nearer getting married than we were at first and it isn't honest
to say we will be soon any more--I can't see any prospect--I've failed
in everything I thought would go--and we can't get married on my job for
_years_--I'm not good enough at it--and I _won't_ have you hurt--I _won't_
have you tied to me when it only means neither of us doing what we want and
both of us getting, older and our work not done. Oh, I love you, Nancy--if
there was any hope at all I'd go down on my knees to ask you to keep on but
there isn't--they've beaten us--they've beaten us--all the fat old people
who told us we were too poor and too young. All we do is go on like this
both of us getting worked up whenever we see each other and both of us
hurting each other and nothing happening--Oh, Nancy, I thought we could
help each other always and now we can't even [Illustration: AND THEN THE
QUEER MAN HAD GONE OUT OF THE DOOR] a little any more. You remember when we
promised that if either of us stopping loving each other we'd tell?"

Nancy is very silent and rather white.

"Yes, Ollie."

"Well, Nancy?"

"Well--"

They look at each other as if they were watching each other burn.

"Good-by darling, darling, darling!" says Ollie through lips like a
marionette's.

Then Nancy feels him take hold of her again--the arms of somebody else in
Oliver's body--and a cold mouth hurting her cheek--and still she cannot
speak. And then the queer man who was walking up and down so disturbingly
has gone out of the door.




XVI

Oliver finds himself walking along a long street in a city. It is not a
distinguished street by any means--there are neither plate-glass shops nor
'residences' on it--just an ordinary street of little stores and small
houses and occasionally an apartment building named for a Pullman car. In
a good many houses the lights are out already--it is nearly eleven o'clock
and this part of St. Louis goes to bed early--only the drugstores and the
moving-picture theatres are still flaringly awake. His eyes read the sign
that he passes mechanically, "Dr. Edwin K. Buffinton--Chiropractor,"
"McMurphy and Kane's," "The Rossiter," with its pillars that look as if
they had been molded out of marbled soap.

Thought. Memory. Pain. Pain pressing down on his eyeballs like an iron
thumb, twisting wires around his forehead tighter and tighter till it's
funny the people he passes don't see the patterns they make on his skin.

Somebody talking in his mind, quite steadily and flatly, repeating and
repeating itself like a piece of cheap music played over and over again on
a scratched phonograph record, talking in the voice that is a composite of
a dozen voices; a fat man comfortable on a club lounge laying down the law
as if he were carefully smearing the shine out of something brilliant with
a flaccid heavy finger; a thin sour woman telling children playing together
"don't, don't, don't," in the whine of a nasty nurse.

"All for the best, you know--all for the best, we're all of us sure of
that. Love doesn't last--doesn't last--doesn't last--as good fish in
the sea as ever were caught out of it--nobody's heart could break at
twenty-five. You think you're happy and proud--you think you're lovers and
friends--but that doesn't last, doesn't last, doesn't last--none of it
lasts at all."

If he only weren't so _tired_ he could do something. But instead he feels
only as a man feels who has been drinking all day in the instant before
complete intoxication--his body is as distinct from him as if it
were walking behind him with his shadow--all the colors he sees seem
exaggeratedly dull or brilliant, he has little sense of distance, the next
street corner may be a block or a mile away, it is all the same, his feet
will take him there, his feet that keep going mechanically, one after the
other, one after the other, as if they marched to a clock. There is
no feeling in him that stays long enough to be called by any definite
word--there is only a streaming parade of sensations like blind men running
through mist, shapes that come out of fog and sink back to it, without
sight, without number, without name, with only continual hurry of feet to
tell of their presence.

A slinky man comes up at his elbow and starts to talk out of the side of
his mouth.

"Say, mister--"

"Oh, _go_ to hell!" and the man fades away again, without even looking
startled, to mutter "Well, you needn' be so damn peeved about it--I'll
say you needn' be so damn peeved--whatcha think you are, anyhow--Marathon
Mike?" as Oliver's feet take Oliver swiftly away from him.

Nancy. The first time he ever kissed her when it was question and answer
with neither of them sure. And then getting surer and surer--and then when
they kissed. Never touching Nancy, never. Never seeing her again never any
more. That song the Glee Club used to harmonize over--what was it?

  We won't go there any more,
  We won't go there any more
  We won't go there any mo-o-ore----

He lifts his eyes for a moment. A large blue policeman is looking at him
fixedly from the other side of the street, his nightstick twirling in a
very prepared sort of way. For an instant Oliver sees himself going over
and asking that policeman for his helmet to play with. That would be the
cream of the jest--the very cream--to end the evening in combat with a
large blue policeman after having all you wanted in life break under you
suddenly like new ice.

He had been walking for a very long time. He ought to go to bed. He had a
hotel somewhere if he could only think where. The policeman might know.

The policeman saw a young man with staring eyes coming toward him,
remarked "hophead" internally and played with his nightstick a little
more. The nearer Oliver came the larger and more unsympathetic the
policeman seemed to him. Still, if you couldn't remember what your hotel
was yourself it was only sensible to ask guidance on the question. His
mind reacted suddenly toward grotesqueness. One had to be very polite to
large policemen. The politeness should, naturally, increase as the square
of the policeman.

"I wonder if you could tell me where my hotel is, officer?" Oliver began.
"What hotel?" said the policeman uninterestedly. Oliver noticed with an
inane distinctness that he had started to swirl his nightstick as a large
blue cat might switch its tail. He wondered if it would be tactful to ask
him if he had ever been a drum major. Then he realized that the policeman
had asked him a question--courtesy demanded a prompt response.

"What?" said Oliver.

"I said 'What hotel?'" The policeman was beginning to be annoyed.

Oliver started to think of his hotel. It was imbecile not to remember the
name of your own hotel--even when your own particular material and
immaterial cosmos had been telescoped like a toy train in the last three
hours. The Rossiter was all that he could think of.

"The Rossiter," he said firmly.

"No hotel Rossiter in _this_ town." The policeman's nightstick was getting
more and more irritated. "Rossiter's a lotta flats. You live there?"

"No. I live in a hotel."

"Well, what hotel?"

"Oh, I tell you I don't remember," said Oliver vaguely. "A big one with a
lot of electric lights."

The policeman's face became suddenly very red.

"Well, you move on, buddy!" he said in a tone of hoarse displeasure. "You
move right on! You don't come around me with any of your funny cracks--I
know whatsa matter with you, all right, all right. I know whatsa matter
with you."

"So do I." Oliver was smiling a little now, the whole scene was so
arabesque. "I want to go to my hotel."

"You move on. You move on _quick_!" said the policeman vastly. "It's a
long walk down to the hoosegow and _I_ don't want to take you there."

"I don't want to go there," said Oliver. "But my hotel--"

"_Quit arguin'"_! said the policeman in a bark like a teased bulldog.

Oliver turned and walked two steps away. Then he turned again. After all
why not? The important part of his life was over anyhow--and before the
rest of it finished he might be able to tell one large policeman just what
he thought of him.

"Why, you big blue boob," he began abruptly with a sense of pleasant
refreshment better than drink, "You great heaving purple ice wagon--" and
then he was stopped abruptly for the policeman was taking the necessary
breath away.




XVII

About which time Nancy had finished crying--raging at herself all the
time, she hated to cry so--and was sitting up straight on the couch
looking at the door which Oliver had shut as if by looking it very hard
indeed she could make it turn into Oliver.

It _couldn't_ end this way. If it did it just meant that all the last year
wasn't real--hadn't any more part in reality than charity theatricals. And
they'd both of them been so sure that it was the chief reality that they
had ever known.

He wasn't _reasonable_. She hadn't wanted the darned old job, she'd wanted
to marry him, but as long as they hadn't seemed to get very far in the
last eight months when he'd been trying to work it--why couldn't _she_
try----

Then 'Oh Nancy, be honest!' to herself. No, that wasn't true. She'd wanted
the job, wanted to get it, hadn't thought about Oliver particularly when
she'd tried for it except to be a little impatient with him for not using
more judgment when he picked out his job. Did that mean that she didn't
love him? Oh Lord, it was all so mixed up.

Starting out so clearly at first and everything being so perfect--and then
the last four months and both getting tireder and tireder and all the
useless little misunderstandings that made you wonder how could you if you
really cared. And now this.

For an instant of mere relief from strain Nancy saw herself in Paris,
studying as she had always wanted to study, doing some real work, all
Paris hers to play with like a big gray stone toy, never having to worry
about loving, about being loved, about people you loved. Being free. Like
taking off your hot, hot clothes and lying in water when you were too hot
and tired even to think of sleeping. Oliver too--she'd leave him free--
he'd really work better without her--without having her to take care of
and make money for and worry about always----

The mind turned the other way. But what would doing anything be like with
Oliver out of it when doing things together had been all that mattered all
the last year?

They couldn't decide things like this on a prickly hot August night when
both of them were nearly dead with fatigue. It wasn't _real_. Even after
Oliver had shut the door she'd been sure he'd come back, though she hoped
he wouldn't just while she was crying; she never had been, she thought
viciously, one of those happy people who look like rain-goddesses when
they cry.

He must come back. She shut her eyes and told him to as hard as she could.
But he didn't.

All very well to be proud and dignified when both of you lived near each
other. But Oliver was going back to New York tomorrow--and if he went back
while they were still like this--She knew his train--the ten seven.

She tried being proud in a dozen different expressive attitudes for ten
minutes or so: Then she suddenly relaxed and went over to the telephone,
smiling rather ashamedly at herself.

"Hotel Rosario?"

"Yes."

"Can I speak to Mr. Oliver Crowe? He is staying there isn't he?"

A pause full of little jingling sounds.

"Yes, he's staying here but he hasn't come in yet this evening. Do you
wish to leave a message?"

Nancy hesitates.

"N-no." That would be just a little too humble.

"Or the name of the party calling?" He will know, of course. Still, had
she better say? Then she remembers the need of punishing him just a
little. After all--it is hardly fair she should go all the way toward
making up when he hasn't even started.

"No--no name. But tell him somebody called, please."

"Very well."

And Nancy goes back to wonder if the reason Oliver hasn't gone back to the
hotel is that he is returning here in an appropriate suit of sackcloth.
She hopes he _will_ come before mother and father get back.

But even while she is hoping it, the large blue policeman is saying
something about "'Sturbance of the peace" to the desk-sergeant, and Oliver
is going down on the blotter as Donald Richardson.




XVIII

"You simply must not worry yourself about it so, Nancy, my darling," says
Mrs. Ellicott brightly. "Lovers' quarrels are only lovers' quarrels you
know and they seem very small indeed to people a little older and more
experienced though I daresay they may loom terribly large just at present.
Why your father and myself used to have--ahem--our little times over
_trifles_, darling, mere _trifles _" and Mrs. Ellicott takes a pinch of
air between finger and thumb as if to display it as a specimen of those
mere trifles over which Mr. and Mrs. Ellicott used to become proudly
enraged at each other in the days before she had faded him so completely.

Nancy, after a night of intensive sleeplessness broken only by dreams of
seeing Oliver being married to somebody else in the lobby of the Hotel
Rosario can only wonder rather dully when it could ever have been that
poor father was allowed enough initiative of his own to take even the
passive part in a quarrel over a trifle and why mother thinks the prospect
implied in her speech of her daughter's marriage being like unto hers can
be so comforting. Nancy made one New Year's resolution the second day
of her engagement, "If I ever find myself starting to act to Ollie the way
mother does to father I'll simply have to leave him and never see him
again." But Mrs. Ellicott goes on.

"If Oliver is at all the sort of young man we must hope he is, he will
certainly come and apologize at once. And if he should not--well Nancy, my
little girl," she adds hieroglyphically "there are many trials that seem
hard to bear at first which prove true blessings later when we see of what
false materials they were first composed."

Mr. Ellicott thinks it is time for him to go to the office. It is five
minutes ahead of his usual time but Mrs. Ellicott has been looking at him
all the way through her last speech until he feels uneasily that he must
be composed of very false material indeed. He stops first though to give
an ineffective pat to Nancy's shoulder.

"Cheer up, Chick," he says kindly. "Always sun somewhere you know, so
don't treat the poor boy too hard," and he shuffles rapidly away before
his wife can look all the way through him for the vague heresy implicit in
his sentence.

"It is all very well for your father to say such things, but, Nancy,
darling, you shall not be put upon by Tramplers" proceeds Mrs. Ellicott in
her most cryptically perfect tones. "Oliver is a man--he must apologize.
A man, I say, though little more than a boy. And otherwise you would now
be pursuing your Art in Paris due to dear kind Mrs. Winters who has always
stood our truest friend and now this other opportunity has come also but I
would never be the first to say that even such should not be sacrificed
most gladly for the love of a true kind husband and dear little children
though marriage is but a lottery at best and especially when affections
are fixed upon their object in early youth."

All this without a pause, pouring over the numbed parts of Nancy's mind
like thin sweetish oil. Nancy considers wearily. Yes, Oliver should
apologize. Yes, it is only being properly dignified not to call up the
Rosario again to find if he is there. Yes, if he truly loves her, he will
call--he will come--and the clock hands are marching on toward ten-seven
and his train like stiff little soldiers and mother is talking, talking--

"Not that I wish or have wished to influence your mind in any way, my
darling, but environment and propinquity count for mountains in such first
youthful attachments and sometimes when we are older to be looked back
upon with such regret. Nor would I ever have Words Spoken that should seem
to injure the choice of my daughter's heart--but when young men cannot
provide even Hovels for their _fiancees_ a reasonable time having been
given, it is only just that they should release them and you looking like
death all these last two months. Never wishing that my own daughter should
act in Ways dishonorable in the slightest but time is the Test in such
matters and if such tests are not to be survived it is best they should
end and no one can deny that the young man talks very queerly and was
often quite disrespectful to you though you may say that was joking but it
would not have been joking in my day and young men with queer nervous eyes
and hands I never have nor will quite trust--"

But it's Oliver that's doing this, Oliver who turned funny and white when
she cut her finger with the breadknife making sandwiches and wanted her to
put all sorts of things on it. Oliver who was always so sweet when she was
unreasonable and always the first to come looking unhappy after they'd
quarrelled even a little and say it was all his fault. Why the very last
letter she got from him was the one that said if she ever stopped loving
him he knew he'd die.

"And when things are ended it is better that such things should be though
doubtless not necessary to put an announcement in the paper yet since
God in his infinite wisdom arranges all things for the best. And with such
a splendid position opening before her it would be only dignified to bring
the young man to his senses for it would not be right to let unreasonable
young men stand in the way of advantages offered by Foreign Travel and
study and these things are soon forgotten, my dear, and if nervous young
men will not admit like gentlemen that they are in the wrong when only
engaged what kind of husbands will they make when married forever? And is
not a broken engagement better than lifelong unhappiness when there are so
many too many sinful people divorcing each other every day and all men who
write for their living use stimulants, my dear, such is literary history
and my dearest have your cry out on mother's shoulder."

The sweetish oil has risen about Nancy relentlessly--it is up to her
waist now and still it keeps talking and flowing and creeping higher. Very
soon when the fatter black soldier on the clock-face has only hitched
himself along a little, it will be over her head and the roving Nancy, the
sparkling Nancy, the Nancy that fell in love will be under it like a calm
body, never to rise or run or be kissed with light seeking kisses on the
soft of her throat again. There will only be a dignified Nancy, a sensible
Nancy, a Nancy going to Paris to study and be successful, a Nancy who,
sooner or later will marry "Some good, clean man."

A little tinkle of chimes from the clock. Six minutes more. The Nancy that
was stands on tiptoe, every eager and tameless bit of her hoping, hoping.
If mother weren't there that Nancy would have been at the telephone an
hour ago in spite of young people's pride and old people's self-respect
and all the thousand and one knife-faced fetishes that all the correct and
common-sensible people hug close and worship because they hurt.

She can see the train sliding out of the station. Ollie is in it and his
face is stiff with surprise and unforgiveness like the face of some
horrible stranger you went up to and spoke to by mistake, thinking he was
your friend. By the time the train is well started he will have begun
talking to that fluffy girl in the other half of the Pullman--no, that
isn't worthy, he wouldn't--but oh Ollie, Ollie!

Half an hour later the telephone rings. Nancy is finishing the breakfast
dishes--her hands jump as she hears it--a slippery plate slops back into
the water and as she dives after it she realizes painfully that the new
water is much too hot.

"What _is_ it, mother?" For an instant the Nancy who has no real self-
respect is talking again.

"Just a minute, Isabella. Mrs. Winters, dear. Don't you want to speak to
her?"

"Oh."

Then----

"Not right now. When I'm through with these. But will you ask her if she's
going to be in this afternoon--I want to tell her about my taking the New
York job."

Satisfied oil pouring back into the telephone with a pleased, thin
chuckle.

"Yes, Nancy has decided. Well, dear, I think she had better tell you
herself--"

Nancy is looking dolefully down at her thumb. Foolish not to have cooled
off that water a little--she has really burned herself. For an instant she
hears Oliver's voice in her ears, low and concerned, sees Oliver kissing
it, making it well. But these things don't happen to sensible, self-
respecting modern girls with experienced mothers, especially when all the
former have now quite made up their own minds.




XIX

It was with some nightmare surprise that Oliver on waking regarded his
tidy cell. Then he remembered and in spite of the fact that yesterday
evening with all that belonged to it kept hurting wherever it was that
most of him lived with the stiff repeating ache of a nerve struck again
and again by the same soft hammer, he couldn't help laughing a little. The
popular college remedy for disprized love had always been an instantaneous
mingling of conflicting alcohols--calling a large policeman a big blue
boob seemed to produce the same desired result of bringing one to one's
senses by first taking one completely out of them without the revolving
stomach and fuzzed mind of the first instance. He tried to think of
yesterday evening airily. Silly children quarreling about things that
didn't matter at all. Of course Nancy should have the job if she wanted--
of course he'd apologize, apologize like Ecclesiastes even for being alive
at all if it was necessary--and then everything would be _all_ right, just
all right and fixed. But the airy attitude somehow failed to comfort--it
was a little too much like trying to shuffle a soft-shoe clog on a new
grave. Nancy _had_ been unreasonable. Nancy _had_ said or hadn't denied
that she wasn't sure she loved him any more. He _had_ released her from
the engagement and told her good-by. He stared at the facts--they sprang
up in front of him like choking thorns--thorns he had to clear away with
his hands before he could even touch Nancy again. Was he sure--even now?
All the airiness dropped from him like a clown's false face. As he thought
of what would happen if Nancy had really meant it about not loving him, it
seemed to him that somebody had taken away the pit of his stomach and left
nothing in its place but air.

Anyhow the first thing to do was to get out of this place--he examined the
neat bars in the door approvingly and wondered how the devil you acted
when you wanted to be let out. There wasn't any way of opening a
conversation about it with no one to talk to--and the corridor was merely
a length of empty steel--and, damn it, his train left at Ten Seven and he
had to see Nancy and explain everything in the world before it left--and
if he didn't get back to New York in time he might lose his job. There
must be some way of explaining to the people in charge that he hadn't
done anything but kid a policeman--that he must get out.

He went over to the door and tried it tentatively--no inside doorknob, of
course, this wasn't a hotel. He looked through the bars--nothing but
corridor and the cell on the other side. Should he call? For an instant
the fantastic idea of crying "Waiter!" or "Please send up my breakfast!"
tugged at him hard, but fantasy had got him into much too much trouble as
it was, he reflected savagely. It made you feel ridiculously self-
conscious, standing behind bars like this and shouting into emptiness.
Still he had to get out. He cleared his throat.

"Hey," he remarked in a pleasant conversational tone. "Hey!"

No answer, he grew bolder.

_"Hey!"_ This time the conversational tone was italicized. A rustle of
voices somewhere rewarded him--that must be people talking. Well, if they
talked, they could listen.

"HEY!" and now his voice was emphatic enough for headline capitals.

The rustle of voices ceased. There was a moment of stupefied silence.
Then,

"SHUT UP!" came from the end of the corridor in a roar that made Oliver
feel as if he had been cooing. The roar irritated him--they might be a
little more mannerly. He clutched the bars and discovered to his pleased
surprise that they would rattle. He shook them as hard as he could like a
monkey asking for peanuts.

"Hey there! I want to get out!" and though he tried to make his voice as
impressive as possible it seemed to him to pipe like a canary's in that
long steel emptiness.

"I've got to catch a train!" he added desperately and then had to stuff
his coat sleeve into his mouth to keep from spoiling his dramatics with
most unseasonable mirth.

There were noises from the end of the corridor--the noises of strong men
at bitter war with something stronger than they, strange rumblings and
snortings and muffled whoops. Then the voice came again and this time its
words were slow and deliberately spaced so as to give it time to master
whatever rocked it between whiles.

"Say--you--_humorist_" said the voice and here it rose sharply into an
undignified squawk of laughter, "You--innercent--child--comedian--you--
Charlie--Chaplin--of the--hoosegow--you _shut_ up--or I'll come down
there and--bend--something--over--your merry little face--_understand?_"
"Yes sir," said Oliver subduedly.

"Ah right. Now go bye-bye--mama'll call you when she's ready to take you
walking" then explosively "I got to catch a train! Oh Holy Mike!"

Oliver left the window and went back toward his bunk, considerably
chastened. As he did so a bundle of second-hand clothes on the floor
rolled over and disclosed a red and unshaven face.

"Wup!" said Oliver--he had almost stepped on it.

"Wha'?" said the bundle, opening sick eyes.

"Oh nothing. I only said good morning."

"Wha'?"

"Good morning."

"Wha'?"

"Good morning."

After incredible difficulties, the bundle attained a sitting position.

"You kid'n me?" it demanded thickly, looking at Oliver with as much
surprise as if he had just grown up out of the floor like a plant.

"Oh no. No."

"You're _nah_ kid'n me?"

"No."

"Ah ri'. 'S countersign. Pass. Fren'."

It attempted a military gesture but succeeded merely in hitting its mouth
with its hand. It then looked at the hand as if the latter had done it on
purpose and became sunk in profound cogitation.

"Not feeling very well today?" Oliver ventured.

It looked at him.

"_Well?_" it said briefly. Then, after a silence devoted to trying to find
where its hands were.

"Hoosh."

"What?" said Oliver.

"_Hoosh_. Goo' hoosh. Gran' hoosh. Oh, _hoosh!_" and as if the mention of
the word had stricken it back into clothes again it slid slowly down on
its back, closed its eyes and began to snore.

Oliver, perched on his bunk for what comfort there was, sat and
considered. He looked at the bundle--the bars--the bars--the bundle. The
bundle wheezed apoplectically--no sound of footsteps came from beyond the
bars. Oliver wondered if Nancy loved him. He wondered if he would ever
catch that Ten Seven. But most of all he wondered why on earth he had
happened to get in here and how on earth he was ever going to get out.




XX

The sky had been a blue steam all day, but at night it quieted, there were
faint airs. From the window of the apartment on Riverside Drive you could
see it grow gentle, fade from a strong heat of azure through gray gauze
into darkness, thick-soft as a sable's fur at first, then uneasily
patterned all at once with idle leopard-spottings and strokes of light.
The lights fell into the river and dissolved, the dark wash took them and
carried them into streaks of lesser, more fluid light. Even so, if there
could have been country silence for five minutes at a time, the running
river, the hills so disturbed with light beyond, might have worn some
aspect of peace. But even in the high bird's nest of the apartment there
was no real silence, only a pretending at silence, like the forced quiet
of a child told to keep still in a corner--the two people dining together
could talk in whispers, if they wanted, and still be heard, but always at
the back of the brain of either ran a thin pulsation of mumbling sound
like the buzz of a kettle-drum softly struck in a passage of music where
the orchestra talks full-voiced--the night sound of the city, breathing
and moving and saying words.

They must have been married rather contentedly for quite a while now, they
said so little of importance at dinner and yet seemed so quietly pleased
at having dinner together and so neat at understanding half sentences
without asking explanations. That would have been the first conclusion of
anybody who had been able to take out a wall and watch their doll-house
unobserved. Besides, though the short, decided man with the greyish hair
must be fifty at least, the woman who stood his own height when she rose
from the table was too slimly mature for anything but the thirties. Not a
highly original New York couple by any means--a prospering banker or
president of a Consolidated Toothpick Company with a beautiful wife,
American matron-without-children model, except for her chin which was less
dimpled than cleft with decisiveness and the wholly original lustre of her
hair, a buried lustre like the shine of "Murray's red gold" in a Border
ballad. A wife rather less society-stricken than the run of such wives
since she obviously preferred hot August in a New York apartment with her
husband's company to beach-picnics at Greenwich or Southampton without it.
Still the apartment, though compact as an army mess-kit, was perfectly
furnished and the maid who had served the cool little dinner an efficient
effacedness of the race that housekeepers with large families and little
money assert passed with the Spanish War. Money enough, and the knowledge
of how to use it without blatancy or pinching--that would have been the
second conclusion.

They were sitting in deep chairs in the living room now, a tall-stemmed
reading lamp glowing softly between them, hardly speaking. The tiredness
that had been in the man's face like the writing in a 'crossed' letter
began to leave it softly. He reached over, took the woman's hand and held
it--not closely or with greediness but with a firm clasp that had
something weary like appeal in it and something strong like a knowledge of
rest.

"Always like this, at home," he said slowly.

"It _is_ rather sweet." Her voice had the gentleness of water running into
water. Her eyes looked at him once and left him deliberately but not as if
they didn't care. It must have been a love-match in the beginning then--
her eyes seemed so infirm.

"You'll read a little?"

"Yes."

"Home," he said. He seemed queerly satisfied to say the word, queerly
moved as if even after so much reality had been lived through together, he
couldn't quite believe that it was reality.

"And I've been waiting for it--five days, six days, this time?"

She must have been at the seashore after all--tan or lack of it meant
little these days, especially to a woman who lived in this kind of an
apartment. The third conclusion might have been rather sentimental, a
title out of a moving picture--something about Even in the Wastes of the
Giant City the Weary Heart Will Always Turn To--Just Home.

A doll on a small table began to buzz mysteriously in its internals. The
man released the woman's hand--both looking deeply annoyed.

"I thought we had a private number here," said the man, the tiredness
coming back into his face like scribbles on parchment.

She crossed to the telephone with a charming furtiveness--you could see
she was playing they had just been found behind the piano together in a
game of hide-and-seek. The doll was disembowelled of its telephone.

"No--No--Oh very well--"

"What was it?"

She smiled.

"Is this the Eclair Picture Palace?" she mimicked. [Illustration: THE
TIREDNESS THAT HAD BEEN IN THE MAN'S FACE BEGAN TO LEAVE IT] Both seemed
almost childishly relieved. So in spite of his successful-business-man
mouth, he wasn't the kind that is less a husband than a telephone-
receiver, especially at home. Still, she would have made a difference even
to telephone-receivers, that could be felt even without the usual
complement of senses.

"That was--bothersome for a minute." His tone lent the words a quaint
accent of scare.

"Oh, well--if you have one at all--the way the service is now--"

"There won't be any telephone when we take our vacation together, that's
_settled_."

She had been kneeling, examining a bookcase for books. Now she turned with
one in her hand, her hair ruddy and smooth as ruddy amber in the reflected
light.

"No, but _telegrams_. And wireless," she whispered mockingly, the more
mockingly because it so obviously made him worried as a worried boy. She
came over and stood smoothing his ear a moment, a half-unconscious
customary gesture, no doubt, for he relaxed under it and the look of rest
came back. Then she went to her chair, sat down and opened the book.

"No use borrowing trouble now, dear. Now listen. Cigar?" "Going."

"Ashtray?"

"Yes."

"And remember not to knock it over when you get excited. Promise?"

"Um."

"Very well."

Mrs. Severance's even voice began to flow into the stillness.

"As I was getting too big for Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt--"




XXI

"And that's the end of the chapter." Mrs. Severance's voice trailed off
into silence. She closed the book with a soft sound. The man whom it might
be rather more convenient than otherwise to call Mr. Severance opened his
eyes. He had not been asleep, but he had found by a good deal of
experience that he paid more attention to Dickens if he closed his eyes
while she read.

"Thank you dear."

"Thank you. You know I love it. Especially Pip."

He considered.

"There was a word one of my young men used the other day about Dickens.
Gusto, I think--yes, that was it. Well, I find that, as I grow older, that
seems to be the thing I value rather more than most men of my age. Gusto."
He smiled "Though I take it more quietly, perhaps,--than I did when I was
young," he added.

"You _are_ young" said Mrs. Severance carefully.

"Not really, dear. I can give half-a-dozen youngsters I know four strokes
in nine holes and beat them. I can handle the bank in half the time and
with half the worry that some of my people take to one department. And for
a little while more, Rose, I may be able to satisfy you. But" and he
passed a hand lightly over his hair. "It's grey, you know," he ended.

"As if it mattered," said Mrs. Severance, a little pettishly.

"It does matter, Rose." His eyes darkened with memory--with the sort of
memory that hurts more to forget than even to remember. "Do you realize
that I am sixteen years older than you are?" he said a little hurriedly as
if he were trying to scribble the memory over with any kind of words.

"But my dear" and she smiled, "you were sixteen years older six years ago
--remember? There's less real difference between us now than there was
then."

"Yes, I certainly wasn't as young in some ways--six years ago." He seemed
to speak almost as if unconsciously, almost as if the words were being
squeezed out of him in sleep by a thing that had pressed for a long time
with a steady weight on his mind till the mind must release itself or be
broken. "But then nobody could be with you, for a month even, and not feel
himself turn younger whether he wanted to or not." "So that's settled."
She was trying to carry it lightly, to take the darkness out of his eyes.
"And once you've bought our steamer tickets we can leave it all behind at
the wharf and by the time we land we'll be so disgracefully young that no
one will recognize us--just think--we can keep going back and back till
I'm putting my hair up for the first time and you're in little short
trousers--and then babies, I suppose and the other side of getting born--"
but her voice, for once, turned ineffectually against his centeredness of
gaze, that seemed now as if it had turned back on itself for a struggling
moment and regarded neither what was nor what might be, but only what was
past.

"Six years ago" he said with the same drowsy thoughtfulness. "Well, Rose,
I shall always be--most grateful--for those six years."

She started to speak but he checked her.

"I think I would be willing to make a substantial endowment to any
Protestant Church that still really believed in hell," he said, "because
that was very like hell--six years ago."

Intensity began to come into his voice like a color of darkness, though he
still spoke slowly.

"You can stand nearly everything in life but being tired of yourself. And
six years ago I was tired--tired to death."

Her hand reached over and touched him medicinally.

"I suppose I had no right" he began again and then stopped. "No, I think
the strong man tires less easily but more wholly than the weak one when he
does tire. And I was strong enough.

"I'd played a big game, you know. When my father died we hadn't much left
but position--and that was going. I don't blame my father--he wasn't a
business man--he should have been a literary critic--that little book of
essays of his still sells, you know; not much but there's a demand for a
dozen copies every year and that's a good deal for an American who's been
dead for thirty. Well, that's where the children get their liking for
things like that--I've got it too, a little--I could have done something
there if I'd had time. But I never had time.

"I could have done it when I got out of Harvard--drifted along like half a
dozen people I know, played at law, played at writing, played always and
forever at being a gentleman--ended up as an officer of the Century Club
with what little money I had in an annuity. But I couldn't stand the idea
of just scraping along. And for nearly ten years I put those things aside.

"You know about my going West and the way I lived there. It wasn't easy
when I'd been at Harvard and gone everywhere in New York and Boston--
starting in so far below the bottom that you couldn't even see the bottom
unless you squinted your eyes. But I never took a job with more money if I
thought I could learn anything in a job with less--and every place I went
I stayed until I could handle the job of the man two places ahead of me--
and if I didn't get his job when I asked for it I went somewhere else. I
don't think I read a book except a technical one for the first five years.
And after that, when the chain-stores started going they asked me back to
New York--a big offer too--but it wasn't the kind I wanted and I threw it
down. I knew just how I wanted to come back to New York and that's the way
I came.

"I don't suppose my morals were too edifying those years. But they were as
good as the men I went with and I kept myself in hand. I saw men go to
pieces with drink--and I didn't drink. I saw men go to pieces over women--
and I kept away from that kind of woman. A man has to have women in his
life no matter how much you talk about it--but I took the kind with the
price-tag because when you paid them you were through. I could have
married a dozen times if I'd wanted but I didn't want--that old hocus-
pocus of tradition was still with me, stronger than death--I thought I
knew the kind of wife I wanted and she was in the East.

"Then the partnership with Jessup came and I took it. And after a year I
was made. I wasn't the last of one of the penniless old families that give
each other dinners once a month and pretend they're the real society
because they haven't money enough to trail in the present society game--
even by then I was--what did that last newspaper story say? 'a figure of
nation-wide importance.' Then it must be just about time, I thought, that
this figure of nation-wide importance began to look around a little and
married the wife he'd been waiting for and started to pick up all the
things he hadn't had for twelve years.

"Well--Mary. And I was so careful about Mary," his lips twisted, half
whimsically, half painfully. "I was so damn sure. I was so damn sure I
knew everything about women.

"She had the qualities I'd said to myself I wanted--beauty, position,
breeding, a good enough mind, some common sense. She hadn't money, but
there I thought I could help her--the way she ran things for her father on
what they had showed what she could do with more. We weren't in love with
each other--oh dear no--but that I considered on the whole an advantage--
she attracted me and it's fair enough to say that beside most of the men
she'd been seeing my combination of having been Old New York and being one
of the young big coming men from the West dazzled her rather. And anyhow I
didn't want--passion--exactly. I thought it would take too much time when
I was only in the middle of my game and getting as much real solid fun out
of it as a kid gets out of cooking his own dinner in camp. I wanted a
partner and a home and children and somebody to sit at the head of my
table when I wanted to be--public--and yet somebody you could be at home
with when you wanted to be at home. And I thought I had them all in Mary--
I thought I was being about the most sensible man in the world.

"Well, up till after both children were born I think I tried pretty hard.
I gave her all I could think of--materially at least. And then I found out
in spite of myself that you can't be married to a woman--even bearably--
and neither be lovers nor friends with her. And Mary and I never got
beyond the social acquaintance stage.

"It wasn't all Mary's fault either--I can see that now. A good deal was in
the way she'd been brought up--they weren't modern about the blisses of
ignorance in the nineties. But the rest of it was Mary and she couldn't
have changed it any more than she could have been rude to a servant or
raised her voice more than usual when she really wanted something done.

"She'd been brought up never to be demonstrative--that was one thing. But
that wasn't the main trouble--the main trouble was her most curious, most
frigid self-sufficiency. Until her children came she was the most wholly
self-sufficient person I've ever known. She was really only happy when she
was entirely alone, always. It wasn't egotism exactly--she's always had a
very-well-mannered conviction of her own relative unimportance--it was
just that in spite of the fact that she seemed so perfectly healthy and
calm and composed whenever she was with other people they'd be sure to
hurt her a little somehow or other without meaning to--the only person she
could genuinely depend on never to hurt her was herself.

"As for men, she'd formed one crystallized opinion of men in the first
weeks of our marriage and she's kept it ever since. She looks at them as
if they were a kind of tame wolf about the house--something you must never
show you're afraid of, something you must feed and look after and be
publicly amiable to because you must be just--but something you never
never would bring in the house of your own accord or touch without feeling
that you, that you had to preserve so jealously against all the things
that could possibly hurt it, start to shrink and be pained inside.

"Then the children came--she did and does love them. She lives for them.
But they're part of herself too, you see, an essential part, and as she
can't give herself to anybody but herself, she can't give them to me even
in the easiest kind of partnership, really. You don't leave small children
alone with even the tamest kind of wolf--and she's the kind of woman whose
children are always six to her. And she's their mother--and so she has her
way.

"That's the way it got worse. Right up to six years ago.

"I'd done my job--I was President of the Commercial. And I'd made my
money, and the money still kept coming in as if it didn't make any
difference what I did with it. I'd won my game. And what was there in it
for me?

"I didn't have a home--I had a place where I ate and slept. I didn't have
a wife--I had an acquaintance who kept house for me. I had children--at
school and college. I didn't have real hobbies--I hadn't had time for
them. And I was forty-nine. All I could do was go on making money till I
died.

"Well, you changed that," his voice shook a little.

"You came and I saw and knew and took you. And I'm not sorry. Because
you've made me alive again. And I'm going to be alive now till I die.

"Funny--I was never so anxious about anything happening as I have been
about--our approaching mutual disappearance. Especially the last six
months when I've been planning. But now that's settled.

"Mary will have more than enough and the children are grown. They won't
know--I still have brains enough to settle that and money will do nearly
everything. It'll be a nine days' wonder. 'Sudden Disappearance of
Prominent Financier--Foul Play Suspected' and that'll be all.

"As for the Commercial--I haven't come to my age without finding out that
nobody in the world is indispensable. If a taxi ran over me tomorrow
they'd have to do without me--and Harris and the young men can handle
things.

"But you know where there'll be an elderly gentleman retired from business
with a country house and a garden he can putter around in all his worst
clothes. And a wife that reads Dickens to him in the evening--oh yes,
Rose, we'll take Dickens along. And he'll be pretty contented as things
go--that retired old gentleman."

The darkness had passed from his eyes--he was smiling now.

"Be nice--eh Rose?"

He took her hand--the warm touch was still strong, still reassuring. Only
the eyes that he was not looking at now seemed singularly unsure, as if
they had seen something they had pondered over lightly, as a mere
possibility, years ago, take on sudden impatient body and demand to be
heard.

She let her hand lie lightly in his for a moment. Then she rose.

"Half past twelve" she said a little stiffly. "Time for two such genuine
antiques as we are to think of being put away in our cases for the night."




XXII

It was three in the afternoon before Oliver walked into the Hotel Rosario
again and when he did it was with the feeling that the house detective
might come up at any moment, touch him quietly on the shoulder and remark
that his bag _might_ be sent down to the station after him if he paid his
bill and left quietly and at once. An appearance before a hoarse judge who
fined him ten dollars in as many seconds had not helped his self-
confidence though he kept wondering if there was a sliding scale of
penalties for improper language applied to the police of St. Louis and
just what would have happened if he had called the large blue policeman
anything out of his A.E.F. vocabulary. Also the desk, when he called there
for his key, reminded him twingingly of the dock, and the clerk behind it
looked at him so knowingly as he made the request that Oliver began to
construct a hasty moral defence of his whole life from the time he had
stolen sugar at eight, when he was reassured by the clerk's merely saying
in a voice like a wink. "Telephone call for you last night, Mr. Crowe."

_Nancy!_

With a horrible effort to keep impassive, "Yes? Who was it?"

"Party didn't leave a name."

"Oh. When?"

"'Bout 'leven o'clock."

"And she didn't leave any message?" Then Oliver turned pink at having
betrayed himself so easily.

"No-o--_she_ didn't." The clerk's eyelid drooped a trifle. Those collegy
looking boys were certainly hell with women.

"Oh, well--" with a vast attempt to seem careless. "Thanks. Where's the
'phone?"

"Over there" and Oliver followed the direction of the jerked thumb to shut
himself up in a booth with his heart, apparently, bent upon doing queer
interpretative dances and his mind full of all the most apologetic words
in or out of the dictionary. "Hello. Hello. _Is this Nancy_?"

"This is Mrs. S. R. Ellicott." The voice seems extremely detached.

"Oh, good morning, Mrs. Ellicott. This is Oliver--Oliver Crowe, you know.
Is Nancy there?"

Nor does it appear inclined toward lengthy conversation--the voice at the
other end. "No."

"Well, when will she be in? I've got to take the five o'clock train Mrs.
Ellicott--I've simply got to--I may lose my job if I don't--but I've got
to talk to her first--I've got to explain--"

"There can be very little good, I think, in your talking to her Mr. Crowe.
She has told me that you both consider the engagement at an end."

"But that's impossible, Mrs. Ellicott--that's too absurd" Oliver felt too
much as if he were fighting for life against something invisible to be
careful about his words. "I know we quarrelled last night--but it was all
my fault, I didn't mean anything--I was going to call her up the first
thing this morning but you see, they wouldn't let me out--"

Then he stopped with a grim realization of just what it was that he had
said. There was a long fateful pause from the other end of the wire.

"I'm afraid I don't quite understand, Mr. Crowe."

"They wouldn't let me out. I was--er--detained--ah--kept in."

"Detained?" The inflection is politely inquisitive.

"Yes, detained. You see--I--you--oh dammit, I was in jail." This time the
pause that follows had to Oliver much of the quality of that little deadly
hush that will silence all earth and sky in the moment before Last
Judgment. Then--

"_In jail_," said the voice with an accent of utter finality.

"Yes--yes--oh it wasn't anything--I could explain in five seconds if I saw
her--it was all a misunderstanding--I called the policeman a boob but I
didn't mean it--I don't see yet why he took offence--it was just--"

He was stifling inside the airless booth--he trickled all over. This was
worse than being court-martialled. And still the voice did not speak.

"Can't you understand?" he yelled at last with more strength of lung than
politeness.

"I quite understand, Mr. Crowe. You were in jail. No doubt we shall read
all about it in tomorrow's papers."

"No you won't--I gave somebody else's name."

"Oh." Mrs. Ellicott was ticking off the data gathered so far on her
fingers. The brutal quarrel with Nancy. The rush to the nearest blind-
tiger. The debauch. The insult to Law. The drunken struggle. The prison.
The alias. And now the attempt to pretend that nothing had happened--when
the criminal in question was doubtless swigging from a pocket-flask at
this very moment for the courage to support his flagrant impudence in
trying to see Nancy again. All this passed through Mrs. Ellicott's mind
like a series of colored pictures in a Prohibition _brochure_.

"But I can explain that too. I can explain everything. Please, Mrs.
Ellicott--"

"Mr. Crowe, this conversation has become a very painful one. Would it not
be wiser to close it?"

Oliver felt as if Mrs. Ellicott had told him to open his bag and when he
did so had pointed sternly at a complete set of burglar's tools on top of
his dress-shirts.

"Can-I-see-Nancy?" he ended desperately, the words all run together:

But the voice that answered was very firm with rectitude.

"Nancy has not the slightest desire to see you, Mr. Crowe. Now or ever."
Mrs. Ellicott asked pardon inwardly for the lie with a false humility--if
Nancy will not save herself from this young man whom she has always
disliked and who has just admitted to being a jailbird in fact and a
drunkard by implication, she will.

"I should think you would find it easier hearing this from me than you
would from her. She has found it easier to say." "But, Mrs. Ellicott--"

"There are things that take a little too much explaining to explain, Mr.
Crowe." The meaning seemed vague but the tone was doomlike enough. "And in
any case" the voice ended with a note of flat triumph, "Nancy will not be
home until dinnertime so you could not possibly telephone her before the
departure of your train."

"Oh."

"Good-by, Mr. Crowe," and a click at the other end showed that Mrs.
Ellicott had hung up the receiver, leaving him to shriek "But listen--"
pitiably into the little black mouthpiece in front of him until Central
cut in on him angrily with "Say, whatcha tryin' to do, fella? Break my
ear?"




XXIII

After cindery hours in a day coach--the fine and the loss of his Pullman
reservation have left him with less than three dollars in cash--Oliver
crawls into Vanamee and Company's about four in the afternoon. Everybody
but Mrs. Wimple and Mr. Tickler is out of Copy for the moment and the
former greets him with coy wit.

"Been taking your vacation at Newport, Crowie? Or didja sneak the Frisco
account away from Brugger's Service when you were out West?"

"Oh, no, got jugged--that was all," says Oliver quite truthfully if
tiredly and Mrs. Wimple crows at the jest with high laughter. Oliver
marvels at the fact that everybody should seem to think it so humorous to
be jailed.

"Why, Crowie, you naughty little boy! Oh mischief, mischief!" and she
scrapes one index finger over the other at him in a try for errant
childishness. Then she and her perfume come closer and this time she looks
around before she speaks and there is some little real concern in her
voice.

"Listen, Crowie--you better watch your step, boy--I'm telling you
straight. Old Man Alley was real sore when you didn't blow in yesterday--
it was one of Vanamee's bad days when his eye gets twitchy and he was
rearing around cursing everybody out and giving an oration on office
discipline that'd a made a goat go laugh itself ill. And then Alley got
hold of Delier and they are both talking about you--I know because Delier
said 'Oh give him another chance' and Alley said 'What's the use, Deller--
he's been here eight months and he doesn't seem to really get the hang of
things,' in that snippy little way and then 'I can't stand breaches of
discipline like this.' You know how nervous it gets him if as much as a
fastener is out of place on his desk--and Winslow's got a kid cousin he
wants to put in here and if you don't act like mama's darling for a while--"

She is ready to go on indefinitely, but Oliver thanks her abstractedly--it
is decent of the old girl after all--grunts "Guess I better start in
looking busy now, Mrs. Wimple!" and sits down at his desk.

A note from Deller with five pencil sketches attached of the new trade
figures for Brittlekin--two bloated looking children with inkblot eyes
looking greedily at an enormous bar of peanut candy. "Dear Crowe: Will you
give me copy on these as soon as possible--something snappy this time.--E.
B. D." A memorandum, "Mr. Piper called you 4 P.M. Monday. Wishes you to
call him as soon as possible." The United Steel Frame Pulley layouts and
another note from Deller, "This is LATE. DO something." Back to pulleys
again and the crowded sweat-box of the copy room and twenty-five dollars a
week with the raise gone glimmering now--

And Nancy is lost.

Oliver sits looking at the layouts for United Steel Frame Pulleys for
half-an-hour without really doing anything but sharpen and resharpen a
pencil. Mrs. Wimple wonders if he's sick--he ain't white or anything but
he looks just like Poppa did the time he came back and told Momma, "Momma
the bank has bust and our funds has went." She watches him eagerly--gee,
it'd be exciting if he fainted or did anything queer! He said he'd been in
jail too--Mrs. Wimple shivers--but he's so comical you never can tell what
he really means--that way he looks may be just what she saw in a movie
once about "the pallid touch of the prison." If it's indigestion, though,
he ought to try Pepsolax--that certainly eases you up right--

Finally Oliver stacks all the layouts together in a careful pile and goes
in to see Mr. Alley. That precise and toothy little sub-deity does not
seem extremely enthusiastic over his return.

"Well, Mr. Crowe, so you got back? What detained you?"

"Police" says Oliver with a faint smile and Mr. Alley laughs dutifully
enough though rather in a "here, here, we must get down to business" way.
Then he fusses with his pencil a little.

"I'm glad you came in, Crowe. I wanted to see you about that matter. It is
not so much that we begrudge--but in a place like this where everyone must
work shoulder to shoulder--and purely as a point of office discipline--Mr.
Vanamee is rather rigid in regard to that and your work so far has really
hardly justified--"

"Oh that's all right, Mr. Alley" breaks in Oliver, though not rudely, he
is much too fagged to be rude, "I'm leaving at the end of the week if it's
convenient to you."

"Well, _really_, Mr. Crowe." But in spite of his diplomatic surprise he
hardly seems distressfully perturbed. "I hope it is not because you feel
we have treated you unfairly--" he begins again a little anxiously--under
all his feathers of fussiness he is essentially kindly.

"Oh no, I'm just leaving."

There are more diplomatic exchanges but when they have ended Oliver goes
back to Copy, remarks "Quitting Saturday, Mrs. Wimple," gets his hat and
goes off a quarter of an hour earlier than he ever has before, leaving the
rest of Copy to match pennies and opinions till closing time on the
question as to whether he fired himself or was fired.




XXIV

Jane Ellen swayed back and forth in the porch hammock, hugging herself
with fat arms. All her dolls lay spread out wretchedly on the floor
beneath her, she had stripped them of every rag and they had the dejected
appearance of victims ready for sacrifice to Baal. "The Choolies are mad!"
she sang to herself, "The Choolies are mad!"

It had been a perfectly sensible idea to try and water the flowers on the
parlor carpet with her doll's watering pot--those flowers hadn't had any
water for an awful long time. But Mother had punished her in the Third
Degree which was by hairbrush and Aunt Elsie had taken the watering-pot
away and Rosalind and Dickie had put on such offensively virtuous
expressions as soon as they heard her being punished that she was mad at
them all. And not ordinarily mad--not mad just by herself--the Choolies
were divinely incensed as well.

"The Choolies are mad!" she hummed again like a battle-cry "Choolies are
dolls and all the Choolies are mad!"

The Choolies were only mad on rare occasions. It took something genuinely
out of the ordinary to turn an inoffensive pink celluloid doll with one of
its legs off into an angry Choolie. But when they were mad the family had
discovered by painful experience that the only thing to do was to leave
Jane Ellen quite entirely alone.

"The Choolies are mad, mad, mad!" she chanted end chanted, her plump legs
swinging, her mouth set like a prophet's calling down lightnings on
Babylon the splendid.

Then she stopped swinging. Somebody was coming up the path--any of the
people she was mad at?--no--only Uncle Ollie. Were the Choolies mad at
Uncle Ollie? She considered a moment.

"Hello, Jane Ellen, how goes it?"

The small mouth was full of rebellion.

"Um mad!"

"Oh--sorry. What about?"

Defiantly

"Um _mad_. And the Choolies are mad--they're mad--they're mad--"

Oliver looked at her a moment but was much too wise to smile.

"They aren't mad at you, but they're mad at Motha and Aunt Elsie and Ro
and Dickie and oh--evvabody!" Jane Ellen stated graciously.

"Well, as long as they aren't mad at me--Any letters for me, Jane Ellen?"
"Yash."

Oliver found them on the desk, looked them over, once, twice. A letter
from Peter Piper. Two advertisements. A letter with a French stamp.
Nothing from Nancy.

He went out on the porch again to read his letters, to the accompaniment
of Jane Ellen's untirable chant. "The Choolies are mad" buzzed in his
ears, "The Choolies, the Choolies are mad." For a moment he saw the
Choolies; they were all women like Mrs. Ellicott but they stood up in
front of him taller than the sky and one of them had hidden Nancy away in
her black silk pocket--put her somewhere, where he never would see her
again.

"Ollie, you look at me sternaly--_don't_ look at me so sternaly, Ollie--
the Choolies aren't mad at you--" said Jane Ellen anxiously. "Fy do you
look at me so sternaly?"

He grinned his best at her. "Sorry, Jane Ellen. But my girl's chucked me
and I've chucked my job--and consequently all _my_ choolies are mad--"




XXV

That night was distinguished by four uneasy meals in different localities.
The first was Oliver's and he ate it as if he were consuming sawdust while
the Crowes talked all around him in the suppressed voices of people
watching a military funeral pass to its muffled drums. Mrs. Crowe was too
wise to try and comfort him in public except by silence and even Dickie
was still too surprised at Oliver's peevish "Oh _get_ out, kid" when he
tried to drag him into their usual evening boxing match to do anything but
confide despondently to his mother that he doesn't see why Oliver has to
act so _queer_ about any girl.

The second meal was infinitely gayer on the surface though a certain kind
of strainedness a little like the strainedness in the pauses of a
perfectly friendly football game when both sides are too evenly matched to
score ran through it. Still, whatever strainedness there was could hardly
have been Mrs. Severance's fault.

The impeccable Elizabeth showed no surprise at being told she could have
the day and needn't be back till breakfast tomorrow. She might have
thought that there seemed to be a good deal of rather perishable food in
the icebox to be wasted, if Mrs. Severance were going to have dinner out.
But Elizabeth had always been one of the rare people who took pride in
"knowing when they were suited" and the apartment on Riverside Drive had
suited her perfectly for four years. She was also a great deal too clever
to abstract any of those fragile viands to take to her widowed sister on
Long Island--Mrs. Severance is so good at finding uses for all sorts of
odd things--Elizabeth felt quite sure she would find some use or other for
these too.

Ted Billett certainly found a good deal of use for some of it, thought
Mrs. Severance whimsically. It had hardly been a Paolo and Francesca
_diner-a-deux_--both had been much too frankly hungry when they came to
it and Ted's most romantic remarks so far had been devoted to a vivid
appreciation of Mrs. Severance's housekeeping. But all men are very much
like hungry little boys every so often, Mrs. Severance reflected.

Ted really began to wonder around nine-thirty. At first there had been
only coming in and finding Rose just through setting the table and then
they had been too busy with dinner and their usual fence of talk to allow
for any unfortunate calculations as to how Mrs. Severance could do it on
her salary. But what a perfect little apartment--and even supposing all
the furniture and so forth were family inheritances, and they fitted each
other much too smoothly for that, the mere upkeep of the place must run a
good deal beyond any "Mode" salary. Mr. Severance? Ted wasn't sure. Oh,
well he was too comfortable at the moment to look gift horses of any
description too sternly in the mouth.

Rose _was_ beautiful--it was Ted and Rose by now. He would like to see
someone paint her sometime as Summer, drowsy and golden, passing through
fields of August, holding close to her rich warm body the tall sheaves of
her fruitful corn. And again the firelight crept close to him, and under
its touch all his senses stirred like leaves in light wind, glad to be
hurt with firelight and then left soothed and heavy and warm.

Only now he had a charm against what the firelight meant--what it had been
meaning more and more these last few weeks with Rose Severance. It was not
a very powerful-looking charm--a dozen lines of a letter from Elinor Piper
asking him to come to Southampton, but it began "Dear Ted" and ended
"Elinor" and he thought it would serve.

That ought to be enough--that small thing only magical from what you made
it mean against what it really was--that wish that nobody could even
nickname hope--to keep you cool against the waves of firelight that rose
over you like the scent of a harvest meadow. It was, almost.

Rose had been telling him how unhappy she was all evening. Not whiningly--
and not, as he remembered later, with any specific details--but in a way
that made him feel as if he, as part of the world that had hurt her, were
partly responsible. And to want exceedingly to help. And then the only way
he could think of helping was to put himself like kindling into the
firelight, and he mustn't do that. "Elinor" he said under his breath like
an exorcism, but Rose was very breathing and good to look at and in the
next chair.

His fingers took a long time getting his watch.

"I've _got_ to go Rose, really."

"Must you? What's the time--eleven?--why heavens, I've kept you here ages,
haven't I, and done nothing but moan about my troubles all the time."

"You know I liked it." Ted's voice was curiously boyishly honest in a way
he hated but a way that was one of Rose's reasons why he was here with
her.

"Well, come again," she said frankly. "It was fun. I loved it." "I will--
Lord knows I thank you enough--after 252A Madison Avenue it was simply
perfect. And Rose--"

"Well?"

"I'm awful damn sorry. I wish I could help."

He thought she was going to laugh. Instead she turned perfectly grave.

"I wish you could, Ted."

They shook hands--it seemed to Ted with a good deal of effort to do only
that. Then they stood looking at each other.

There was so little between them--only a charm that nobody could say was
even partly real--but somewhere in Ted's brain it said "Elinor" and he
managed to shake hands again and get out of the door.

Mrs. Severance waited several minutes, listening, a faint smile curling
her mouth with intentness and satisfaction. No, this time he wouldn't come
back--nor next time, maybe--but there would be other times---

Then she went into the pantry and started heating water for the dishes
that she had explained reassuringly to Ted they were leaving for
Elizabeth. There was no need at all of Elizabeth's knowing any more than
was absolutely necessary.




XXVI

Mr. Severance--the courtesy title at least is due him--seems to be a man
with quite a number of costly possessions. At least here he is with
another house, a dinner-table, servants, guests, another Mrs. Severance or
somebody who seems to fill her place very adequately at the opposite end
of the table, all as if Rose and the Riverside Drive apartment and reading
Dickens aloud were only parts of a doll-house kept in one locked drawer of
his desk.

The dinner is flawless, the guests importantly jeweled or stomached,
depending on their sex, the other Mrs. Severance an admirable hostess--and
yet in spite of it all, Mr. Severance does not seem to be enjoying himself
as he should. But this may be due to a sort of minstrel give-and-take of
dialogue that keeps going on between what he says for publication and what
he thinks.

"Well, Frazee, I'll be ready to go into that loan matter with you inside a
month," says his voice, and his mind "Frazee, you slippery old burglar, it
won't be a month before you'll be spreading the news that my disappearance
means suicide and that the Commercial is rotten, lock, stock and barrel."

"Yes, dear," in answer to a relayed query from the other Mrs. Severance.
"The children took the small car to go to the dance." "And, Mary, if
they'd ever been our children instead of your keeping them always yours,
there wouldn't be that little surprise in store for you that I've
arranged."

"Cigar, Winthrop?" "Better take two, my friend--they won't be as good
after Mary has charge of that end of the house."

So it goes--until Mr. Severance has dined very well indeed. And yet
Winthrop, chatting with Frazee, just before they go out of the door, finds
it necessary to whisper to him for some reason--half a dozen words under
cover of a discussion of what the Shipping Board's new move will mean to
the mercantile marine. "I told you so, George. See his hands? The old
boy's failing."




XXVII

The fourth meal is Nancy's and it doesn't seem very happy. When it is over
and Mr. Ellicott has rustled himself away from intrusion behind the
evening paper.

"Nobody--'phoned today--did they, mother?"

"No, dear." The voice is not as easy as it might be, but Nancy does not
notice.

"Oh."

Nor does Nancy notice how hurriedly her mother's next question comes.

"Did you see Mrs. Winters, darling?"

"Oh yes--I saw her."

"And you're going on to New York?"

"Yes--next week, I think."

"With her. And going to stay with her?"

"I suppose so."

Mrs. Ellicott sighs relievedly.

"That's so nice."

Nancy will be safe now--as safe as if she were under an anesthetic. Mrs.
Winters will take care of that. She must have a little talk with dear
Isabella Winters. But that night Nancy is alone in her room--doing up her
engagement ring and Oliver's letters in a wobbly package. She is not quite
just, though, she keeps one letter--the first.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Margaret Crowe, who, having just come to her seventeenth birthday in this
present day and generation, felt it her official family duty to season the
general conversation with an appropriate pepper of heartlessness, had
really put it very well. She had said that while she didn't suppose one
house party over Labor Day would more than partially rivet a broken heart,
it honestly was a relief for everybody else to get Oliver out of the house
for a while, and mother needn't look at her that way because she was as
sorry as any of the rest of them for poor old Oliver but when people went
about like walking cadavers and nearly bit you any time you mentioned
anything that had to do with marriage, it was time they went somewhere
else for a while and stayed there till they got over it.

And Mrs. Crowe, though dutifully rebuking her for her flippant treatment
of a brother's pain, agreed with the sense of her remarks, if not with the
wording. It had taken a good deal of quiet obstinacy on the part of the
whole family to get Oliver to accept Peter Piper's invitation--Mrs. Crowe,
who was understanding, knew at what cost--the cost of a man who has lost a
hand's first appearance in company with the stump unbandaged--but anything
would be better than the mopey Oliver of the last two weeks and a half,
and Mrs. Crowe had been taught by a good deal of living the aseptic powers
of having to go through the motions of ordinary life in front of a casual
audience, even when it seemed that those motions were no longer of any
account. So Oliver took clean flannels and a bitter mind to Southampton on
the last day of August, and, as soon as he got off the train, was swung
into a reel of consecutive amusements that, fortunately, allowed him
little time to think.

When he did, it was only to wonder rather frigidly if this fellow with
glasses who played tennis and danced and swam and watched and commented
athletically on the Davis Cup finals, sitting between Elinor Piper and
Juliet Bellamy whom he had taken to dances off and on ever since he had
had his first pair of pumps, could really be he. The two people didn't
feel in the least the same.

The two Mr. Crowes, he thought. "Mr. Oliver Crowe--meet Mr. Oliver Crowe."
"On our right, ladies and gentlemen, we have one of the country's greatest
curiosities--a young gentleman who insists upon going on existing when
there is nothing at all that makes his existence useful or interesting or
proud. A very realistic wax figure that will toddle, shoot a line and play
almost any sort of game until you might easily believe it to be genuinely
alive. Mr. Oliver Crowe."

The house-party was to last a week, except for Ted Billett who would have
to go back after Labor Day--and before eight hours of it were over, Oliver
was watching Ted with grandmotherly interest, a little mordant jealousy,
and humor, that, at times, verged toward the hysterical. Nancy--and
especially the loss of her--had made him sensitive as a skinless man to
the winds and vagaries of other young people in love--and while Ted could
look at and talk with Elinor Piper and think himself as safe as a turtle
under its shell from the observations and discoveries of the rest of the
party he could no more hide himself or his intentions from Oliver's
painful scrutiny than he could have hidden the fact that he had suddenly
turned bright green. So Oliver, a little with the sense of his own extreme
generosity, but sincerely enough in the main, began to play kind shepherd,
confidante, referee and second-between-the-rounds to Ted's as yet quite
unexpressed strivings--and since most of him was only too willing to busy
itself with anything but reminiscences of Nancy, be began to congratulate
himself shortly that under his entirely unacknowledged guidance things
really seemed to be getting along very well.

And here too his streak of ineradicable humor--that bright plaything made
out of knives that is so fine to juggle with light-handedly until the hand
meets it in its descent a fraction of a second too soon--came often and
singularly to his aid. He could see himself in a property white beard
stretching feeble hands in blessing over a kneeling and respectful Elinor
and Ted. "Bless you my dear, dear children--for though my own happiness
has gone with yester-year, at least I have made you--find each other--
and perhaps, when you sit at evening among the happy shouts of your
posterity--" but here Oliver broke off into a snort of laughter.

Of course Ted had confided nothing formally as yet--but then, thought
Oliver sourly out of his own experience, he wouldn't; that was the way you
always felt; and Ted had never been a person of easy confidences. The most
he had done had been to take Oliver grimly aside from the dance they had
gone to last night and explain in one ferocious and muffled sentence
delivered half at Oliver and half at a large tree that if Hinky Selvage
didn't stop dancing with Elinor that way he, Ted, would carry him
unobtrusively behind a bush and force him to swallow most of his own front
teeth. And again Oliver, looking back as a man might to the feverish
details of a major operation, realized with cynic mirth that that was a
very favorable symptom indeed. Oh everything was going along simply finely
for Ted, if the poor fool only knew it. But that he would no more believe
of course than you would a dentist who told you he wasn't going to hurt.
People in love _were_ poor fools--damn fools--unutterably lucky,
unutterably perfect--fools.

Ted and Oliver must have one talk though before it all happened beyond
redemption and Ted started wearing that beautiful anesthetized smile and
began to concoct small kindly fatal conspiracies with Elinor and Oliver
and some nice girl. They hadn't had a real chance to talk since Oliver
came back from St. Louis, and shortly--oh very shortly indeed by the way
things looked--the only thing they would be able to talk about would be
Elinor and how wonderful she and requited love and young happy marriage
were--and however glad Oliver might be for Ted and his luck--he really
wouldn't be able to stand that, under the present circumstances, for very
long at a time. Ted would be gone into fortune--into a fortune that Oliver
would have to be the last person on earth to grudge him--but that meant
the end of eight years of fighting mockery and friendship together as
surely as if those years were marbles and Elinor were dropping them down a
well. They could pick it up later--after Ted had been married a year say--
but it would have changed then, it wouldn't be the same.

Oliver smiled rather wryly. He wondered if that was at all like what Ted
might have thought when he and Nancy--But that wasn't comparable in the
least. But Nancy and he were different. _Nancy_--and with that, the pain
came so dazzlingly for a minute that Oliver had to shut his eyes to bear
it--and something that wasn't just stupidly rude had to be said to Juliet
Bellamy in answer to her loud clear question as to whether he was falling
asleep.

All up to and through Labor Day Oliver bluffed and manoeuvered like the
head of a small but vicious Balkan State in an International Congress for
Ted and Elinor, and towards tea-time, decided sardonically that it was
quite time his adopted infants took any further responsibilities off his
shoulders. There was no use delaying conclusions any longer--Oliver felt
as he looked at his victims like a workmanlike god who simply must finish
the rough draft of the particular world he is fussing with before sunset,
in spite of all rebellious or slipshod qualities in its clay. There would
be a dance that evening. There would be, Oliver thought with some
proprietary pride, a large sentimental moon. A few craftily casual words
with Elinor before dinner--a real talk with Ted in one of the
intermissions of the dance--a watchdog efficiency in guarding the two from
intrusion while they got the business over with neatly in any one of
several very suitable spots that Oliver had picked out already in his
mind's eye. And then, having thoroughly settled Ted for the rest of his
years in such a solid and satisfactory way--perhaps the queer gods that
had everyone in charge, in spite of their fatal leaning toward practical-
joking where the literary were concerned, might find enough applause in
their little tin hearts for Oliver's acquired and vicarious merit to give
him in some strange and painful way another chance to be alive again and
not merely the present wandering spectre-of-body that people who knew
nothing about it seemed to take so unreasonably for Oliver Crowe.

So he laid his snares, feeling quite like Nimrod the mighty, though
outwardly he was only kneeling on the Piper porch, waiting for the dice to
come around to him in a vociferous game of crap that Juliet had organized
--he seldom shot without winning now he noticed with superstitious awe. And
tea passed to a sound of muffled crumpets, and everyone went up to dress
for dinner.




XXIX

Mrs. Winters' little apartment on West 79th Street--she heads letters from
it playfully "The Hen Coop" for there is almost always some member of her
own sex doing time with the generous Mrs. Winters. Mrs. Winters is quite
celebrated in St. Louis for her personally-conducted tours of New York
with stout Middle-Western matrons or spectacled school girls east for
visits and clothes--Mrs. Winters has the perfectly-varnished manners, the
lust for retailing unimportant statistics and the supercilious fixed smile
of a professional guide. Mrs. Winters' little apartment, that all the
friends who come to her to be fed and bedded and patronized tell her is so
charmingly New Yorky because of her dear little kitchenette with the
asthmatic gas-plates, the imitation English plate-rail around the dining-
room wall, the bookcase with real books--a countable number of them--and
on top of it the genuine signed photograph of Caruso for which Mrs.
Winters paid the sum she always makes you guess about, at a charity-
bazaar.

Mrs. Winters herself--the Mrs. Winters who is _so_ interested in young
people as long as they will do exactly what she wants them to--every inch
of her from her waved white hair to the black jet spangles on her dinner
gown or the notes of her "cultivated" voice as frosted and glittery and
artificial as a piece of _glace_ fruit. And with her, Nancy, dressed for
dinner too, because Mrs. Winters feels it to be one's duty to oneself to
dress for dinner always, no matter how much one's guests may wish to
relax--Nancy as much out of place in the apartment whose very cushions
seem to smell of that modern old-maidishness that takes itself for
superior feminist virtue as a crocus would be in an exhibition of wool
flowers--a Nancy who doesn't talk much and has faint blue stains under her
eyes.

"So everything went very satisfactorily indeed today, dear Nancy?"

Mrs. Winters' voice implies the uselessness of the question. Nancy is
staying with Mrs. Winters--it would be very strange indeed if even the
least important accompaniments of such a visit were not of the most
satisfactory kind.

"Yes, Mrs. Winters. Nothing particularly happened, that is--but they like
my work."

"Yes, dear," Mrs. Winters croons at her, she is being motherly. The effect
produced is rather that of a sudden assumption of life and vicarious
motherhood on the part of a small, brightly-painted porcelain hen.

"Then they will be sending you over shortly, no doubt? Across the wide
wide sea--" adds Mrs. Winters archly, but Nancy is too tired-looking to
respond to the fancy.

"I suppose they will when they get ready," she answers briefly and returns
to her chicken-croquette with the thought that in its sleekness,
genteelness, crumblingness, and generally unnourishing qualities it is
really rather like Mrs. Winters. An immense desire, after two weeks of
Mrs. Winters' mental and physical cuisine for something as hearty and
gross as the mere sight of a double planked steak possesses her achingly--
but Mrs. Winters was told once that she "ate like a bird."

"Well, in that case, dear Nancy, you certainly must not leave New York
indefinitely without making the most of your opportunities," Mrs. Winters'
tones are full of genteel decision. "I have made out a little list, dear
Nancy, of some things which I thought, in my funny old way, might possibly
be worth your while. We will talk it over after dinner, if you like--"

"Thank you so much, dear Mrs. Winters" says Nancy with dutiful
hopelessness. She is only too well acquainted with Mrs. Winters' little
lists. "As an _artist_, as an _artist_, dear Nancy, especially." Mrs.
Winters breathes somewhat heavily, "Things That Should Interest you.
Nothing Bizarre, you understand, Nothing Merely Freakish--but some of the
Things in New York that I, Personally, have found Worth While."

The Things that Mrs. Winters Has Found Personally Worth While include a
great many public monuments. She will give Nancy a similar list of Things
Worth While in Paris, too, before Nancy sails--and Nancy smiles acceptably
as each one of them is mentioned.

Only Mrs. Winters cannot see what Nancy is thinking--for if she did she
might become startlingly human at once as even the most perfectly poised
of spinsters is apt to do when she finds a rat in the middle of her neat
white bed. For Nancy is thinking quite freely of various quaint and
everlasting places of torment that might very well be devised for Mrs.
Winters--and of the naked fact that once arrived in Paris it will matter
very little to anybody what becomes of her and least of all to herself--
and that Mrs. Winters doesn't know that she saw a chance mention of Mr.
Oliver Crowe, the author of "Dancer's Holiday" today in the "Bookman" and
that she cut it out because it had Oliver's name in it and that it is now
in the smallest pocket of her bag with his creased and recreased first
letter and the lucky piece she had from her nicest uncle and a little dim
photograph of Mr. Ellicott and half a dozen other small precious things.




CHAPTER XXX

The dance is at the Piper's this time--the last Piper dance of the
Southampton season and the biggest--other people may give dances after it
but everybody who knows will only think of them as relatively pleasant or
useless addenda. The last Piper Dance has been the official period to the
Southampton summer ever since Elinor's _debut_--and this time the period
is sure to be bigger and rounder than ever since it closes the most
successful season Southampton has ever had.

Nothing very original about its being a masquerade, from Mr. Piper a
courteously grey-haired mandarin in jade-green robes beside Mrs. Piper--
lovely Mary Embree that was--in the silks of a Chinese empress, heavy and
shining and crusted as the wings of a jeweler's butterfly, her reticent
eyes watching the bright broken patterns of the dancing as impassively as
if she were viewing men being tortured or invested with honor from the
Dragon Throne, to Oliver, a diffident Pierrot who has discovered no even
bearably comfortable way of combining spectacles and a mask, and Peter who
[Illustration: THE LAST PIPER DANCE HAS BEEN THE OFFICIAL PERIOD TO THE
SOUTHAMPTON SUMMER] is gradually turning purple under the furs of a
dancing bear. Nothing much out of the ordinary in the tunes and the three
orchestras and the fact that a dozen gentlemen dressed as the Devil are
finding their tails very inconvenient as regards the shimmy and a dozen
Joans of Arc are eying each other with looks of dumb hatred whenever they
pass. Nothing singular about the light-heart throb of the music, the smell
of powder and scent and heat and flowers, the whole loose drifting garland
of the dancers, blowing over and around the floor in the idle designs of
sand, floating like scraps of colored paper through a smooth wind heavy
with music as the hours run away like light water through the fingers. But
outside the house the Italian gardens are open, little lanterns spot them
like elf-lights, shining on hedge-green, pale marble; the night is pallid
with near and crowded stars, the air warm as Summer water, sweet as dear
youth.

The unmasking is to take place at midnight and it is past eleven when
Oliver drops back into the stag line after being stuck for a dance and a
half with a leaden-footed human flower-basket who devoted the entire time
to nervous giggles and the single coy statement that she just knew he
never could guess who she was but she recognized him perfectly. He starts
looking around for Ted. There he is, scanning the clown's parade with the
eyes of an anxious hawk, disgruntled nervousness plain in every line of
his body. Then Oliver remembers that he saw a slim Chinese girl in loose
blue silks go off the floor ten minutes or so ago with a tall musketeer.
He goes over and touches Ted on a particolored arm--the latter is dressed
as a red and gilt harlequin--and feels the muscles he touches twitch under
his hand.

"Cigarette? It's getting hotter than cotton in here--they'll have to open
more windows--"

"What?" Then recognizing voice and glasses "Oh yeah--guess so--awful mob,
isn't it?" and they thread their way out into the cool.

They wander down from the porch and into the gardens, past benches where
the talk that is going on seems to be chiefly in throaty undertones and
halts nervously as their steps crunch past.

"The beautiful and damned!" says Oliver amusedly, then a little louder
_"Amusez vous bien, mes enfants_" at a small and carefully modulated
shriek that comes from the other side of the low hedge, "The night's still
young. But Good Lord, isn't there _any_ place in the whole works where two
respectable people can sit without feeling like chaperones?"

They find one finally--it is at the far end of the gardens--a seat the
only reason for whose obvious desertion seems to be, comments Oliver, that
some untactful person has strung a dim but still visible lantern directly
above it--and relapses upon it silently. It is not until the first
cigarettes of both are little red dying stars on the grass beside them
that either really starts to talk.

"Cool," says Oliver, stretching his arms. The night lies over them light
as spray--a great swimming bath and quietness of soft black, hushed
silver--above them the whole radiant helmet of heaven is white with its
stars. From the house they have left, glowing yellow in all its windows,
unreal against the night as if it were only a huge flat toy made out of
paper with a candle burning behind it, comes music, blurred but insistent,
faint as if heard over water, dull and throbbing like horse-hoofs muffled
with leather treading a lonely road.

"Um. Good party."

"Real Piper party, Ted. And, speaking of Pipers, friend Peter certainly
seems to be enjoying himself--"

"Really?"

"Third bench on the left as we came down. Never go to a costume-party
dressed as a dancing-bear if you want to get any quiet work in on the
side. Rule One of Crowe's Social Code for Our Own First Families."

Ted chuckles uneasily and there is silence for another while as they
smoke. Both are in very real need of talking to each other but must feel
their way a little carefully because they are friends. Then--

"I," says Ted and--

"You," says Oliver, simultaneously. Both laugh and the little tension that
has grown up between them snaps at once.

"I suppose you know that Nancy's and my engagement went bust about three
weeks ago," begins Oliver with elaborate calm, his eyes fixed on his
shoes.

Ted clears his throat.

"Didn't _know_. Afraid it was something like that though--way you were
looking," he says, putting his words one after the other, as slowly as if
he were building with children's blocks. "What was it?" Don't tell me
unless you want to, of course--_you_ know---"

"Want to, rather." Ted knows that he is smiling, and how, though he is not
looking at his face. "After all--old friends, all that. My dear old
College chum," but the mockery breaks down. "My fault, I guess," he says
in a voice like metal.

"It was, Ted. Acted like a fool. And then, this waiting business--not much
use going over that, now. But it's broken. Got my--property--such as it
was all back in a neat little parcel two weeks ago. That's why I quit
friend Vanamee--you ought to have known from that."

"Did, I suppose, only I hoped it wasn't. I'm damn sorry, Ollie.

"Thanks, Ted."

They shake hands, but not theatrically.

"Oh well--oh hell--oh dammit, you know how blasted sorry I am. That's all
I can say, I guess--"

"Well, so am I. And it was my fault, chiefly. And that's all I can say."

"Look here, though." Ted's voice is doing its best to be logical in spite
of the fact that two things, the fact that he is unutterably sorry for
Oliver and the fact that he mustn't show it in silly ways, are fighting in
him like wrestlers. "Are you sure it's as bad as all that? I mean girls---
" Ted flounders hopelessly between his eagerness to help and his knowledge
that it will take ungodly tact. "I mean, Nancy's different all right--but
they change their minds--and they come around--and--"

Oliver spreads out his hands. It is somehow queerly comforting not to let
himself be comforted in any degree. "What's the use? Tried to explain--got
her mother--Nancy was out but she certainly left a message--easier if we
never saw each other again--well--Then she sent back everything--she knew
I'd tried to phone her--tried to explain--never a word since then except
my name and address on the package--oh it's over, Ted. Feenee. But it's
pretty well smashed me. For the present, at least."

"But if you started it," Ted says stubbornly.

"Oh I did, of course--gentlemanly supposition anyhow--that's why--don't
you see?"

"Can't say I do exactly."

"Well?"

"Well?"

"We're both of us too proud, Ted. And too poor. And starting again--can't
you--visualize--it wouldn't be the way it was--only both of us thinking
about _that_ all the time--and _still_ we couldn't get married. I've got
less right than ever, now--oh, but how _could_ we after what we've said--"
and this time his voice has lost all the attitudes of youth, it is
singularly older and seems to come from the center of a place full of
pain.

"I wish I could help, though, Ollie. You know," says Ted.

"Wish you could." Then later, "Thanks." "Welcome."

Both smoke and are silent for a time, remembering small things out of the
last eight years.

"But what are you going to do, Ollie, now you've kissed the great god
Advertising a fond good-by?"

Ollie stirs uneasily.

"Dunno--exactly. I told you about those two short stories Easten wanted me
to take out of my novel? Well, I've done it and sent 'em in--and he'll buy
'em all right."

"That's fine!"

"It's a little money, anyhow. And then--remember Dick Lamoureux?"

"Yes."

"Got a letter from him right after--I came back from St. Louis. Well, he's
got a big job with the American Express in Paris--European Advertising
Manager or something like that--he's been crazy to have either of us come
over ever since that idea of the three of us getting an apartment on the
_Rive Gauche_ fell through. Well, he says, if I can come over, he'll get
me some sort of a job--not much to go on at first but they want people who
are willing to stay--enough to live on anyway--I want to get out of the
country, Ted."

"Should think you would. Good Lord--Paris! Why you lucky, lucky Indian!"
says Ted affectionately. "When'll you leave?" "Don't know. He said cable
him if I really decided--think I will. They need men and I can get a fair
enough letter from Vanamee. I've been thinking it over ever since the
letter came--wondering if I'd take it. Think I will now. Well."

"Well, I wish I was going along, Crowe."

And this time Oliver is really able to smile.

"No, you don't."

"Oh well--but, honestly--well, no, I suppose I don't. And I suppose
_that's_ something you know all about, too, you--private detective!"

"Private detective! Why, you poor ass, if you haven't noticed how I've
been playing godmother to you all the way through this house-party--"

"I have. I suppose I'd thank anybody else. Coming from you, though, I can
only say that such was both my hope and my expectation."

"Oh, you _perfect_ ass!" Both laugh, a little unsteadily.

"Well, Ollie, what think?" says Ted, finding some difficulty with his
words for some reason or other.

"Think? Can't tell, my amorous child. Coldly considered, I think you've
got a good show--and I'm very strong for it, needless to say--and if you
don't go and put it over pretty soon I'll be intensely annoyed--one of the
pleasures I've promised myself for years and years has been getting
most disgracefully fried at your wedding, Ted."

"Well, tonight is going to be zero hour, I think." Ted proceeds with a try
at being flippant and Oliver cackles with mirth.

"I knew it. I knew it. Old Uncle Ollie, the Young Proposer's Guide and
Pocket Companion." Then his voice changes. "Luck," he says briefly.

"Thanks. Need it."

"Of course I'm not worthy," Ted begins diffidently but Oliver stops him.

"They never are. I wasn't. But that doesn't make any difference. You've
got to--_n'est-ce pas?_"

"You old bum! Yes. But when I think of it---"

"Don't"

"But leaving out everything else--it seems so damned _cheeky!_ When
Elinor's got everything, including all the money in the world, and I--"

"We talked that over a long time ago, remember? And remember what we
decided--that it didn't matter, in this year and world at least. Of course
I'm assuming that you're really in love with her--"

"I am," from Ted very soberly. "Oh I am, all right."

"Well then, go ahead. And, Theodore, I shall watch your antic motions with
the greatest sarcastic delight, both now and in the future--either way it
breaks. Moreover I'll take anybody out of the action that you don't want
around--and if there were anything else I could do--"

"Got to win off my own service," says Ted. "You know. But thanks all the
same. Only when I think of--some incidents of Paris--and how awful near
I've come to making a complete fool of myself with that Severance woman in
the last month--well--"

"Look here, Ted." Oliver is really worried. "You're not going to let that
--interfere--are you? Right now?"

"I've got to tell her." Ted's smile is a trifle painful. "Got to, you
know. Oh not that. But France. The whole business."

"But good heavens, man, you aren't going to make it the start of the
conversation?"

"Well--maybe not. But it's all got to be--explained. Only way I'll ever
feel decent--and I don't suppose I'll feel too decent then."

"But Ted--oh it's your game, of course. Only I don't think it's being--
fair--to either of you to tell her just now."

"Can't help it, Ollie." Ted's face sets into what Oliver once christened
his "mule-look." "I've thought it over backwards and sideways and all
around the block--and I can't squirm out of it because it'll be incredibly
hard to do. As a matter of fact," he pauses, "it'll tell itself, you know,
probably," he ends, more prophetically than he would probably care to know.

"Well, I simply _don't_ see--"

"_Must_," and after that Oliver knows there is very little good of arguing
the point much further. He has known Ted for eight years without finding
out that a certain bitter and Calvinistic penchant for self-crucifixion is
one of his ruling forces--and one of those least easily deduced from his
externals. Still he makes a last effort.

"Now don't start getting all tied up about that. Keep your mind on
Elinor."

"That's not--hard."

"Good--I see that you have all the proper reactions. And you'll excuse me
for saying that _I_ don't think she's too good for you--and even if she
were she'd have to marry somebody, you know--and when you put it, put it
straight, and let Paris and everything else you're worrying about go plumb
to hell! And that's good advice."

"I know it. I'll tell you of course."

"Well, I should _think_ you would!"

Oliver looks at his watch. "Great Scott--they'll be unmasking in twenty
minutes. And I've got to go back and cut Juliet out of the herd and take
her to supper--"

They rise and look at each other. Then

"Hope this is the last time, Ted, old fel--which isn't any reflection on
the last eight years odd," says Oliver slowly, and their hands grip once
and hard. Then they both start talking fast as they walk back to the house
to cover the unworthy emotion. But just as they are going in the door,
Oliver hisses into Ted's ear, an advisory whisper,

"Now go and eat all the supper you can, you idiot--it always helps."




XXXI

The parti-colored harlequin and the young Chinese lady in blue silks are
walking the Italian gardens, talking about nothing in particular. Ted has
managed to discuss the moon--it is high now, a round white lustre--the
night, which is warm--the art of garden decoration, French, English and
Italian--the pleasantness of Southampton after New York--all with great
nervous fluency but so completely as if he had met Elinor for the first
time ten minutes ago that she is beginning to wonder why, if he dislikes
her as much as that, he ever suggested leaving the dance-floor at all.

Ted, meanwhile, is frantically conscious of the fact that they have
reached the end of the garden, are turning back, and still he is so
cripplingly tongue-tied about the only thing he really wishes to say that
he cannot even get the words out to suggest their sitting down. It is not
until he stumbles over a pebble while passing a small hard marble seat set
back in a nest of hedge that he manages to make his first useful remark of
the promenade.

"Ah--a bench!" he says brightly, and then, because that sounded so
completely imbecile, plunges on.

"Don't you want to sit down a minute, Elinor?--I--you--it's so cool--so
warm, I mean--" He closes his mouth firmly--what a _ghastly_ way to begin!

But Elinor says "Yes" politely and they try to adapt themselves to the
backless ornamental bench, Ted nervously crossing and recrossing his legs
until he happens to think that Elinor certainly never would marry anybody
with St. Vitus' Dance.

"Can't tell you how nice it's been this time, Elinor. And you've been--"
There, things are going better--at least, he has recovered his voice.

"Why, you know how much we love to have you, Ted," says Elinor and Ted
feels himself turn hot and cold as he was certain you never really did
except in diseases. But then she adds, "You and Ollie and Bob Templar,
and, oh, all Peter's friends."

He looks at her steadily for a long moment--the blue silks of her costume
suit her completely. She is there, black hair and clear eyes, small hands
and mouth pure as the body of a dream and elvish with thoughts like a
pansy--all the body of her, all that people call her. And she is so
delicately removed from him--so clean in all things where he is not--that
he knows savagely within him that there can be no real justice in a world
where he can even touch her lightly, and yet he must touch her because if
he does not he will die. All the things he meant to say shake from him
like scraps of confetti, he does not worry any more about money or seeming
ridiculous or being worthy, all he knows at all in the world is his
absolute need of her, a need complete as a child's and so choosing any
words that come.

"Listen--do you like me?" says the particolored harlequin and all the
sharp leaves of the hedge begin to titter as wind runs over them at one of
the oldest and least sensible questions in the world.

The young Chinese lady turns toward the harlequin. There is some laughter
in her voice and a great deal of surprise.

"Why, Ted, of course--why, why shouldn't I?--You're Peter's friend and--"

"Oh, I don't mean _that_!" The harlequin's hands twist at each other till
the knuckles hurt, but he seems to have recovered most voluble if chaotic
powers of speech.

"That was silly, asking that--but it's hard--when you care for anybody so
much you can't _see_--when you love them till they're the only thing there
_is_ you care about--and you know you're not fit to touch them--not worthy
of them--that they're thousands of times too good for you but--oh, Elinor,
Elinor, I just can't stand it any more! Do you love me, Elinor, because I
love you as I never loved anything else in the world?"

The young Chinese lady doesn't seem to be quite certain of just what is
happening. She has started to speak three times and stopped each time
while the harlequin has been waiting with the suspense of a man hanging
from Heaven on a pack-thread. But then she does speak.

"I think I do, Ted---oh, Ted, I know I do," she says uncertainly--and then
Oliver, if he were there, would have stepped forward to bow like an
elegant jack-knife at the applause most righteously due him for perfect
staging, for he really could not have managed better about the kiss that
follows if he had spent days and days showing the principals how to
rehearse it.

And then something happens that is as sudden as a bubble's going to pieces
and most completely out of keeping with any of Oliver's ideas on how love
should be set for the theatre. For "Oh, what am I _doing_?" says the
harlequin in the voice of a man who has met his airy double alone in a
wood full of ghosts and seen his own death in its face, and he crumples
into a loose bag of parti-colored silks, his head in his hands.
[Illustration: The Young Chinese Lady is Shrinking Inside Her Silks] It
would be nothing very much to any sensible person, no doubt--the picture
that made itself out of cold dishonorable fog in the instant of peace
after their double release from pain. It was only the way that Elinor
looked at him after the kiss--and remembering the last time he saw his own
diminished little image in the open eyes of a girl.

The young Chinese lady is shrinking inside her silks as if frost had
touched her--all she knows is that she doesn't understand. And then there
is the harlequin looking at her with his face gone suddenly pinched and
odd as if he had started to torture himself with his own hands; and the
fact that he will not touch her, and what he says.

"Oh, Elinor, darling. Oh, I can't tell you, I can't."

"But what _is_ it, Ted?"

"It's this--it's what I meant to tell you before I ever told you I loved
you--what I haven't any right not to tell you--and I guess that the fact I
didn't, shows pretty well what sort of a fellow I am. Do you really think
you know about me, dear--do you really think you do?"

"Why, of course, Ted." The voice is still a little chill with the fright
he gave her, but under that it is beautifully secure.

"Well, you don't. And, oh Lord, why couldn't it have happened before I
went to France!--because then it would have been all different and I'd
have had some sort of a right--not a right, maybe--but anyhow, I could
have come to you--straight. I can't now, dear, that's all."

The voice halts as if something were breaking to pieces inside of it.

"I can't bring you what you'd bring me. Oh, it isn't anything--physically
--dangerous--that way--I--was--lucky." The words space themselves as slowly
as if each one of them burnt like acid as it came. "It's--just--that. Just
that--while I was in France--I went over--all the hurdles--and then a few
more, I guess--and I've got to--tell you about it--because I love you--and
because I wouldn't dare love you, even--if I didn't--tell you the truth.
You see. But, oh my God, I never thought it would--hurt so!" and the
parti-colored body of the harlequin is shaken with a painful passion that
seems ridiculously out of keeping with his motley. But all that the young
Chinese lady feels is that for a single and brittle instant she and
somebody else had a star in their hands that covered them with light clean
silver, and that now the conjuror who made the star out of nothing and
gave it to her is showing her just why there never was any star. Moreover,
she has only known she was in love for the last five minutes--and that is
hardly long enough for her to discover that love itself is too living to
be very much like any nice girl's dreams of it--and the shock of what Ted
has said has brought every one of her mother's reticent acid hints on the
general uncleanliness of Man too prickling-close to her mind. And she
can't understand--she never will understand, she thinks with dull pain.

"Oh how _could_ you, Ted? How _could_ you?" she says as he waits as a man
walking the plank might wait for the final gentle push that will send him
overboard.

"Oh, I know it was fine of you to tell me--but it's just spoiled
everything forever. Oh, Ted, how _could_ you?" and then she is half-
running, half-walking, up the path toward the porch and all she knows is
that she must get somewhere where she can be by herself. The harlequin
does not follow her.




XXXII

Oliver, in the middle of a painfully vivid dream in which he has just
received in the lounge of a Yale Club crowded with whispering, pointing
spectators the news that Miss Nancy Ellicott of St. Louis has eloped with
the Prince of Wales, wakes, to hear someone stumbling around the room in
the dark.

"That you, Ted?"

"Yes. Go to bed."

"Can't--I'm there. What's time?"

"'Bout five, I guess." Ted doesn't seem to want to be very communicative.

"Um." A pause while Oliver remembers what it was he wanted to ask Ted
about and Ted undresses silently.

"Well--congratulations?"

Ted's voice is very even, very controlled.

"Sorry, Ollie. Not even with all your good advice."

"_Honestly_?"

"Uh-huh." "Well, look here--better luck next time, anyway. It's all--"

"It's all over, Ollie. I'm getting out of here tomorrow before most of
them are up. Special breakfast and everything--called back to town by
urgent legal affairs." He laughs, rather too barkingly for Oliver to like
it.

"Oh, Hell!"

"Correct."

"Well, she's--"

"She's an angel, Ollie. But I had to tell her--about France. That broke
it. D'you wonder?"

"Oh, you poor, damn, honorable, simple-minded, blessed, blasted fool!
_Before_ you'd really begun?"

Ted hesitates. "Y-yes."

"Oh, hell!"

"Well, if all you can do is to lie back in bed there and call on your
Redeemer when---Sorry, Ollie. But I'm not feeling too pleasant tonight."

"Well, I ought to know--"

"Forgot. You ought. Well--you do."

"But I don't see anything yet that--"

"She does."

"But--"

"Oh, Ollie, what's the use? We can both of us play Job's comforter to the
other because we're pretty good friends. But you can see how my telling
her would--oh well there isn't much percentage in hashing it over.
I've done what I've done. If I'd known I'd have to pay for it this way, I
wouldn't have--but there, we're all made like that. There's one thing I
can't do--and that is get away with a thing like that on false pretences--
I'd rather shoot the works on one roll and crap than use the sort of dice
that behave. I went into the thing with my eyes open--now I've got to pay
for it--well, what of it? It wouldn't make all the difference to a lot of
girls, perhaps--a lot of the best--but it does to Elinor and she's the
only person I want. If I can't have her, I don't want anything--but if
I've made what all the Y.M.C.A. Christians that ever sold nickel bars of
chocolate for a quarter would call a swine out of myself--well, I'm going
to be a first-class swine. So put on my glad rags, Josie, I'm going to
Rector's and hell!"

All this has been light enough toward the end but the lightness is not far
from a very real desperation, all the same.

"Meaning by which?" Oliver queries uneasily.

"Meaning by which that some of my address for the next two-three weeks
will be care of Mrs. Rose Severance, 4th floor, the Nineveh, Riverside
Drive, New York--you know the place, I showed it to you once from a bus-
top when we were talking the mysterious lady over. And that I don't think
Mr. Theodore Billett will graduate _cum laude_ from Columbia Law School.
In fact, I think it very possible that Mr. Billett will join Mr. Oliver
Crowe, the celebrated unpublished novelist on a pilgrimage to Paris for to
cure their broken hearts and go to the devil like gentlemen. Eh, Ollie?"

"Well, that's all right for _me_," says Oliver combatively. "And I always
imagined we'd find each other in hell. I'm not trying to be inhospitable
with my own pet red-hot gridiron, but all the same--"

"Now, Crowe, for Pete's sake, it's five o'clock in the morning and I'm
catching the 7.12--"

And Oliver is too sleepy to argue the point. Besides he knows quite well
that any arguments he can use will only drive Ted, in his present state of
mind, a good deal farther and faster along the road he has so dramatically
picked out for himself. So, between trying to think of some means of
putting either sense or the fear of God into Elinor Piper, whatever Ted
may say about it, and wondering how the latter would take a suggestion to
come over to Melgrove for a while instead of starting an immoral existence
with that beautiful but possessive friend of Louise's, he drops off to
sleep.




XXXIII

Oliver had depended on Ted's noisy habits in dressing and packing to wake
him and give them a chance to talk before Ted left--but when he woke it
was to hear a respectful servantly voice saying "Ten o'clock, sir!" and
his first look around the room showed him that Ted's bed was empty and
Ted's things were gone. There was a scribbled note propped up against the
mirror, though.

  "Dear Ollie:

  "So long--and thanks for both good advice
  and sympathy. The latter helped if the former
  didn't. Drop me a message at 252A as soon
  as you decide on this French proposition. I'm
  serious about it.                    TED."

By the time he had read this through, Oliver began to feel rather genuinely
alarmed.

He could not believe that the whole affair between Ted and Elinor Piper
had gone so utterly wrong as the note implied--he had had a whimsical
superstition that it must succeed because he was playing property man to it
after his own appearance as Romeo had failed--but he knew Ted and the two
years' fight against the struggling nervous restlessness and discontent
with everything that didn't have either speed or danger in it that
the latter, like so many in his position, had had to make. His mouth
tightened--no girl on earth, even Nancy, could realize exactly what that
meant--the battle to recover steadiness and temperance and sanity in a
temperament that was in spite of its poised externals most brilliantly
sensitive, most leapingly responsive to all strong stimuli--a temperament
moreover that the war and the armistice between them had turned wholly
toward the stimuli of fever--and Ted had made it with neither bravado nor
bluster and without any particular sense of doing very much--and now this
girl was going to smash it and him together as if she were doing nothing
more important than playing with jackstones.

He remembered a crowd of them talking over suicide one snowy night up in
Coblenz--young talk enough but Ted had been the only one who really meant
it--he had got quite vehement on picking up your proper cue for exit when
you knew that your part was through or you were tired of the part. He
remembered cafe hangers-on in Paris--college men--men who could talk or
write or teach or do any one of a dozen things--but men who had crumbled
with intention or without it under the strain of the war and the snatches
of easy living to excess, and now had about them in everything they said or
wore a faint air of mildew; men who stayed in Paris on small useless jobs
while their linen and their language verged more and more toward the soiled
second-hand--who were always meaning to go home but never went. If Ted
went to Paris--with his present mind. Why Ted was his best friend, Oliver
realized with a little queer shock in his mind--it was something they had
never just happened to say that way. And therefore. Far be it from Oliver
to be rude to the daughter of his hostess, but some things were going to
be explained to Miss Elinor Piper if they had to be explained by a public
spanking in the middle of the Jacobean front hall.

But then there was breakfast, at which few girls appeared, and Elinor was
not one of the few. And then Peter insisted on going for a swim before
lunch--and then lunch with Elinor at the other end of the table and Juliet
Bellamy talking like a mechanical piano into Oliver's ear so that he had to
crane his neck to see Elinor at all. What he saw, however, reassured him a
little--for he had always thought Elinor one of the calmest young persons
in the world, and calm young persons do not generally keep adding spoonfuls
of salt abstractedly to their clam-broth till the mixture tastes like the
bottom of the sea.

But even at that it was not till just before tea-time that Oliver managed
to cut her away from the vociferous rest of the house-party that seemed
bent on surrounding them both with the noise and publicity of a private
Coney Island. Peter has expressed a fond desire to motor over to a little
tea-room he knows where you can dance and the others had received the
suggestion with frantic applause. Oliver was just starting downstairs after
changing his shoes, cursing house-party manners in general and Juliet
Bellamy in particular all over his mind when Elinor's voice came up to him
from below.

"No, really, Petey. No, I know it's rude of me but honestly I am _tired_
and if I'm going to feel like anything but limp _tulle_ this evening. No,
I'm _perfectly_ all right, I just want to rest for a little while and I
promise I'll be positively incandescent at dinner. No, Juliet dear, I
wouldn't keep you or anybody else away from Peter's nefarious projects for
the world--"

That was quite enough for Oliver--he tiptoed back and hid in his own
closet--wondering mildly how he was going to explain his presence there if
a search party opened the door. He heard a chorus of voices calling him
from below, first warningly, then impatiently--heard Peter bounce up the
stairs and yell "Ollie! Ollie, you slacker!" into his own room--and then
finally the last motor slurred away and he was able to creep out of his
shell.

He met Elinor on the stairs--looking encouragingly droopy, he thought.

"Why Ollie, what's the matter? The pack was howling for you all over the
house--they've all gone over to the Sharley--look, I'll get you a car--"
She went down a couple of steps toward the telephone.

Oliver immediately and without much difficulty put on his best expression
of blight.

"Sorry, El--must have dropped off to sleep," he said unblushingly. "Lay
down on my bed to sort of think some things over--and that's what happens
of course. But don't bother--"

"It's no trouble. I could take you over myself but I was so sort of fagged
out--that's why I didn't go with them," she added--a little uncertainly he
noticed.

"And--oh it's just being silly and tired I suppose, but all of them
together--"

"I know," said Oliver and hoped his voice had sounded appropriately bitter.
"No reflections on you or Peter, El, you both understand and you've both
been too nice for words--but some of the others sometimes--"

"Oh I'm _sorry_," said Elinor contritely, and Oliver felt somewhat as if
he were swindling her out of sympathy she probably needed for herself by
deliberately calling attention to his own cut finger. But it had to be
done--there wasn't any sense in both of them, he and Ted, walking crippled
when one of them might be able to doctor the other up by just giving up a
little pride. He went on.

"So I thought--I'd just stay around here with a book or something--get some
tea from your mother, later, if she were here--"

"Why, I can do that much for you, Ollie, anyway. Let's have it now."

"But look here, if you were going to do anything--" knowing that after that
she could hardly say so, even if she were.

"Oh no. And besides, with both of us here and both of us blue it would be
silly if we went and were melancholy at each other from opposite sides of
the house." She tried to be enthusiastic. "And there's strawberry jam and
muffins somewhere--the kind that Peter makes himself such a pig about--"

"Well, Elinor, you certainly are a friend--"

A little later, in a quiet corner of the porch with the tea-steam floating
pleasantly from the silver nose of its pot and a decorous scarlet and
yellow still-life of muffins and jam between them, Oliver felt that so far
things had slid along as well as could be expected. Elinor's manners in the
first place and her genuine liking for him in the second had come to his
help as he knew they would--she was too concerned now with trying to
comfort him in small unobtrusive ways to be on her guard herself about
her own troubles. All he had to do, he knew, was to sit there and look
ostentatiously brokenhearted to have the conversation move in just the
directions he wished and that, though it made him feel shameless was not
exactly difficult--all he required was a single thought of the last three
weeks to make his acting sour perfection itself. "Greater love hath no man
than this," he thought with a grotesque humor--he wondered if any of the
celebrated story-book patterns of friendship from Damon and Jonathan on
would have found things quite so easy if they had had to take not their
lives but most of their most secret and painful inwards and put them down
on a tea-table like a new species of currant bun under the eyes of a
friendly acquaintance to help their real friends.

"I can't tell you how awfully decent it was of you and Peter," he began
finally after regarding a buttered muffin for several minutes as if it were
part of the funeral decorations for dead young love. "Asking me out
here, just now. Oh I'll write you a charming bread-and-butter letter of
course--but I wanted to tell you really--" He stopped and let the sentence
hang with malice aforethought. Elinor's move. Trust Elinor. And the trust
was justified for she answered as he wanted her to, and at once.

"Why Ollie, as if it was anything--when we've all of us more or less grown
up together, haven't we--and you and Peter--" She stopped--oh what was the
use of being tactful! "I suppose it sounds--put on--and--sentimental and
all that--saying it," she laughed nervously, "but we--all of us--Peter and
myself--we're so really _sorry_--if you'll believe us--only it was hard to
know if you wanted to have us say so--how awfully sorry we were. And then
asking you out here with this howling mob doesn't seem much like it, does
it? but Peter was going to be here--and Ted--and I knew what friends you'd
been in college--I thought maybe--but I just didn't want you to think it
was because we didn't care--"

"I know--and--and--thanks--and I do appreciate, Elinor." Oliver noticed
with some slight terror that his own voice seemed to be getting a little
out of control. But what she had just said took away his last doubt as to
whether she was really the kind of person Ted ought to marry--and in spite
of feeling as if he were trapping her into a surgical operation she knew
nothing about, he kept on.

"It gets pretty bad, sometimes," he said simply and waited. Last night--if
things came out right later--will have been just what Elinor needed most,
he decided privately. She had always struck him as being a little too aloof
to be quite human--but she was changing under his eyes to a very human
variety of worried young girl.

"Well, isn't there something we can really _do_?" she said diffidently,
then changing,

"Oh I mean it--if you don't think it's only--probing--asking that?" as she
changed again.

"Not a thing I'm afraid, Elinor, though I really do thank you." He hated
his voice--it sounded so brave. "It's just finished, that's all. Can't kick
very well. Oh no," as she started to speak, "it doesn't hurt to talk about,
really. Helps, more. And Peter and Ted help too--especially Ted."

He watched her narrowly--changing color like that must mean a good deal
with Elinor.

Then "Why Ted?" she said, almost as if she were talking to herself and then
started to try and make him see that that didn't matter--a spectacle to
which he remained gratifiedly blind. He addressed his next remarks at the
dish of jam so that she wouldn't be able to catch his eye.

"Oh, I'm not slamming Peter's sympathetic soul, El, you know I'm not--but
Ted and I just happened to go through such a lot of the war and after it
together--and then Ted saw a good deal more of Nancy. Peter's delightful.
And kind. But he does assume that because lots of people get engaged and
disengaged again all over the lot these days as if they were cutting for
bridge-partners there isn't anything particularly serious in things like
that. Nothing to really make you make faces and bust, that is. Well, ours
happened to be one of the other kind--that's the difference. And Peter,
well, Peter isn't exactly the soul of constancy when it comes to such
matters--"

"Peter--oh Peter--if you knew the millions of girls that Peter's kept
pictures of--"

"Well, I've heard all about the last hundred thousand or so, I think. But
there's perfect safety in thousands. It's when you start being so stalwart
and sure and manly about one--"

Oliver spread out his hands. Elinor's color--the way it fluctuated at
least--was most encouraging. So was the fact that she had tried to butter
her last muffin with the handle of her knife. "But I don't see _how_ if a
girl really cared about a man she could let anything--" she said and then
stopped with a burning flush. And now Oliver knew that he had to be very
careful. He looked over his tools and decided that infantile bitterness was
best.

"Girls are girls," he said shortly, stabbing a muffin. "They tell you they
do and then they tell you they don't--that's them."

"Oliver Crowe, I never heard such a nasty, childish seventeen-year-old idea
from you in my whole life!" Oh what would calm Mrs. Piper say if she could
see Elinor, eyes cloudy with anger, leaning across the tea-wagon and
emphasizing her points by waves of a jammy knife as she defends constancy
and romance! "They do _not_! When a girl cares for a man--and she knows he
cares for her--she doesn't care about _anything_ else, she--"

"That's what Nancy said," remarked Oliver placidly out of his muffin. "And
then--"

"Well, you know I'm sorry for you--you know I'm just as sorry for you as I
can be," went on Elinor excitedly. "But all the same, my dear Ollie, you
have no right in the least to say that just because one girl has broken her
engagement with you, all girls are the same. I know dozens of girls--" "So
do I," from Oliver, quietly. "Dozens. And they're just the same."

"They _aren't_. And I haven't the slightest wish to suggest that it was
_your_ fault, Oliver--but no girl as sweet and friendly and darling as
Nancy Ellicott, the little I knew of her that is, but other girls can tell,
and she certainly thought you were the person that made all the stars come
out in the sky and twinkle, would go and break her engagement _entirely_ of
her own accord--you _must_ have--"

And now Oliver looked at her with a good deal of sorrowful pity--she had
delivered herself so completely into his hands.

"I never said it was her fault, Elinor," he said gently, keeping the
laughter back by a superb effort of will. "It was mine, I am sure," and
then he added most sorrowfully, "All mine."

"_Well!_"

For a moment he forgot that he was there playing checkers with himself and
Elinor for Ted.

"You've never been through it, have you?" he said rather fiercely. "You
can't have--you couldn't talk like that if you had. When you've put
everything you've got in mind or body or soul completely in one person's
hands and then, just because of a silly misunderstanding we neither of
us meant--they drop it--and you drop with it and the next thing you know
you're nothing but a _mess_ and all you can wonder is if even the littlest
part of you will ever feel whole again--" He realized that he was very
nearly shouting, and then, suddenly, that if he kept on this way the game
was over and lost. He must think about Ted, not Nancy. Ted, Ted. Mr.
Theodore Billett, Jr.

"She'd forgiven me such a lot," he ended rather lamely. "I thought she'd
keep on."

But his outburst had only made Elinor feel the sorrier for him--he felt
like a burglar as he saw the kindness in her eyes.

"I don't imagine she ever had such an awful lot to forgive, Ollie," she
said gently.

Then the lie he had been leading up to all the way came at last,
magnificently hesitant.

"She had, Elinor. I was in France you know."

He was afraid when he had said it--it sounded so much like a title out of
a movie--but he looked steadily at her and saw all the color go out of her
face and then return to it burningly.

"Well, that wasn't anything to be--forgiven about exactly--was it?" she
said unsteadily.

He spoke carefully, in broken sentences, only the knowledge that this was
the only way he could think of to help things nerving his mind. "It wasn't
being in France, Elinor. It was--the adjuncts. I don't suppose I was any
worse than most of my outfit--but that didn't make it any easier when I had
to tell her I hadn't been any better. I felt," his voice rose, his literary
trick of mind had come to his rescue now and made him know just how he
would have felt if it had really happened, "I felt as if I were in hell.
Really. But I had to tell her. And when she'd forgiven me that--and said
that it was all right--that it didn't make any real difference now--I
thought she was about the finest person in the world--for telling me such
nice lies. And after that--I was so sure that it was all right--that
because of her knowing and still being able to care--it would last--oh
well--"

He stopped, waiting for Elinor but Elinor for a person so voluble a little
while ago seemed curiously unwilling to speak.

"Lord knows why I'm telling you this--except that we started arguing and
you're nice enough to listen. It's not tea-table conversation, or it
wouldn't have been ten years ago--and if I've shocked you, I'm sorry.
But after that, as I said--I didn't think there was anything that could
separate us--really I didn't--and then just one little time when we didn't
quite understand each other and--over. Sorry to spoil your illusions,
Elinor, but that's the way people do."

"But how could she?" and this time there was nothing but pure hurt
questioning in Elinor's voice and the words seemed to hurt her as if she
were talking needles. "Why Ollie--she couldn't possibly--if she really
cared--"

All he wondered was which of them would break first.

"She could," he said steadily, in spite of the fact that everything in
his mind kept saying "No. No. No." "Any girl could--easily. Even you,
Elinor--if you'll excuse my being rude--"

For a moment he thought that his carefully plotted scenario was going
to break up into melodrama with the reticent, composed and sympathetic
Elinor's suddenly rising and slapping his face. Then he heard her say in a
voice of utter anger,

"How can you say anything like that, how can you? You are being the most
hateful person that ever lived. Why if I really cared for anyone--if I ever
really cared--" and then she began to cry most steadily and whole-heartedly
into her napkin and Oliver in spite of all the generous plaudits he was
receiving from various parts of his mind for having carried delicate
business successfully to a most dramatic conclusion, wondered what in the
name of Hymen his cue was now. Some remnants of diplomacy however kept him
from doing anything particularly obtrusive and, after he had received an
official explanation of nervous headache with official detachment, the end
of tea found them being quite cheerful together. Neither alluded directly
to what both thought about most but in spite of that each seemed inwardly
convinced of being completely if cryptically understood by the other and
when the noise of the first returning motor brought a friendly plotter's
"You talk to them--they mustn't see me this way," from Elinor and a casual
remark from Oliver that he felt sure he would have to run into town for
dinner--family had forwarded a letter from an editor this morning--so
if she wanted anything done--they seemed to comprehend each other very
thoroughly.

He babbled with the returning jazzers for a quarter of an hour or so,
tactfully circumvented Peter into offering him the loan of a car since he
had to go into New York, and intimated that he would drop back and in at
the Rackstraws' dance as soon as possible, after many apologies for daring
to leave at all. Then he went slowly upstairs, humming loudly as he did so.
Elinor met him outside his door.

"Ollie--as long as you're going in--I wonder if you'd mind--" Her tone was
elaborately careless but her eyes were dancing as she gave him a letter,
firmly addressed but unstamped.

"No, glad to--" And then he grinned. "You'll be at the Rackstraws'."

"Yes, Ollie."

"Well--we'll be back by ten thirty or try to. Maybe earlier," he said at
her back and she turned and smiled once at him. Then he went into his room.

"Mr. Theodore Billett," said the address on the letter, "252A Madison Ave.,
N. Y. C.," and down in the lower corner, "Kindness of Mr. Oliver Crowe."

He thought he might very well ask for the latter phrase on Ted's and
Elinor's wedding invitations. He passed a hand over his forehead--that had
been harder than walking a tight-rope with your head in a sack--but the
chasm had been crossed and nothing was left now but the fireworks on the
other side. How easy it was to tinker other people's love-affairs for
them--for oneself the difficulties were somehow a little harder to manage,
he thought. And then he began considering how long it would take from
Southampton to New York in the two-seater and just where Ted would most
likely be.




XXXIV

A long-distance telephone conversation about six o'clock in the afternoon
between two voices usually so even and composed that the little pulse
of excitement beating through both as they speak now seems perilous,
unnatural. One is Mr. Severance's thin cool speech and the other--most
curious, that--seems by every obsequious without being servile, trained
and impassive turn and phrase to be that of that treasure among household
treasures, Elizabeth.

"My instructions were that I was to call you, sir, whenever I was next
given an evening out."

"Yes, Elizabeth. Well?"

"I have been given an evening out tonight, sir."

"Yes."

"Mrs. Severance has told me that I am on no account to return till tomorrow
morning, sir."

"Yes. Go on."

"There are the materials of a small but quite sufficient meal for two
persons in the refrigerator, sir. Mrs. Severance is dining out, sir--she
said." "Yes. Any further information?"

"Mrs. Severance received a telephone call this morning, sir, before she
went out. It was after that that she told me I was to have the evening."

"You did not happen to--overhear--the conversation, did you, Elizabeth?"

"Oh no, sir. Mrs. Severance spoke very low. The only words that I could
catch were 'You' at the beginning and 'Please come' near the end. The words
'please come' were rather--affectionately--spoken if I might make so bold,
sir."

"You have done very well, Elizabeth."

"Thank you, sir."

"There is nothing else?"

"No, sir. Should you wish me to 'phone you again before tomorrow morning,
sir?"

"No, Elizabeth."

"Thank you, sir. Good-by, sir."

"Good-by, Elizabeth."




XXXV

The rest of the party has scattered to the gardens or the porch--Oliver has
wandered into the library alone to wait for Peter who is bringing around
the two-seater himself. It is a big dim room with books all the way up to
the ceiling and a comfortable leather lounge upon which he sinks, picks
up a magazine from a little table beside it and starts ruffling the pages
idly. The chirrup of a telephone bell that seems to come out of the wall
beside him makes him jump.

Then he remembers--that must be Mr. Piper's office through the closed door
there. He remembers, as well, Peter joking with his father once about his
never getting away from business even in the country and pointing at the
half dozen telephones on top of the big flat desk with a derisive gesture
while detailing to Oliver the fondness that Sargent Piper has for secretive
private wires and the absurd precautions he takes to keep them intensely
private. "Why he went and had all his special numbers here changed once
just because I found out one of them by mistake and called him up on it for
a joke--the cryptic old person!" Peter had said with mocking affection.

The telephone chirrups again and Oliver gets up and goes toward the door
of the office with a vague idea of answering it since there seem to be no
servants about. Then he remembers something else--Peter's telling him that
nothing irritates his father more than having anyone else answer one of his
private wires--and stops with his hand on the door that has swung inward
an inch or so already under his casual pressure. It doesn't matter
anyhow--there--somebody has answered it--Mr. Piper probably, as there is
another door to the office and both of them are generally kept locked. Mr.
Piper like all great business men has his petty idiosyncrasies.

Oliver is just starting to turn away when a whisper of sound that seems
oddly like "Mrs. Severance" comes to his ear by some trick of acoustics
through the door. He hesitates--and stays where he is, wondering all the
time why he is doing anything so silly and unguest-like--and also what on
earth he could say if Mr. Piper suddenly flung open the door. But Ted has
told him a good deal at various times of the more mysterious aspects of
Mrs. Severance, and her name jumping out at him this way from the middle
of Mr. Piper's private office makes it rather hard to act like a copybook
gentleman--especially with his last conversation with Ted still plain in
his mind.

The voices are too low for him to hear anything distinctly but again one
of the speakers says "Mrs. Severance"--of that he is entirely sure. The
receiver clicks back and Oliver regains the lounge in three long soft
strides, thanking his carelessness that he is still wearing rubber-soled
sport-shoes. He is very much absorbed in an article on "Fishing for Tuna"
when Peter comes in.

"Well, Oliver, everything ready for you. Awfully sorry you have to rush in
this way--"

"Yes, nuisance all right, but it's my one best editor and that may mean
something real--terribly cheeky thing for me to do, Pete--bumming your car
like this--"

"Oh rats, you know you're welcome--and anyhow I'm lending it to you because
you'll have to bring it back, and that means you'll come back yourself--"

"Well look, Pete, _please_ make all the excuses you can for me to your
mother. And I'll run back here and change and then go over to the
Rackstraws', as soon as I can--Elinor told you about Ted?"

"Yes. Sounds sort of simple to me asking him back tonight for that beach
picnic tomorrow when he absolutely had to leave this morning--but I never
could keep all Elinor's social arrangements straight. Certainly hope he can
get off."

"So do I," says Oliver non-committally and then the door of Mr. Piper's
office opens and Mr. Piper comes out looking as well-brushed and courteous
as usual but with a face that seems as if it had been touched all over
lightly with a grey painful stain.

"Hello, Father? Anything up from Secret Headquarters?"

"No, boy," and Oliver is surprised at the effort with which Mr. Piper
smiles. "Winthrop called up a few minutes ago about those Hungarian bonds
but it wasn't anything important--" and again Oliver is very much surprised
indeed, though he does not show it.

"Is your mother here, Peter?"

"Upstairs dressing, I think, Father."

Mr. Piper hesitates.

"Well, you might tell her--it's nothing of consequence but I must go in to
town for a few hours--I shall have them give me a sandwich or so now and
catch the 7.03, I think."

"But look, Father, Oliver has to go in too, for dinner--he's taking the
two-seater now. Why don't you let him take you too--that would save time--"
"Perfectly delighted to, Mr. Piper, of course, and--"

Mr. Piper looks full at Oliver--a little strangely, Oliver thinks.

"That would be--" Mr. Piper begins, and then seems to change his mind for
no apparent reason. "No, I think the train would be better, I do not
wish to get in too early, though I thank you, Oliver," he says with an
old-fashioned bob of his head. "And now I must really--a little food
perhaps"--and he escapes before either Oliver or Peter has time to argue
the question. Oliver turns to Peter.

"Look here, Pete, if I'm--"

"You're not. Oh _I'd_ think it'd be a lot more sensible of Father to let
you take him in, but you never can tell about Father. Something must be up,
though, in spite of what he says--he's supposed to be on a vacation and
I haven't seen him look the way he does tonight since some of the tight
squeezes in the war."




XXXVI

It all started by having too much Mrs. Winters at a time, Nancy decided
later. Mrs. Winters went down with comparative painlessness in homeopathic
doses but Mrs. Winters day in and day out was too much like being forcibly
fed with thick raspberry syrup. And then there had been walking up the
Avenue from the Library alone the evening before--and remembering walks
with Oliver--and coming across that copy of the "Shropshire Lad" in Mrs.
Winters' bookcase and thinking just how Oliver's voice had sounded when he
read it aloud to her--a process of some difficulty, she recalled, because
he had tried to read with an arm around her. And then all the next day as
she tried to work nothing but Oliver, Oliver, running through her mind
softshoed like a light and tireless runner, crumbling all proper dignity
and good resolutions away from her, little hard pebble by little hard
pebble, till she had finally given up altogether, called up Vanamee and
Company on the telephone and asked, with her heart in her mouth, if Mr.
Oliver Crowe were there. The reply that came seemed unreal somehow--she had
been so sure he would be and every nerve in her body had been so strung to
wonder at what she was going to say or do when he finally answered, that
the news that he had left three weeks before brought her down to earth as
suddenly as if she had been tripped. All she could think of was that it
must be because of her that Oliver had left the company--and illogically
picture a starving Oliver painfully wandering the streets of New York and
gazing at the food displayed in restaurant windows with lost and hopeless
eyes.

Then she shook herself--what nonsense--he must be at Melgrove. She couldn't
call him up at Melgrove, though, he mightn't be there when she 'phoned and
then his family would answer and what his family must think of her now,
when they'd been so perfectly lovely when she and Oliver were first
engaged--she shivered a little--no, that wouldn't do. And letters never
really said things--it mustn't be letters--besides, she thought, humbly, it
would be so awful to have Oliver send letters back unopened. Two weeks of
pure Mrs. Winters had chastened Nancy to an unusual degree.

For all that though, it was not until Mrs. Winters had left her alone for
the evening after offering her an invitation to attend a little discussion
group that met Wednesday evenings and read literary papers at each other,
an invitation which Nancy somewhat stubbornly declined, that she finally
made up her mind. Then she sighed and went to the telephone again.

"Mr. Oliver Crowe? He is away on a visit just at present but we expect him
back tomorrow afternoon." Margaret is pretending for her own satisfaction
over the wire that the Crowes have a maid. "Who is calling, please?"

Rather shakily, "A f-friend."

Briskly. "I understand. Well, he will be back tomorrow. Is that all that
you wished to inquire? No message?"

"Good-by then," and again Nancy thinks that things simply will not be
dramatic no matter how hard she tries.

She decides to take a small walk however--small because she simply must
get to bed before Mrs. Winters comes back and starts talking at her
improvingly. The walk seems to take her directly to the nearest Subway--and
so to the Pennsylvania Station, where, after she has acquired a timetable
of trains to Melgrove, she seems to be a good deal happier than she has
been for some time. At least as she is going up the cake-colored stairs to
the Arcade again she cannot help taking the last one with an irrepressible
skip.




XXXVII

Oliver had quite a little time to think things over as the two-seater
purred along smooth roads toward New York. The longer he thought them over,
the less amiable some few of the things appeared. He formed and rejected
a dozen more or less incredible hypotheses as to what possible connection
there could be between Mrs. Severance and Sargent Piper--none of them
seemed to fit entirely and yet there must be something perfectly simple,
perfectly easy to explain--only what on earth could it be?

He went looking through his mind for any scraps that might possibly piece
together--of course he hadn't known Peter since College without finding out
that in spite of their extreme politeness toward each other, Peter's mother
and father really didn't get on. Club-stories came to him that he had tried
to get away from--the kind of stories that were told about any prominent
man, he supposed--a little leering paragraph in "Town Gossip"--a dozen
words dropped with the easy assuredness of tone that meant the speakers
were alluding to something that everyone knew by people who hadn't realized
that he was Peter's friend. A caustically frank discussion of Mrs.
Severance with Ted in one of Ted's bitter moods--a discussion that had
given Oliver a bad half-hour later with Louise.

But things like that didn't _happen_--people whose houses you stayed
at--people your sister brought home over the week-end--the fathers of your
own friends. And then Oliver winced as he remembered the afternoon when all
the New Haven evening papers had screamed with headlines over the Witterly
divorce suit--and Bob Witterly's leaving College because he couldn't stand
it--that had been people you knew all right--and everyone had always had
such a good time at the Witterlys' too.

It was all perfectly incredible of course--but he would have to find Ted
just as soon as possible, no matter where he had to go to find him--and as
the little reel of the speedometer began to hitch toward the left and into
higher figures, Oliver felt very relieved indeed that he had the two-seater
and that Mr. Piper wasn't coming into town till the 7.03.

He got into New York to find he hadn't made as good time as he'd thought--a
couple of traffic blocks had kept him back for valuable minutes--though of
course the minutes couldn't be valuable exactly when it was all bosh about
his having to get in so quickly after all. He went first to 252A Madison
Avenue, hoping most heartily that Ted would be there on the fifth floor
with his eyeshade over his eyes and large law-books crowding his desk, but
the door was locked and knockings brought no response except a peevish
voice from the other side of the narrow hall requesting any gentleman that
was a gentleman to shut up for Gawd's sake. The Yale Club next--there was
just a chance that Ted might be there--

Oliver went through the Yale Club a good deal more thoroughly than most
pages, from the lobby to the upstairs dining-room. He even invaded the
library to the suspicious annoyance of some old uncle who was pretending
to read a book held upside down in his lap in order to camouflage his
pre-prandial nap. No Ted--though half-a-dozen acquaintances who insisted on
saying hello and taking up time. Back to the street and a slight dispute
with a policeman as regarded the place where Oliver had parked his car. He
looked at his watch just before poking the self-starter--Mr. Piper's train
must be halfway to New York by now. He set his lips and turned down 44th
Street toward the Avenue.

Fourth floor Ted had said. The elevator went much too quickly for
Oliver--he was standing in front of a most non-committal door-bell before
he had arranged the racing tumult of thought in his mind enough to be in
any measure sure of just what the devil he was going to say.

Moreover he was oppressed by a familiar and stomachless sensation--the
sensation he always had when he tried to high-dive and stood looking
gingerly down from a shaky platform at water that seemed a thousand miles
away and as flat and hard as a blue steel plate. There wasn't any guide
in any Manual of Etiquette he had ever heard of on What to Say When
Interrupting a Tete-a-Tete between Your Best Friend and a Dangerous
And Beautiful Woman. He wondered idly if Ted would ever speak to him
again--Mrs. Severance certainly wouldn't--and he rather imagined that even
if Ted and Elinor did get married he would hardly be the welcome guest he
had always expected to be there.

Well, that was what you get for trying to pull a Jonathan when the Saul in
question was behaving a good deal more like David in the affair with Uriah
the Hittite's spouse--and it wasn't safe and Biblical and all done with a
couple of thousand years ago but abashingly real and now happening directly
under your own astonished eyes. He licked his lips a little nervously--they
seemed to be rather dry. No use standing outside the door like a wooden
statue of Unwelcome Propriety anyhow--the thing had to be done, that was
all--and he pushed the bell-button with all the decision he could force
into his finger.

The fact that it was not answered at once helped him a good deal by giving
him a certain strength of annoyance. He pushed again.

It was Mrs. Severance who answered it finally--and the moment he saw her
face he knew with an immense invisible shock of relief how right he had
been, for it was composed as an idol's but under the composure there was
emotion, and, the moment she saw him, anger, as strong and steady and
impassive as the color of a metal that is only white because it has been
possessed to extremity already with all the burning heat that its substance
can bear. She was dressed in some stuff that moved with her and was part of
her as wholly as if it and her body had been made together out of light
and gilded cloud--he had somehow never imagined that she could be
as--lustrous--as that--it gave him the sensation that he had only seen her
before when she was unlighted like an empty lantern, and that now there was
such fire of light in her that the very glass that contained it seemed
to be burning of itself. And then he realized that she had given him
good-evening with an exquisite politeness, shaken hands and now was
obviously waiting, with a little tired look of surprise around her mouth,
to find out exactly why he was there at all.

He gathered his wits--it wasn't fair, somehow, for her to be wearing that
air of delicate astonishment at an unexpected call at dinner-time when he
hadn't been invited--it forced him into being so casually polite.

"Sorry to break in on you like this, Mrs. Severance," he said with a
ghastly feeling that after all he might be entirely wrong, and another that
it was queer to have to be so formal, in the afternoon tea sense, with his
words when his whole mind was boiling with pictures of everything from Ted
as a modern Tannhauser in a New York Venusberg to triangular murder. "I
hope I'm not--disturbing you?"

"Oh no. No," and he suddenly felt a most complete if unwilling admiration
for the utter finish with which she was playing her side of the act.

"Only you see," and this was Oliver doing his best at the ingenuous boy,
"Ted Billett, you know--he said he might be having dinner with you
this evening--and I've got a very important letter for him--awful
nuisance--don't see why it couldn't have gone in the mail by itself--but
the man was absolutely insistent on my delivering it by hand." "A letter?
Oh yes. And they want an answer right away?" Again Oliver realized
grudgingly that whatever Mrs. Severance might be she was certainly not
obvious. For "I'm so glad you came then," she was saying with what seemed
to be perfect sincerity. "Won't you come in?"

That little pucker that came and went in the white brow meant that she
was sure that she could manage him, sure she could carry it off, Oliver
imagined--and he was frank enough with himself to admit that he was not at
all sure that she couldn't.

"Oh Ted--" he heard her say, very coolly but also with considerable
distinctness, as if her voice had to carry, "there's a friend of yours here
with a letter for you--"

And then she had brought him inside and was apologizing for having the
front room so badly lighted but one had to economize on light-bills, didn't
one, even for a small apartment, and besides didn't it give one a little
more the real feeling of evening? And Oliver was considering why, when if
as he pressed the bell, he had felt so much like a modern St. George and
wholly as if he were doing something rather fine and perilous, he should
feel quite so much like a gauche seventeen-year-old now. He thought that
he would not enjoy playing chess with Mrs. Severance. She was one of those
people who smiled inoffensively at the end of a game and then said they
thought it would really be a little evener if they gave you both knights.

Ted reassured him though. Ted, stumbling out of the dining-room, with a
mixture of would-be unconcern, compound embarrassment and complete though
suppressed fury at Oliver on his face. It was hardly either just or moral,
Oliver reflected, that Mrs. Severance should be the only one of them to
seem completely at her ease.

"Hello, Ollie," in the tone of "And if you'd only get the hell out as
quickly as possible." "Mrs. Severance--" a stumble over that. "You've got a
letter for me?"

"Yes. It's important," said Oliver as firmly as he could. He gave it, and,
as Ted sat down near a lamp to read it, Oliver saw by one sudden momentary
flash that passed over Mrs. Severance's face that she had seen the address
and known instantly that the handwriting was not that of a man. And then
Oliver began to think that he might have been right when he had thought of
the present expedition as something rather perilous--he found that he had
moved three steps away from Mrs. Severance without his knowing it, very
much as he might have from an unfamiliar piece of furniture near which
he was standing and which had instantaneously developed all the electric
properties of a coil of live wire. Then he looked at Ted's face--and what
he saw there made him want to kick himself for looking--because it is never
proper for even the friendliest spectator to see a man's private soul
stripped naked as a grass-stalk before his own eyes. It was horribly like
watching Ted lose balance on the edge of a cliff that he had been walking
unconcernedly and start to fall without crying out or any romantic
gestures, with only that look of utter surprise struck into his face and
the way his hands clutched as if they would tear some solid hold out of the
air. Oliver kept his eyes on him in a frosty suspense while he read the
letter all through three times and then folded it and put it carefully away
in his breast pocket--and then when he looked at Mrs. Severance Oliver
could have shouted aloud with immense improper joy, for he knew by the way
Ted's hands moved that they were going back in the car together.

Ted was on his feet and his voice was as grave as if he were apologizing
for having insulted Mrs. Severance in public, but under the meaninglessness
of his actual words it was wholly firm and controlled.

"I'm awfully sorry--I've got to go right away. You'll think me immensely
rude but it's something that's practically life-and-death." "Really?" said
Mrs. Severance and Oliver could have clapped his hands at her accent. Now
that the battle had ended bloodlessly, he supposed he might be permitted to
applaud, internally at least. And "I'm sorry--but this is over," said every
note in Ted's voice and "Lost have I? Well then--" every note in hers.

It occurred to Oliver that things were badly arranged--all this--and he was
the only audience.

Life seemed sudden lavish in giving him benefit performances of other
people's love-affairs--he supposed it was all part of the old and deathless
jest.

And then, like a prickling of cold, there passed over him once more that
little sense of danger. Mrs. Severance and Ted were both standing looking
at each other and neither was saying anything--and Ted looked by his face
as if he were walking in his sleep.

"The car's down below, old boy," said Oliver helpfully, and then, a little
louder "Peter's car, you know," and whatever cobwebs had been holding
Ted for the last instant broke apart. He went over to Mrs. Severance.
"Good-by."

"Good-by," and he started making apologies again while she merely looked
and Oliver was suddenly fretting like a weary hostess whose callers have
stayed hours too long, to have him down in the car and the car pointed
again with its nose toward Southampton.

And then he heard, through Ted's last apologia, the whir of a mounting
elevator.

The elevator couldn't stop at the fourth floor--it couldn't. But it did,
and there was the noise of the gate slung back and "_What's that?_" said
Mrs. Severance sharply, her politeness broken to bits for the first time.

They were all standing near the door, and, with a complete disbelief in all
that he was hearing and seeing, Oliver heard Mrs. Severance's voice in his
ear, "The kitchen--fire-escape--" saw her push Ted toward him as if
she were shifting a piece of cumbrous furniture, and obeyed her orders
implicitly because he was too surprised to think of doing anything else.

He hurried himself and the still half-somnambulistic Ted through the
dining-room curtains, just in time to catch a last glimpse of Mrs.
Severance softly pressing with all her weight and strength against her side
of the door of the apartment as a man's quick short footsteps crossed the
hall in two strides, and after a second's pause, a key clicked into the
lock.




XXXVIII

Mrs. Severance, her whole weight against the door, felt it push at her
fiercely without opening, and, even in the midst of her turmoil, smiled.
Mr. Severance had never been exactly what one would call an athlete--

She slackened her pressure, little by anxious little. Her hand crept down
to the knob, then she jerked it sharply and stood back and Mr. Piper came
stumbling into the room, a little too fast for dignity. He had to catch
to her to save himself from falling but as soon as he had recovered his
balance he jerked his hands away from her as if they had taken hold of
something that hurt him and when he stood up she saw that his face was grey
all over and that his breath came in little hard sniffs through his nose.

"Sorry, Sargent," she said easily. "I heard your key but that silly old
door is sticking again. You didn't hurt yourself, did you?"

For an instant she thought that everything was going to be perfectly
simple--his face had changed so, with an intensity of relief almost
childish, at the sound of her accustomed voice. Then the greyness came
back.

"Do you mind--introducing me--Rose--to the gentleman--you are dining with
tonight?" he said with a difficulty of speech as if actual words were not
things he was accustomed to using. "I merely--called--to be quite sure."

She managed to look as puzzled as possible.

"The gentleman?"

"Oh yes, the gentleman." He seemed neither to be particularly disgusted
nor murderously angry--only so utterly tired in body and spirit that she
thought oddly that it seemed almost as if any sudden gesture or movement
might crumble him into pieces of fine grey paper at her feet.

"Oh, there isn't any use in pretending, Rose--any more. I have my
information."

"Yes? From whom?"

"What on earth does it matter? Elizabeth--since you choose to know."

"Elizabeth," said Mrs. Severance softly. She could not imagine how time,
even when successfully played for and gained, could help the situation very
much--but that was the only thing she could think of doing, and she did it,
therefore, with every trick of deliberation she knew, as if any instant
saved before he went into the dining-room might bring salvation.

"Do you know, I was always a little doubtful about Elizabeth. She was a
little too beautifully incurious about everything to be quite real--and a
little too well satisfied with her place, even on what we paid her. But of
course is she has been supplementing her salary with private-detective work
for you--"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I suppose you were foolish enough to give her one of your private
numbers," she said a trifle acidly. "Which will mean that you will be
paying her a modest blackmail all the rest of your life, and you'll
probably have to provide for her in your will. Oh, I know Elizabeth! She'll
be perfectly secret--if she's paid for it--she'll never make you willing to
risk the scandal by asking for more than just enough. But if this is the
way you carry on all your confidential investigations, Sargent--well, it's
fortunate you have large means--"

"She doesn't know who I am."

"Oh Sargent, Sargent! When all she has to do is to subscribe to 'Town and
Country.' Or call up the number you gave her, some time, and ask where it
is."

"There are the strictest orders about nobody but myself ever answering the
telephones in my private office."

"And servants are always perfectly obedient--and there are no stupid
ones--and accidents never happen. Sargent, really--"

"That doesn't matter. I didn't come here to talk about Elizabeth." "Really?
I should think you might have. I could have given you all the information
you required a good deal less expensively--and now, I suppose, I'll have to
think up some way of getting rid of Elizabeth as well. I can't pay her off
with one of my new dresses this time--"

"_Who is he?_"

"Suppose we start talking about it from the beginning, Sargent--?"

"_Where_ is he?"

"In the dining-room, I imagine. It wouldn't be very well bred of anyone,
would it, to come out and be introduced in the middle of this very loud,
very vulgar quarrel that you are making with me--"

"I'm going to see."

"No, Sargent."

"Let me pass, Rose!"

"I will not. Sargent, I will not let you make an absolute fool of yourself
before my friends before you give me a chance to explain--"

"I will, I tell you! I will! _Let me go!_"

They were struggling undignifiedly in the center of the room, her firm
strong hands tight over his wrists as he pawed at her, trying to wrench
himself away. Mr. Piper was a gentleman no longer--nor a business man--nor
a figure of nation-wide importance--he was only a small furious figure with
a face as grey and distorted as a fighting ape's who was clutching at the
woman in front of him as if he would like to tear her with his hands. A red
swimming had fallen over his eyes--all he knew was that the woman-person in
front of him had fooled him more bitterly and commonly than anyone had been
fooled since Adam--and that if he could not get loose in some way or other
from the hateful strength that was holding him, he would burst into the
disgusting tears of a vicious small boy who is being firmly held down and
spanked by an older girl. Grammar, manners and sense had gone from him as
completely as if he had never possessed them.

"Lemme go! oh damn you, damn you--you _woman_--you _devil--lemme_ go!"

"Be _quiet,_ Sargent! Oh shut up, you _fool, shut up!"_

A noise came from the kitchen--a noise like the sound of a man falling
over boxes. Mr. Piper struggled furiously--Paris was crawling out of the
window--Paris, the sleek, sly chamberer, the gay hateful cuckoo of his
private nest was getting away! Mrs. Severance turned her head toward the
noise a second. Mr. Piper fought like a crippled wrestler.

"Grr-ah! Ah, would you, would you?"

He had wrenched one hand free for an instant--it went to his pocket and
came out of it with something that shone and was hard like a new metal toy.

_"Now_ will you lemme go?" But Mrs. Severance tried to grab for the hand
with the revolver in it instead, and succeeded only in striking the barrel
a little aside. There was a noise that sounded like a cannon-cracker
bursting in Mr. Piper's face--it was so near--and then he was standing up,
shaking all over, but free and a man ready to explain a number of very
painful things to Paris as soon as he caught him. He took one step toward
the dining-room, sheer rage tugging at his body as high wind tugs at a
bough. Now that woman was out of the way----

And then he saw that she was out of the way indeed. She could not have
fallen without his hearing her fall--how could she?--but she was lying on
the floor in a crumple of clothes and one of her arms was thrown queerly
out from her side as if it did not belong to her body any longer. He stood
looking at her for what seemed one long endless wave of uncounted time and
that firecracker noise he had heard kept echoing and echoing through his
head like the sound of loud steps along a long and empty corridor. Then he
suddenly dropped the pistol and knelt clumsily beside her.

"Rose! Rose!" he started calling huskily, his hands feeling with frantic
awkwardness for her pulse and her heart, as Oliver Crowe ran into the room
through the curtains.




XXXIX

Oliver thought that he had never been quite so sure of anything as he was
that he must be insane. He was insane. Very shortly some heavy person in
uniform would walk into the tidy kitchen where he and Ted were crouching
like moving-picture husbands and remark with a kind smile that the Ahkoond
of Whilom was giving a tea-party in the Mountains of the Moon that
afternoon and that unless Oliver (or, as he was probable better known) St.
Oliver, came back at once in the nice private car with the wire netting
over its windows, everybody from God the Father Almighty to Carrie Chapman
Catt would be highly displeased. For a moment Oliver thought of lunatic
asylums almost lovingly--they had such fine high walls and smooth green
lawns and you were so perfectly safe there from anything ever happening
that was real. Then he jumped--that must be Mrs. Severance opening the
door.

"What are we going to _do_?" he said to Ted in a fierce whisper.

Ted looked at him stupidly. "Do? When I don't know whether I'm on my feet
or my head?" he said. His drugged passiveness showed Oliver with desolating
clarity that anything that could be done would have to be done by himself.
He crept over toward the window with a wild wish that black magic were
included in a Yale curriculum--the only really sensible thing he could
think of doing would be for both of them to vanish through the wall.

"Look! Fire-escape!"

"What?"

"_Fire-escape_!"

"All right. You take it."

Oliver had been sliding the window up all the while, cursing softly and
horribly at each damnatory creak. Yes--there it was--and people thought
fire-escapes ugly. Personally, Oliver had seldom seen anything in his life
which combined concrete utility with abstract beauty so ideally as that
little flight of iron steps leading down the entry outside the window into
blackness.

"You first, Ted."

"Can't." The word seemed to come despairingly out of the bottom of his
stomach.

"Came here. Own accord. Got to see it through. Take my medicine."

"You fool, she doesn't want you here! Think of Elinor!" For a moment Oliver
thought Ted was going to blaze into more blind rage. Then he checked
himself.

"I am. But listen to that."

The voices that came to them from the living-room were certainly both high
and excited--and the second that Oliver heard one of them he knew that all
his most preposterous suppositions on the drive down from Southampton had
come preposterously and rather ghastly true.

"Well, _listen_ to it! Do you know who the man is now? And will you get out
on the fire-escape, you _fool_?"

Ted listened intently for the space of a dozen seconds. Then "Oh my God!"
he said and his head went into his hands. Oliver crept over to him.

"Ted, listen--oh listen, damn you! What's the use of acting the chivalrous
fool, _now_? Don't you see? Don't you understand? Don't you get it that if
you leave she can explain it some way or other--that all you're doing by
staying is ruining yourself and Elinor for a point of honor that hasn't any
honor _to_ it?"

"Oh sure. Sure. But listen to him--why great God, Ollie, if he has a gun he
might kill her--probably will--Don't you see it's just because I hate the
whole business now--and her--and myself--th'at I've got to stick it out?
You go, Ollie, it's none of your business--"

"You go. You blessed idiot, there's no use of both of us smashing. If
anybody's got to stay--I can bluff it out a good deal better than you can
--trust me--"

"Oh rats. Not that it isn't very decent of you, Ollie, it is--and you'd do
it--but I wouldn't even be a _person_ to let you--"

They were both on their feet, talking in jerks, ears strained for every
sound from that other room.

"It's _perfectly_ simple--nobody's going to pull any gunplay--good Lord,
imagine poor old Mr. Piper--" said Oliver uncertainly, and then as
noises came to them that meant more than just talking, "_Get down that
fire-escape_!"

"I can't. Let go of me, Ollie. I mustn't Listen--something's up--something
bad! Get out of the way there, Ollie, I've got to go in! It _isn't_ your
funeral!"

"Well, it isn't going to be yours!" said Oliver through shut teeth--Ted's
last remark had, somehow been a little too irritating. He thought savagely
that there was only one way of dealing with completely honorable fools--Ted
shouldn't, by the Lord!---Oliver had gone to just a little too much trouble
in the last dozen hours to build Ted a happy home to let any of Ted's
personal wishes in the matter interrupt him now. He stepped back with a
gesture of defeat but his feet gripped at the floor like a boxer's and his
eyes fixed burningly on the point of Ted's jaw. Wait a split-second--he
wasn't near enough--now--_there_!

His fist landed exactly where he had meant it to and for an instant he felt
as if he had broken all the bones in his hand. Ted was back against the
wall, his mouth dropping open, his whole face frozen like a face caught
in a snapshot unawares to a sudden glare of immense and ludicrous
astonishment. Then he began to give at the knees like a man who has been
smitten with pie in a custard-comedy and Oliver recovered from his surprise
at both of them sufficiently to step in and catch him as he slumped, face
forward.

He laid him carefully down on the floor, trying feverishly to remember how
long a knockout lasted. Not nearly long enough, anyway. Ropes. A gag. His
eyes roved frantically about the kitchen. _Towels_!

He was filling Ted's mouth with clean dish-rag and thinking dully that it
was just like handling a man in the last stages of alcohol--the body had
the same limp refractory heaviness all over--when he heard something that
sounded like the bursting of a large blown-up paper bag from the other
room. He accepted the fact with neither surprise nor curiosity. Mr. Piper
had shot Mrs. Severance. Or Mrs. Severance had shot Mr. Piper. That was
all.

As soon as he had safely disposed of Ted--for an eery moment he had
actually considered stowing him away in a drawer of the kitchen-cabinet--it
might be well to go in and investigate the murder.

And then either Mrs. Severance or Mr. Piper--whichever it was of the two
that remained alive--might very well shoot him unless he or she had shot
himself or herself first. It seemed to Oliver that the latter event would
save everyone a great deal of trouble.

He did not relish the idea of being left alone in a perfectly strange
apartment with two corpses and one gagged, bound and unconscious best
friend--but he liked the picture of himself trying to make explanations to
either his hostess or Mr. Piper when, in either case, the other party to
the argument would be in possession of a loaded revolver, still less. He
hoped that if Mrs. Severance were the survivor she had had a sufficiently
Western upbringing at least to know how to shoot. He had no particular wish
to die--but anything was better than being mangled--and a reminiscence
of Hedda Gabler's poet's technique with firearms caused his stomach to
contract quite painfully as he tightened the knots around Ted's ankles. Ted
was the devil and all to get out on the fire-escape--and then you had to
tie him so that he wouldn't roll off.

He crawled back through the window, dusted his trousers, and settled his
necktie as carefully as if he were going to be married. Married. And he had
hoped, he thought rather pitiably, that even though Nancy had so firmly
decided to blight him forever she might have a few pleasant memories of
their engagement at least. Instead--well, he could see the headlines
now. "Big Financier, Youth and Mystery Woman Die in Triple Slaying."
"_Dead_--Oliver Crowe, Yale 1917, of Melgrove, L. I."

It hadn't been his job, damn it, it hadn't been his job at all. It was now,
though, with Ted perfectly helpless on the fire-escape where any crazy
person could take pot-shots at him as if he were a plaster pipe in a
shooting gallery. The idea of escape had somehow never seriously occurred
to him--what had happened in the evening already had impressed him so
with a sense of inane fatality that he could not even conceive of the
possibility of any-thing's coming right. In any event, Ted, tied up the
way he was, was too heavy and clumsy to carry down even the most ordinary
flight of stairs--and if he were going to be shot, he somehow preferred
to gasp his last breaths out on a comfortably carpeted floor rather than
clinging like a disreputable spider to the iron web of a fire-escape.

Oliver sighed--Nancy's firmness had admittedly quite ruined all the better
things in life--but even the merest sort of mere existence had got to be,
at times, a rather pleasant convention--how pleasant, he felt, he had never
quite realized somehow until just now. Then, with a vague idea of getting
whatever was to happen over with as quickly and decently as possible, he
settled his tie once more and trotted meekly through the dining-room and
beyond the curtains.




XL

"Why, Mr. Piper!" was Oliver's first and wholly inane remark.

It was not what he had intended to say at all--something rather more
dramatic and on the lines of "Shoot if you must this old grey head, but if
you will only listen to a reasonable explanation--" had been uppermost in
his mind. But the sight of Peter's father crouched over what must be Mrs.
Severance's body, his weak hands fumbling for her wrist and heart, his
voice thin with a senile sorrow as if he had been stricken at once and
in an instant with a palsy of incurable age, brought the whole world of
Southampton and house-parties and reality that Oliver thought he had lost
touch with forever, back to him so vividly that all he could do was gape at
the tableau on the floor.

Mr. Piper looked up and for a second of relief Oliver thought that the
staring eyes had not recognized him at all. Then he realized from the look
in them that who or what he was made singularly little difference now to
Mr. Piper. "Water!" croaked Mr. Piper. "Water! I've shot her. Oh, poor
Rose, poor Rose!" and he was plucking at her dress again with absorbed,
incapable fingers.

Oliver looked around him. The gun. There must have been a gun. Where? Oh
_there_--and as he picked it up from under a chair he did so with much
inward reverence in spite of the haste he took to it, for he felt as if it
were all the next forty years of his life made little into something cold
and small and of metal that he was lifting like a doll from the floor.

"Water," said Mr. Piper again and quite horribly. "Water for Rose."

It was only when he had gone back to the kitchen and started looking for
glasses that he realized that Mrs. Severance might very possibly be dying
out there in the other room. Till then the mere fact that he was not dying
himself had been too large in his vision to give him time to develop proper
sympathy for others. When he did, though, he hurried bunglingly, in spite
of a nervous flash in which after accidentally touching the revolver in his
pocket he almost threw it through the pane of the nearest window before he
considered. A moment, though, and he was back with a spilling tumbler.

"Water," said Mr. Piper with querulous satisfaction. "Give her water."
Oliver hesitated. "Where's she shot?" he said sharply.

"I don't know. Oh, I don't know. But I shot her. I shot her. Poor Rose."

It was certainly odd, there being no blood about, thought Oliver
detachedly. Internal wounds? Possibly, but even so. He dipped his fingers
in the glass of water, bent over Mrs. Severance and sprinkled the drops
as near her closed eyelids as possible. No sound came from her and not a
muscle of her body moved, but the delicate skin of the eyelids shivered
momentarily. Oliver drew a long breath and stepped back.

"She's dead," said Mr. Piper. "She's dead." And he began to weep, very
quietly with a mouselike sound and the slow horrible tears of age. "No use
trying water on her," said Oliver loudly, and again he thought he saw the
skin of the eyelids twitch a little. "Is there any brandy here--anything
like that, Mr. Piper?"

"K-kitchen," said Mr. Piper with a sniff and one of his hands came away
from Mrs. Severance to fumble for a key.

"I'll go get it," said Oliver, still rather loudly, and took one step
away. Then he bent down again swiftly and poured the whole contents of the
tumbler he was holding into the little hollow of Mrs. Severance's throat
just above the collar-bone. _"Oh!"_ said the dead Mrs. Severance in the
tone of one who has turned on the cold in a shower unexpectedly, and she
opened her eyes.

"Rose!" said Mr. Piper snifflingly. "You aren't dead? You aren't dead,
dear? Rose! Rose!"

"Oh," said Mrs. Severance again, but this time tinily and with a flavor of
third acts about her, and she started to relax rather beautifully into a
Dying Gladiator pose.

"I'll get some more water, Mr. Piper," said Oliver briskly, and Mrs.
Severance began to sit up again.

"I--fainted--silly of me," she said with a consummate dazedness. "Somebody
was firing revolvers--"

"I tried--I tried--I--t-tried to s-shoot you, Rose," came from the damp
little heap on the floor that was Mr. Piper.

"Really, Sargent--" said Mrs. Severance comfortably. Then she turned her
head and made what Oliver was always to consider her most perfect remark.
"You must think us very queer people indeed, Mr. Crowe?" she said smiling
questionmgly up at him.

Oliver's smile in answer held relief beyond words. It wasn't the ordinary
cosmos again--quite yet--but at least from now on he felt perfectly sure
that no matter how irregular anyone's actions might become, in speech at
least, every last least one of the social conventions would be scrupulously
observed.

"I think--if you could help me, Sargent--" said Mrs. Severance delicately.

"Oh yes, yes, yes," from Mr. Piper very eagerly and with Oliver's and his
assistance Mrs. Severance's invalid form was aided into a deep chair.

"And I think, now," she went on, "that if I could have just a little--" She
let the implication float in the air like a pretty bubble. "Perhaps--it
might help us all--"

"Oh _certainly,_ dear," from Mr. Piper. "I--"

"In the kitchen, you said, Mr. Piper. And you must let _me,"_ from Oliver
with complete decision. He hadn't bargained for that. Mr. Piper might not
notice Ted on the fire-escape--but then again he might--and if he did he
would certainly investigate--mute bound bodies were not ordinary or normal
adjuncts of even the most illegal of Riverside Drive apartments. And then.
Oliver's hand went down over the revolver in his pocket--if necessary he
stood perfectly ready to hold up Mr. Piper at the point of his own pistol
to preserve the inviolability of that kitchen.

But Mrs. Severance saved him the bother.

"If you would be so kind?" she said simply. "It's in the small
cupboard---the brown one--Sargent, you have the key?"

"Oh, yes, Rose." Mr. Piper was looking, Oliver thought, rather more
embarrassed than it was fair for any man to have to look and live. His eyes
kept going pitifully and always to Mrs. Severance and then creeping, away.
He produced the key, however, and gave it to Oliver silently and Oliver
took the first opportunity when he was through the curtains of giving
whatever fates had presided over the insanities of the evening a long cheer
with nine Mrs. Severances on the end.

He carefully stayed in the kitchen fifteen minutes--devoting most of
the time to a cautious examination of Ted, who seemed to be gradually
recovering consciousness. At least he stirred a little when poked by
Oliver's foot.

"Sleeps just like a baby--oh, the sweet little fellow--the dear little
fellow--" hummed Oliver wildly as he made a few last additions to the
curious network of string and towels with which he had wound Ted into the
fire-escape as if he had been making him a cocoon. "Well--well--_well_--
what a night we're having! What a night we're having and what _will_ we
have next?" Then he remembered the reason for his journey and removed a
bottle of brandy from the brown cup-board, found appropriate glasses
and, in the ice-chest, club-soda and ginger ale. He poured himself a drink
reminiscent of Paris--not that he felt he needed it for the reaction from
bracing himself to die like a Pythias had left him elvishly grotesque in
mind--gathered the bottles tenderly in his arms like small glass babies and
went back to the living-room.




XLI

And this time he was forced to pay internal high compliment to Mr. Piper as
well as to Mrs. Severance. The pitiful grey image, its knees rumpled from
the floor, its features streaked like a cheap paper mask with ludicrous
dreadful tears, had turned back into the President of the Commercial Bank
with branches in Bombay and Melbourne and all the business-capitals of the
world. Not that Mr. Piper was at ease again, exactly--to be at ease under
the circumstances would merely have proved him brightly inhuman--but he
looked as Oliver thought he might have on one of the Street's Black Mondays
when only complete firmness and complete audacity in one could keep even
the Commercial afloat at a time when the Stock Exchange had turned into a
floor-full of well-dressed maniacs and houses that everyone had thought as
solid as granite went to pieces like sand castles.

Oliver set down the bottles and opened them with a feeling both that he had
never known Mr. Piper at all before, only Peter's father, and, spookily,
that neither Peter's father nor the terrible old man who had wept on the
floor beside Mrs. Severance could have any real existence--this was such a
complete and unemotional Mr. Piper he had before him, a Mr. Piper, too, in
spite of all the oddities of the present situation, so obviously at home in
his own house.

None of them said anything in particular until the mixture in the glasses
had sunk about half-way down. Then Mr. Piper remarked in a pleasant voice,
"I don't often permit myself--seldom even before the country adopted
prohibition--but the present circumstances seem to be--er--unusual
enough--to warrant--" smiled cheerfully and lifted his glass again. When
he had set it down he looked at Mrs. Severance, then at Oliver, and then
started to speak.

Oliver listened with some tenseness, knowing only that whatever he might
possibly have imagined might happen, what would happen, to judge from the
previous events of the evening, would be undoubtedly so entirely different
that prophecy was no use at all. But, even so, he was not entirely prepared
for the unexpectedness of Mr. Piper's first sentence.

"I feel that I owe you very considerable apologies, Oliver," the President
of the Commercial began with a good deal of stateliness. "In fact I really
owe you so many that it leaves me at rather a loss 'as to just how to
begin." He smiled a little shyly.

"Rose has explained everything," he said, and Oliver looked at Mrs.
Severance with stupefied wonder--_how?_

"But even so, there remains the difficulty--of my putting myself into
words."

"Silly boy," said Mrs. Severance easily, and Oliver noted with fresh
amazement that the term seemed to come from her as naturally and almost
conventionally as if she had every legal American right to use it. "Let me,
dear." And Oliver felt his head begin to go round like a pinwheel.

But then--but she really _couldn't_ be married to Mr. Piper--and yet
somehow she seemed so much more married to him than Mrs. Piper ever had
been--Oliver's thoughts played fantastically for an instant over the
proposition that she and Mr. Piper had been secretly converted to
Mohammedanism together and he looked at Mr. Piper's grey head almost as
if he expected to see a large red fez suddenly drop down upon it from the
ceiling.

"No, Rose," and again Mr. Piper's voice was stately. "This is
my--difficulty. No matter how hard it may be."

"Of course I did not understand--how could I?--that Rose--was such a very
good friend of your sister's and all your family's. Rose had told me
something about it, I believe--but I was so--foolishly disturbed--when I
came in--that really, I--well I must admit that even if I had seen you when
I first came in that would hardly have been the thought uppermost in my
mind at the time." He spoke in the same tone of kindly reproof toward
himself that he would have used if business worries had made him commit a
small but definite act of inhospitality toward one of his guests.

"And naturally--you will think me very ignorant indeed of my son's
affairs--and those of his friends--but while I had heard from Peter--of the
breaking of your engagement--you will pardon me, I hope, if I touch upon a
subject that must be so painful to you--I had no idea of the fact that you
were--intending to leave the country--and knowing Rose thought that with
her present position on 'Mode'--" he paused.

"It was very kind indeed of Mrs. Severance to offer to do what she could
for me," said Oliver non-committally. He thought he got the drift of the
story now--a sheer one enough but with Mr. Piper's present reaction toward
abasement and his obvious wish to believe whatever he could, it had
evidently sufficed.

"I know it was silly of me having Oliver to dinner here alone--" said
Mrs. Severance with the air of one ready to apologize for a very minor
impropriety. "Silly and wrong--but Louise was coming too until she
telephoned about Jane Ellen's little upset--and I thought we could have
such fun getting supper together with Elizabeth away. I get a little tired
of _always_ entertaining my friends in restaurants, Sargent, especially
when I want to talk to them without having to shout. And _really_ I never
_imagined_--"

She looked steadily at Mr. Piper and he seemed to shrink a little under her
gaze.

"As for Elizabeth," he said with hurried vindictiveness, "Elizabeth shall
leave tomorrow morning. She--"

"Oh, we might as well keep her, Sargent," said Mrs. Severance placidly.
"You will have to pay her blackmail, of course--but after all that's really
your fault a little, isn't it?--and it seems as if that was more or
less what you had to do with any kind of passable servant nowadays. And
Elizabeth is perfection--as a servant. As police--" she smiled a little
cruelly. "Well, we shan't go into that, but I think it would be so much
better to keep her. Then we'll be getting something out of her in return
for our blackmail, don't you see?"

"Perhaps. Still we have no need of discussing that now. I can only say that
if Elizabeth is to stay, she will have to--" "Reform? My dear Sargent! When
everything she did was from the most rigidly moral motives? I had no idea
she was such a _clever_ cat, though--"

"She will have ample opportunities of exercising her cleverness in jail if
I can find any means of getting her there, and I think I can. Really," said
Mr. Piper reflectively, "really when I think--"

Then he stopped.

"But you're still waiting for an--explanation--aren't you, Oliver?"

"Having been very nearly assassinated because of Elizabeth's abilities in
telephone conversation, I should think he might very well be interested in
knowing what is going to happen to her. However--"

"Yes," and Mr. Piper's face became very sober. He looked at his glass as if
he would be willing to resign the Presidency of the Commercial in its favor
if it would only explain to Oliver for him.

"You were saying, Sargent?" said Mrs. Severance implacably.

"I was. Well, I," he began, and then "You," and stopped, and then he began
again.

"I said that it would be--difficult--for me to explain matters to you
fully, Oliver; I find it to be--even more difficult than I had supposed.
I--it is rather hard for a man of my age to defend his manner of life to
one of your age, even when he himself is wholly convinced that that manner
is not---unrighteous. And in this particular case, to one of his son's best
friends."

He twisted his fingers around the rim of his glass. Oliver started to speak
but Mr. Piper put up his hand. "No--please--it will be so much easier if I
finish what I have to say first," he said rather pleadingly.

"Well--the situation here between Rose and myself--must be plain to you
now." Oliver nodded, he hoped in not too knowing a way. "Plain. How that
situation arose--is another matter. And a matter that would take a good
deal too long to tell. Except that, given the premises from which we set
forth--what followed was perhaps as inevitable as most things are in life.

"That situation has been known to no other person on earth but
ourselves--all these years. And now it is known. Well, Oliver, there you
have it. And you happen to have us also--entirely in your hands. Because of
a spying, greedy servant--and my own stupidity and distrust--we have been
completely found out. And by one of my son's best friends.

"I wish that I could apologize for--all the scene before this. Better. I
hope that you will believe that I am trying to do so now. But I seldom make
apologies, Oliver, even when I am evidently in the wrong--and this hasn't
been one of my easiest to make. And now."

He sat back and waited, his fingers curled round his glass. And, as
he looked at him, Oliver felt a little sickish, for, on the whole, he
respected Mr. Piper a good deal more than his irreverent habit of mind
permitted him to respect most older people, and at the same time felt
pitifully sorry for him--it must be intensely humiliating to have to
explain this way--and yet the only thing Oliver could do was to take
the largest advantage possible of his very humiliation and
straightforwardness--the truth could still do nothing at all but wreck
everybody concerned.

"I give you my word of honor, Mr. Piper, to keep everything I know entirely
and completely secret," said Oliver, slowly, trying to make the large
words seem as little magniloquent as possible. "That's all I can say, I
guess--but it's true--you can really depend on it."

"Thank you," said Mr. Piper quite simply. "I believe you, Oliver," and
again Oliver felt that little burn of shame in his mind.

"Thank you," said Mrs. Severance, copying Mr. Piper finished his drink and
rose. "And now, I do not wish you to misunderstand me," he said. "I have
not come to my age without realizing that there are certain services that
cannot be paid for. But you have done me a very great service, Oliver--a
service for which I should have been glad to give nearly everything
material that I possess. I merely wish you to know that in case you should
ever need--assistance--from an older man---in any way--that is clumsily
put, but I can think of no other suitable word at the moment--I am entirely
at your disposal. Entirely so."

"Thank you, sir," said Oliver a little stiffly. Mr. Piper was certainly
heaping coals of fire. Then he wondered for an instant just what Mrs.
Ellicott would think if she could have heard the President of the
Commercial say that to him--

Mr. Piper was moving slowly toward the door, and the politeness that had
been his at the beginning of the conversation was nothing to his supreme
politeness now.

"And now," he said, as if he were asking everybody's pardon for an entirely
unintentional intrusion, "I really must be getting back to Southampton--and
you and Rose I imagine have still quite a bit to talk over--"

"But--" said Oliver clumsily, "but Mr. Piper--" and "Must you really,
dear?" said Mrs. Severance in the softest tones of conventional wifely
reproach.

Her manner was ideal but Oliver somehow and suddenly felt all the
admiration he had ever had for her calm power blow away from him like
smoke. He could not help extremest appreciation of her utter poise--he
never would be able to, he supposed--but from now on it would be the
somewhat shivery appreciation that anyone with sensitive nerves might
give to the smooth mechanical efficiency of a perfectly-appointed
electric-chair.

"No," said Mr. Piper perfectly, "I insist. You certainly could not have
finished your discussion before I came and for the present--well--it seems
to me that I have intruded quite long enough. I wish it," he added and
Oliver understood.

"You are staying with us, over tomorrow, Oliver, are you not?" said Mr.
Piper calmly, and Oliver assented. "I suppose we shall see each other at
breakfast then?"

"Oh yes, sir." And then Oliver tried to rise to Mr. Piper's magnificence of
conventionality in remark. "By the way, sir, I'm driving back in Peter's
car--as soon as Mrs. Severance and I have finished our talk--I couldn't
pick you up anywhere, sir, could I?"

Mr. Piper smiled, consulting his watch. "There is an excellent train at
10.33--an excellent one--" he said, and again Oliver was dumfounded to
realize that the whole march of events in the apartment had taken scarcely
two hours.

"Thank you, Oliver, but I think I had better take that. Not that I distrust
your driving in the least, but it will be fairly slow going, I imagine,
over some of those roads at night--and this was one evening on which I had
really intended to get a good night's sleep."

He smiled again very quaintly.

"You'll be dancing as soon as you get back, I suppose? I understand there
is to be a dance this evening?"

"Yes, sir--at least, I guess so. Told Peter I'd show up."

"Youth," said Mr. Piper. "Youth." There was a certain accent of dolefulness
in the way he said it.

"And now I shall call a taxi," he said briskly.

"Can't I take you down--?" Oliver began, but

"No, no. I insist," said Mr. Piper a little irritatedly, and then Oliver
understood that though he might be quixotic on occasion, he was both human
and--Oliver hesitated over the words, they seemed so odd to his youth to
be using of a man who was certainly old enough to be his father--really in
love with Mrs. Severance after all. So, until Mr. Piper's taxi came they
chatted of indifferent matters much as they might have while watching
people splashing about in the water from the porch of the swimming pool
at Bar Harbor--and Oliver felt exceedingly in the way. These last dozen
minutes were the hardest to get through of the whole evening, he thought
rather dizzily; up till now he had almost forgotten about Ted, but it would
be quite in keeping with everything else that had happened if just as
Mr. Piper were leaving, a formal farewell on his lips and everything
straightened out to everyone's conspiratorial or generously befooled
satisfaction, Ted should stagger into the room like the galvanized corpse
of a Pharoah wrapped in towels instead of mummy-cloth and everything from
revolver-shots to a baring of inmost heart-histories would have to be gone
through with again.

So when Oliver heard the telephone ring again he knew it was too good to be
true, and, even when Mr. Piper started to answer it, was struck chilly
with a hopeless fear that it might be police. But Fate had obviously got
a trifle bored of her sport with them, or very possibly tired out by the
intricacy of her previous combinations--for it was only the taxi after all
and Mr. Piper was at the door.

"No use saying good-by to you now, is there, Oliver?" he said quietly, but
held out his hand nevertheless.

"Well, good-by, Rose," as he scrupulously shook hands with Mrs. Severance.

"Good-by, Sargent," and then the door he had had such difficulty in opening
two hours before had shut behind him and Oliver and Mrs. Severance were
left looking at each other.

"Well," said Mrs. Severance with a small gasp.

"Well," said Oliver. "Well, well!"

"Excuse me," said Oliver, and he walked over to the table and poured
himself what he thought as he looked at it was very like the father and
mother of all drinks.

"You might--do something like that for me--" said Mrs. Severance
helplessly. "If you did--I think--I might be able to think--oh, _well_!"

"Well," repeated Oliver like a toast as he tipped the bottle and the drink
which he poured for Mrs. Severance was so like unto his drink that it would
have taken a fine millimeter-gauge to measure the difference between them.

Mrs. Severance went back to her chair and Oliver sank into the chair that
had been previously occupied by Mr. Piper. As he stretched back luxuriously
something small and hard and bulging made him aware of itself in his
pocket. "Oh Lord, I forgot I still had that gun of Mr. Piper's!" said
Oliver inconsequentially.

"Have you?" said Mrs. Severance. The fact did not seem to strike her as
being of any particular importance. They both drank long and frankly and
thirstily, as if they were drinking well-water after having just come in
from a hot mountain trail. And again, and for a considerable time, neither
spoke.

"I suppose," said Mrs. Severance finally, with a blur of delicate scorn, "I
suppose our friend Mr. Billett--got away safely?"

Her words brought up a picture of Ted to Oliver,--Ted netted like a fish
out there on the fire-escape, swaddled up like a great papoose in all the
towels and dish-cloths Oliver had been able to find. The release was too
sudden, too great--the laughter came--the extreme laughter--the laughter
like a giant. He swayed in his chair, choking and beating his knees and
making strange lion-like sounds.

"Ted," he gasped. "Ted! Oh, no, Mrs. Severance, Ted didn't get away!
He didn't get away at all--Ted didn't! He didn't because you see he
_couldn't_. He's out on the fire-escape now--oh, wait till you see him, oh
Ted, oh Glory, oh what a night, what a night, what a night!"




XLII

It took a good deal of explaining, however, to make Ted understand. He was
still tightly bound, though very angrily conscious when they found him and
his language when Oliver removed the improvised gag was at first of such an
army variety that Oliver wondered doubtfully if he hadn't better replace
it until he got Ted alone. Also Oliver was forced to curse himself rather
admiringly for the large number of unnecessary knots he had used, when he
started to unravel his captive.

When they finally got him completely untangled Ted's first remarks were
hardly those of gratitude. He declared sulkily that his head felt as if it
were going to split open, that he must have a bump on the back of it as big
as a squash and that it wasn't Oliver's fault if he hadn't caught pneumonia
out on that fire-escape--the air, believe him, was _cold_!

Mrs. Severance, however, and as usual, rose to the occasion and produced a
bottle of witch-hazel from the bathroom with which she insisted on bathing
the bump till Ted remarked disgruntledly that he smelt like a hospital.
Oliver watched the domestic scene with frantic laughter tearing at his
vitals--this was so entirely different and unromantic an end to the evening
from that from which Oliver had set out to rescue Ted like a spectacled Mr.
Grundy and which Ted in his gust of madness had so bitterly and grandiosely
planned.

Then they moved back into the living-room and the story was related
consecutively, by Oliver with fanciful adornments, by Mrs. Severance with a
chill self-satisfaction that Oliver noticed with pleasure was like touching
icicles to Ted. Ted gave his version--which only amounted to waking up on
the fire-escape, trying to shout and succeeding merely in getting mouthfuls
of towels--Oliver preened himself a little there--and lying there stoically
and getting more and more furious until he was rescued. And while he told
it he kept looking everywhere in the room but at Rose. And then Oliver
remembered Mr. Piper and looked at his watch--11.04. He rose and gazed at
Mrs. Severance.

"Well," he said, and then caught her eye. It was chilly, doubtless, and
even by Oliver's unconventional standards he could not think of her as
anything but a highly dangerous and disreputable woman--but that eye was
alive with an irony and humor that seemed to him for a moment more perfect
than those in any person he had ever seen. "_Must_ you go?" she said
sweetly. "It's been _such_ an interesting party--so _original_," she
hesitated. "Isn't that the word? Of course," she shrugged, "I can see that
you're simply dying to get away and yet you can hardly complain that I
haven't been an entertaining hostess, can you?"

"Hardly," said Oliver meekly, and Ted said nothing--he merely looked down
as if his eyes were augers and his only concern in life was screwing them
into the floor.

"_Must_ you go?" she repeated with merciless mocking. "When it _has_ been
fun--and I don't suppose we'll ever see each other again in all our lives?
For I can hardly come out to Melgrove now, can I, Oliver? And after you've
had a quiet brotherly talk with her, I suppose I'll even have to give up
lunching with Louise. And as for Ted--poor Ted--poor Mr. Billett with all
his decorations of the Roller Towel, First Class--Mr. Billett must be a
child that has been far too well burnt this evening, not, in any imaginable
future to dread the fire?"

Both flushed, Ted deeper perhaps than Oliver, but neither answered. There
really did not seem to be anything for them to say. She moved gently toward
the door--the ideal hostess. And as she moved she talked and every word
she said was a light little feathered barb that fell on them softly as
snowflakes and stuck like tar.

"I hope you won't mind if I send you wedding presents--both of you--oh, of
course I'll be quite anonymous but it will be such a pleasure--if you'll
both of you only marry nice homey girls!" Ted started at this as if he
had been walking barefoot and had stepped on a wasp and she caught him
instantly.

"Dear, dear, so Mr. Billett has serious intentions also--and I thought a
little while ago that I was really in Mr. Billett's confidence--it only
shows how little one can tell. As for Oliver, he of course is blighted--at
present--but I'm sure that that will not last very long--one always finds
most adequate consolation sooner or later though possibly not in the way in
which one originally supposed." She sighed elfinly as Oliver muttered under
his breath.

"What was that, Oliver? Oh, no, I am not at all the sort of person that
writes anonymous letters to one's wife--or family--or sister," a spaced
little pause between each noun. "And besides it wouldn't be much use in me,
would it? for of course you young gentlemen will tell the young ladies you
marry _everything_ about yourselves--all honorable young people do. And
then too," she spread out her hands, "to be frank. We've all been so
beautifully frank about ourselves tonight--that's one thing I _have_ liked
so much about the evening--well, it would hardly be worth my while to take
lessons in blackmailing from Elizabeth if the only subjects on which I
could apply them were two impecunious young men. And, oh, I realize most
perfectly--and please don't misunderstand me!--that we're all of us
thieves together so to speak and only getting along on each other's
sufferance. But then, if one of us ever starts telling, even a little, he
or she can hardly do so in any way that will redound to anything but his
or her discredit and social obliteration--how nicely I've put that!--so I
don't think any of us will be very anxious to tell.

"_Good_-by, Mr. Billett--and when you do marry, please send me an
invitation--oh I shan't come, I've been far too well brought-up--but I must
send--appreciations--and so must have the address. We have had a pleasant
acquaintanceship together, haven't we?--perhaps a little more pleasant on
my side than on yours--but even so it's _so_ nice to think that nothing has
ever happened that either of us could really regret.

"Just remember that the only person I could incriminate you to would be
Mr. Piper, and not even there very much, due to Sargent's melodramatic
appearance in the middle of dinner. But I shan't even there--it would mean
incriminating myself a little too much too, don't you know? and even if the
apartment here does get a trifle lonely one evening and another, I have got
to be extraordinarily fond of it and I couldn't have nearly as nice a one
--or as competent an Elizabeth--on what they pay me on 'Mode.' So I'll keep
it, I think, if you don't mind.

"But that may make you a little more comfortable when you think things
over--and I'm sure we all deserve to be very comfortable indeed for quite a
long while after the very trying time we've just been through.

"_Good_-by, and I assure you that even if I shall never be able to think of
you in the future except as all wrapped up in the middle of those absurd
towels, I shall think of you quite kindly though rather ridiculously
nevertheless. And now if you will just run away a minute and wait down in
that car of Sargent's that Oliver--borrowed--so effectively--because I
must have one motherly word with Oliver alone before we part forever! Thank
you so _much_! _Good_-by!"




XLIII

So Oliver was left alone with her, he didn't know why. He noticed, however,
that when she came to talk to him, though it was still with lightness, she
was at no particular effort any longer to make the lightness anything but a
method of dealing with wounds.

"Mr. Billett does not seem quite to appreciate exactly how much your timely
pugilistics did for him," she observed. "Or exactly how they might have
affected you."

Oliver set his jaw, rather. He was hardly going to discuss what Ted might
or might not owe him with Mrs. Severance. Hardly.

"No, I suppose you wouldn't," she said uncannily. Then she spoke again
and this time if the tone was airy it was with the airiness of a defeated
swordsman apologizing for having been killed by such a clumsy stroke of
fence.

"But I have some--comprehension--of just what you did. And besides--I seem
to have a queer foible for telling the truth just now. Odd, isn't it, when
I've been lying so successfully all evening?"

"Very successfully," said Oliver, and, to his astonishment, saw her wince.

"Yes--well. Well, I don't know quite why I'm keeping you here--though there
was something I wanted to say to you, I believe--in a most serious and
grandmotherly manner too--the way of a grown woman as Sargent would put
it--poor Sargent--" She laughed.

"Oh yes, I remember now. It was only that I don't think you
need--worry--about Mr. Billett any more. You see?"

"I think so," said Oliver with some incomprehension.

"Seeing him done up that way in towels," she mused with a flicker of mirth.
"And the way he looked at me when I was telling about things afterwards--
oh it wouldn't do, you know, Oliver, it wouldn't do! Your friend
is--essentially--a--highly--Puritan--young man," she added slowly. Oliver
started--that was one of the things so few people knew about Ted.

"Oh yes--wholly. Even in the way he'd go to the devil. He'd do it with
such a religious conviction--take it so _hard_. It would eat him up.
Completely. And it isn't--amusing--to go to the devil with anybody
whose diabolism would be so efficiently pious--a reversed kind of
Presbyterianism. We wouldn't do that, you know--you or myself," and for an
instant as she spoke Oliver felt what he characterized as a most damnable
feeling of kinship with her.

It was true. Oliver had been struck with that during his army
experiences--things somehow had never seemed to stick to him the way they
had seemed to with Ted.

"Which is one reason that I feel so sure Mr. Billett will get on very well
with Sargent's daughter--if his Puritan principles don't make him feel
too much as if he were linking her for life to a lost soul," went on Mrs.
Severance.

"_Wha-a-at!_"

"My dear Oliver, whatever my failings may be, I have some penetration. Mr.
Billett was garrulous at times, I fear--young men are so apt to be with
older women. Oh _no_--he was beautifully sure that he was not betraying
himself--the dear ostrich. And that letter--really that was clumsy of both
of you, Oliver--when I could see the handwriting--all modern and well-bred
girls seem to write the same curly kind of hand somehow--and then Sargent's
address in embossed blue letters on the back. And I _couldn't_ have
suspected him of carrying on an intrigue with Mrs. Piper!" and Oliver was
forced to smile at her tinkle of laughter. Then she grew a little earnest.

"I don't suppose it was--Mr. Billett--I wanted so--exactly," she mused. "It
was more--Mr. Billett's age--Mr. Billett's undeniable freshness--if you
see. I'm not quite a Kipling vampire--no--a vampire that wants to crunch
the bones--or do vampires crunch bones? I believe they only act like babies
with bottles--nasty of them, isn't it?--But one gets to a definite age--and
Sargent's a dear but he has all the defects of a husband--and things begin
slipping away, slipping away--"

She made a motion of sifting between her hands, letting fall light grains
of a precious substance that the hands were no longer young enough to keep.

"And life goes so queerly and keeps moving on like a tramp in front of a
policeman till you've started being gray and taking off your corset every
time you're alone because you like being comfortable better than having
a waist-line--and you've never had anything to settle you," her face
twitched, "not children--nor even the security of marriage--nothing but
work that only interests part of you--and this--"

She spread her hands at the apartment.

"Well--what a lot of nonsense I'm talking--and keeping Mr. Billett out in
the car when he's sure he has pneumonia already--how unkind of me. You must
think me a very immoral old woman, don't you, Oliver?"

"I think you're very sporting," said Oliver, truthfully.

"Not very. If I really _wanted_ Mr. Billett, you see." Her eyes sparkled.
"I'm afraid you wouldn't think me sporting at all--in that case. But then I
don't think you'd have been able to--save--anybody I really wanted as you
did Mr. Billett." She spoke slowly. "Even with that very capable looking
right hand. But in case you're still worried--"

"I'm not, really."

She paid no attention.

"In case you're still worried--what I told Mr. Billett was true. In the
first place, Sargent would never believe me, anyway. In the second place
it would mean breaking with Sargent--and do you know I'm rather fond of
Sargent in my own way?--and a thing like that--well, you saw how he was
tonight--it would mean more things like revolvers and I _hate_ revolvers.
And hurting Sargent--and ruining Mr. Billett who is a genuinely nice boy
and can't help being a Puritan, though I never shall forget the way
he looked in those towels. Still, I'm rather fond of him too--oh, I'm
perfectly unashamed about it, it's quite in an aunty way now and he'll
never see me again if he can help it.

"And making Sargent's daughter--who must be charming from what I hear of
her--but charming or not, she happens to be a woman and I have a feeling
that, being a woman, life will hurt her quite sufficiently without my
adding my wholly vicarious share. Oh, I'm perfectly harmless now, Oliver,"
she made a pretty gesture with her hands. "You and Sargent and the
fire-escape between you have drawn my fangs."

"I can't exactly--thank you," said Oliver, "but I do repeat--you're
sporting."

"Never repeat a compliment to a woman over twenty and seldom then." She
looked at him reflectively. "The same woman, that is. There is such a
great deal I could teach you though, really," she said. "You're much more
teachable than Mr. Billett, for instance," and Oliver felt a little shudder
of terror go through him for a moment at the way she said it. But she
laughed again.

"I shouldn't worry. And besides, you're blighted, aren't you?--and they're
unteachable till they recover. Well.

"Oh, yes, there was something else I meant to be serious about. Sargent
said something about our--disappearing, and all that. Well, Sargent has
always been enamored of puttering around a garden somewhere in an alias and
old trousers with me to make him lemonade when he gets overheated--and so
far I've humored him--but I've really never thought very much of the idea.
That would be--for me--a particularly stupid way of going to seed." She was
wholly in earnest now. "And I haven't the slightest intention of going to
seed with Sargent or anybody else for a very long time yet. If it ever
comes definitely to that I shall break with Sargent; you can depend on my
selfishness--arrogance--anything you like for that. Quite depend.

"Tonight," she hesitated. "Tonight has really made a good many
things--clear to me. Things that were moving around in my mind, though
I didn't know quite what to call them. For one thing, it has made
me--realize," her eyes darkened, "that my time for really being--a
woman--not in the copybook sense--is diminishing. Getting short. Oh, you
and Mr. Billett will have to reconcile your knowledge of Sargent's and
my situation with whatever moral ideas you may happen to have on
fathers-in-law and friends' fathers for some time yet--I'm sure I don't
know how you're going to do it, especially Mr. Billett, and I can't
honestly say that I particularly care. But that will not be--permanent, I
imagine. You understand?" She put her hand on the door-knob to imply that
the audience was over.

"I shall miss Louise, though," she said, frankly.

"Louise will miss you." Oliver saw no need for being politic now. He added
hesitatingly, "After all--"

"Oh, no. No," she said lightly but very firmly. "I couldn't very well, now,
could I?" and Oliver, in spite of all the broadmindedness upon which he
prided himself, was left rather dumb.

"Oh, it won't be--difficult," she added. "We can keep up--in the
office--yes?"

"Yes," said Oliver hastily. He might be signing a compact with all the
powers of darkness, but even so.

"For the rest, I am--used to things like that," she added, and once again
her face grew suddenly bright with pain. Then she recovered herself.

"Well--our next merry meeting and so forth," she said airily. "Because when
it happens, if it does, I may be so stodgily respectable you'll be
very glad to ask me to dinner, you know. Or I may be--completely
disreputable--one never knows. But in any case," and she gave her hand.

"Mr. Billett must be freezing to death in that car," she murmured.
"Good-by, Oliver, and my best if wholly unrespectable good wishes." "Thanks
and--good luck to you."

She turned on him swiftly.

"Oh, no. All the happiness in the world and _no_ luck---that's better,
isn't it? _Good_-by."

"Good-by."

And then Oliver was out in the hall, pressing the button that would summon
a sleepy, disgruntled elevator-boy to take him down to Ted and the car. He
decided as he waited that few conversations he had ever had made him feel
quite so inescapably, irritatingly young; that he saw to the last inch of
exactitude just why Mr. Piper completely and Ted very nearly had fallen
in love with Mrs. Severance; that she was one of the most remarkable
individuals he had ever met; and that he hoped from the bottom of his heart
he never, never saw her again.




XLIV

Ted and he had little conversation going back in the car. The most
important part of it occurred when they had left New York behind and were
rushing along cool moon-strewn roads to Southampton. Then--

"Thanks," said Ted suddenly and fervently and did not seem to be able to
say anything more.

The events of the evening had come too close, at moments, to grotesque
tragedy for Oliver to pretend to misunderstand him.

"Oh, that's all right. And anyhow I owed you one for that time with the
gendarmes in Brest."

"Maybe," but Ted didn't seem to be convinced. "That was jocose though. Even
at the worst." The words came with effort. "This was--serious. I owe you
about everything, I guess."

"Oh, go take a flying leap at a galloping goose!"

"Go do it yourself. Oh, Oliver, you ass, I _will_ be pretty and polite
about your saving my life." And both laughed and felt easier. "Saved a good
deal more than that as a matter of fact--or what counts for more with me,"
Ted added soberly. "Then the letter I brought _was_ satisfactory?"

"Satisfactory? Gee!" said Ted intensely, and again they fell silent.

Some miles later Oliver added casually

"You won't have any trouble with our late hostess, by the way. Though she
knows all about it."

"She knows?"

Oliver couldn't resist.

"And quite approves. But she's--a sport." Then for Ted's sake, "Besides,
you see, it would crab her game completely."

"I'll tell Elinor, though," said Ted, stubbornly.

"About her father? You can't."

"Oh, Lord, no. About myself. Don't have to give names and addresses."

"Afterwards."

"Well, yes--afterwards. Though it makes me feel like a swine."

"Nobody our age who hasn't been one or felt like one--some of the
time--except Christers and the dead," said Oliver, and they proceeded for
several minutes on the profundity of that aphorism. The silence was broken
by Ted's saying violently,

"I _will_ marry her! I don't give a damn what's happened."

"Good egg. Of course you will." Oliver chuckled.

Ted turned to him anxiously after another silence.

"Look Ollie, that bump on my head--you've seen the size it is. Well, is it
going to just show up like _thunder_ at this silly dance?"




XLV

Half-past five in the morning and Oliver undressing wearily by the light of
a pale pink dawn.

Now and then he looks at his bed with a gloating expression that almost
reaches the proportions of a lust--he is so tired he can hardly get off his
clothes. The affairs of the last twenty-four hours mix in his mind like
a jumble of colored postcards, all loose and disconnected and brightly
unreal. Ted--Elinor--Mrs. Severance--Mr. Piper--the dance he has just
left--sleep--oh--sleep!

Where is Ted? Somewhere with Elinor of course--it doesn't matter--both
were looking suspiciously starry when he last saw them across the
room--engagements--marriages--sleep--Mr. Piper's revolver--sleep. How will
he return Mr. Piper's revolver? Can't do it tactfully--can't leave it
around to be lost, the servants are too efficient--send it to Ted and
Elinor as a wedding present--no, that's not tactful either--what silly
thoughts--might have been dead by this time--rather better, being
alive--and in bed--and asleep--and asleep. Oh, _bed!_ and he falls into
it as if he were diving into butter and though he murmurs "Nancy" once to
himself before his head sinks into pillows, in two seconds he is drugged
with such utter slumber that it is only the blind stupefied face of a man
under ether that he is able to lift from his haven when Ted comes in
half an hour later and announces, in the voice of one proclaiming a new
revelation, that Elinor is the finest person that ever lived and that
everything is most wholly and completely all right.




XLVI

"A letter for you, dear Nancy."

Mrs. Winters gestures at it refinedly--she never points--as Nancy comes in
to breakfast looking as if whatever sleep she had had not done her very
much good.

"From your dear, dear mother, I should imagine," she adds in sugared watery
tones.

Nancy opens it without much interest--Mother, oh, yes, Mother. Six crossed
pages of St. Louis gossip and wanderingly fluent advice. She sets herself
to read it, though, dutifully enough--she is under Mrs. Winters' eyes.

Father's usual September cold. The evil ways of friends' servants.
Good wishes to Mrs. Winters. "Heart's Gold--such a really _inspiring_
moving-picture." Advice. Advice. Then, half-way down the next to last page
Nancy stops puzzledly. She doesn't quite understand.

"And hope, my daughter, that now you are really cured though you may have
passed through bitter waters but all such things are but God's divine will
to chasten us. And when the young man told me of his _escapade_ I felt that
even over the telephone he might have"

She sets herself wearily to decode some sort of definite meaning out
of Mother's elliptic style. An escapade. Of Oliver? and over the
telephone--what was that? Mother hadn't said anything--

She finishes the letter and then rereads all the parts of it that seem to
have any bearing on the cryptogram, and finally near the end, and evidently
connected with the "telephone," she comes upon the phrase "that day."

There is only one day that Mother alludes to as "That Day" now. Before her
broken engagement "That Day" was when Father failed.

But Oliver _hadn't_ telephoned--she'd asked Mother _particularly_ if he
had, and he hadn't. But surely if he had telephoned, surely, surely, Mother
would have told her about it--Mother would have known that there were a few
things where she really hadn't any right to interfere.

Mother had never liked Oliver, though she'd pretended. Never.

Nancy remembers back and with fatally clear vision. It is fortunate that
Mrs. Ellicott cannot turn over with Nancy that little shelf-full of
memories--all the small places where she was not quite truthful with
Nancy, where she was not quite fair, where she "kept things from her"--Mrs.
Ellicott has always been the kind of woman who believes in "keeping things
from" people as long as possible and then "breaking them gently." Almost
any sort of things.

It is still more fortunate that Mrs. Ellicott cannot see Nancy's eyes as
she reviews all the tiny deceptions, all the petty affairs about which she
was never told or trusted--and all for her own best interests, my dear,
Mrs. Ellicott would most believingly assure her--but when parents stand so
much in Loco Dei to nearly all children--and when the children have long
ago found out that their God is not only a jealous God but one that must
be wheedled and propitiated like an early Jehovah because that is the only
thing to be done with Gods you can't trust--

Nancy doesn't _want_ to believe. She keeps telling herself that she won't,
she absolutely won't unless she absolutely has to. But she is lucky or
unlucky enough to be a person of some intuition--she knows Oliver, and,
also, she knows her mother--though now she is beginning to think with an
empty feeling that she really doesn't know the latter at all.

What facts there are are rather like Mrs. Ellicott's handwriting--vague and
crossed and illegibly hard to read. But Nancy stares at them all the time
that she is eating her breakfast and responding mechanically to Mrs.
Winters' questions. And then, suddenly, she _knows_.

Mrs. Ellicott like many inexperienced criminals, has committed the deadly
error of letting her mind dwell too long on the _mise-en-scene_ of her
crime. And her pen--that tell-tale pen that all her life she has taken a
delight almost sensual in letting run on from unwieldy sentence to pious
formless sentence, has at last betrayed her completely. There is genuine
tragedy in store for Mrs. Ellicott--Nancy in spite of being modern, is
Nancy and will forgive her--but Nancy, for all her trying, will never quite
be able to respect her again.

Nancy doesn't finish her breakfast as neatly as Mrs. Winters would have
wished. She goes into the next room to telephone.

"Business, dear?" says Mrs. Winters brightly from the midst of a last piece
of toast and "Yes--something Mother wants me to do" from Nancy, unfairly.

Then she gives the number--it is still the same number she and Oliver used
when they used to talk after he had caught the last train back to Melgrove
and both by all principles that make for the Life Efficient should have
gone to bed--though to Nancy's mind that seems a great while ago. "Can I
speak to Mrs. Crowe, please?" The explaining can be as awful as it likes,
Nancy doesn't care any more. An agitated rustle comes to her ears--that
must be Mrs. Winters listening.

"Mrs. Crowe? This--is--Nancy--Ellicott."

She says it very loudly and distinctly and for Mrs. Winters to hear.




 XLVII

Oliver wakes around one o'clock with a dim consciousness that noisy crowds
of people have been talking very loudly at him a good many too many times
during the past few hours, but that he has managed to fool them, many or
few, by always acting as much like a Body as possible. His chief wish is to
turn over on the other side and sleep for another seven hours or so, but
one of those people is standing respectfully beside his bed and though
Oliver blinks eyes at him reproachfully, he will not vanish back into his
proper nonentity--he remains standing there--obsequious words come out of
his mouth.

"Ten minutes to one, sir. Lunch is at one, sir."

Oliver stares at the blue waistcoat gloomily. "What's that?"

"Ten minutes to one, sir. Lunch is at one, sir."

"Lunch?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then I'd better get up, I suppose. Ow-_ooh!_" as he stretches.

"Yes, sir. A bath, sir?" "Bath?"

"Yes, sir."

"Oh, yes, bath. No--don't bother--I mean, I'll take it myself. You needn't
watch me."

"Certainly _not_, sir. Thank you, sir. There have been several telephone
calls for you, sir."

Oliver sighs--he is really awake now--it will be less trouble to get up
than to try and go back to sleep. Besides, if he tries, that brass-buttoned
automaton in front of him will probably start shaking him gently in its
well-trained English way.

"Telephone calls? Who telephone-called?"

"The name was Crowe, sir. The lady who was calling said she would call
again around lunch time. She said you were to be sure to wait until she
called, sir."

"Oh, yes, certainly." Politely, "And now I think I'll get up, if you don't
mind?"

"Oh, no, sir," rather scandalizedly. "You are in need of nothing, sir?"

Oliver thinks of replying, "Oh, just bring me a little more sleep if you
have it in the house," but then thinks better of it.

"No, thanks."

"Very good, sir," and the automaton pussyfoots away.

Oliver still half asleep manages to rise and find slippers and a wrapper
and then pads over to an empty bathroom where he disports himself like a
whale. To his surprise he discovers himself whistling--true, the sunlight
has an excellent shine to it this morning and the air and the sky outside
seem blue and crisp with first fall--but even so.

"Nancy," he murmurs and frowns and finishes his bath rather gloomily--a
gloom which is in no wise diminished when he goes downstairs to find
everybody nearly through lunch and Ted and Elinor, as far away from each
other at the table as possible, quite sure that they are behaving exactly
as usual while the remnants of the house-party do their best to seem
tactfully unconcerned.

Oliver, while managing to get through a copious and excellent lunch in
spite of his sorrows, regards them with the morose pity of a dyspeptic
octogenarian for healthy children. It is all very well and beautiful for
them now, he supposes grimly, but sooner or later even such babes as they
will have to Face Life--Come Up Against Facts--

He is having a second piece of blueberry pie when he is summoned to the
telephone. Rather tiresome of Mother, really, he thinks as he goes out of
the dining-room--something about his laundry again most probably--or when
he is coming back.

"Hello, Oliver?" "Hello, dear. Anything important?"

Mrs. Crowe's voice has a tiny chuckle in it--a chuckle that only comes when
Mrs. Crowe is being very pleased indeed.

"Well, Oliver, that depends--"

"Well, Mother, _honestly_! I'm right in the middle of lunch--"

"Oh, I'll call up again, if you'd rather, Oliver dear." But Mrs. Crowe for
private reasons doesn't seem to be at all ashamed of taking up so much of
her son's very valuable time.

"Only I _did_ think it would interest you--that you'd like to know as soon
as possible."

Impatiently, "Yes. Well?"

"Well--a friend of yours is coming to see you on the three o'clock. A
_rather_ good friend. We thought you'd be back by then, you see, and so--"

Oliver's heart jumps queerly for an instant.

"_Who_?"

But the imp of the perverse has taken complete charge of Mrs. Crowe.

"Oh--a friend. Not a childhood one--oh, no--but a--good--one, though you
haven't seen each other for--more than three weeks now, isn't it? You
should just be able to make it, I should think, if somebody brought you
over in a car, but of course, if you're so busy--" "_Mother_!"

Then Oliver jangles the little hook of the telephone frantically up and
down.

"Mother! Listen! Listen! Who is it? Is it--honestly?"

But Mrs. Crowe has hung up. Shall he get the connection again? But that
means waiting--and Mother said he would just be able to make it--and Mother
isn't at all the kind that would fool him over a thing like this no matter
how much she wanted to tease. Oliver bounds back toward the dining-room and
nearly runs into Elinor Piper. He grabs her by the shoulders.

"Listen, El!" he says feverishly. "Oh, I'll congratulate you properly and
all that some time but this is utterly everything--I've got to go home
right away--this minute--toot sweet--and no, by gum, I won't apologize
_this_ time for asking you to get somebody to take me over in a car!"




XLVIII

She was sitting on the porch of the house--a small figure in the close
blue hat he knew, a figure that seemed as if it had come tired from a long
journey. She had been talking with his mother, but as soon as the car drew
up, Mrs. Crowe rose quickly and went into the house.

Then they were together again.

The instant paid them for all. For the last weeks' bitterness and the human
doubt, the human misunderstandings that had made it. And even as it opened
before them a path some corners and resting-places of which seemed almost
too proud with living for them to dare to be alive on it--both knew that
that fidelity which is intense and of the soul had ended between them
forever an emptier arrogance that both had once delighted in like bright
colors--a brittle pride that lives only by the falser things in being
young.

They had thought they were sure of each other in their first weeks
together--they had said many words about it and some of them clever enough.
But their surety now had no need of any words at all--it had been too well
tempered by desolation to find any obligation for speech or the calling of
itself secure.

They kissed--not as a pleasant gesture, and no fear of looking publicly
ridiculous stopped them.

The screen door behind Nancy pushed open. Jane Ellen appeared, Jane Ellen,
by the look of her, intent upon secret and doubtful business, a large
moth-eaten bear dangling by its leg from one of her plump hands. She was
too concerned with getting her charge through the door to notice what was
happening at first but as soon as she was fairly out on the porch she
looked about her. The bear dropped from her fingers--her eyes grew rounder
than buttons and very large.

"Why it's Oliver and he's kissing Aunt _Nancy_!" she squeaked in a small
voice of reproachful surprise.




XLIX

Whatever the number was of the second-class stateroom on the _Citric_,
it was rather too far down in the belly of that leviathan to have suited
fashionable people. But Oliver and Nancy had stopped being fashionable
some time before and they told each other that it was _much_ nicer than
first-class on one of the small liners with apparent conviction and never
got tired of rejoicing at their luck in its being an outside. It was true
that the port-hole might most of the time have been wholly ornamental for
all the good it did them, for it was generally splashed with grey October
sea, but, at least, as Nancy lucently explained, you could see things--once
there had actually been a porpoise--and that neither of them, in their
present condition, would have worried very much about it if their cabin had
been an aquarium was a fact beyond dispute.

"Time to get up, dear!" This is Oliver a little sternly from the upper
berth. "That was your bath that came in a minute ago and said something in
Cockney. At least I _think_ it was--mine's voice is a good deal more like
one of Peter's butlers--" "But, Ollie, I'm so _comfortable_!"

"So am I. But think of breakfast."

"Well--breakfast is a point." Then she chuckles, "Oh, Ollie, wouldn't it
have been _awful_ if we'd either of us been bad sailors!"

"We couldn't have been," says Oliver placidly. "We have too much luck."

"I know but--that awful woman with the face like a green pea--oh, Ollie,
you'd have hated me--we are lucky, darling."

Oliver has thought seriously enough about getting up to be dangling his
legs over the edge of his shelf by now.

"Aren't we?" he says soberly. "I mean I am."

"_I_ am. And everybody's being so nice about giving us checks we can use
instead of a lot of silly things we wouldn't know what to do with." She
smiles. "Those are your feet," she announces gravely.

"Yes. Well?"

"Oh, nothing. Only I'm going to tickle them."

"You're not? Ouch--Nancy, you _little devil_!" and Oliver slides hastily to
the floor. Then he goes over to the port-hole.

"A very nice day!" he announces in the face of a bull's eye view of dull
skies and oily dripping sea.

"Is it? How kind of it! Ollie, I must get up." "Nancy, you must." He goes
over and kneels awkwardly by the side of her berth--an absurd figure enough
no doubt in tortoise-shell spectacles and striped pajamas, but Nancy
doesn't think so. As for him he simply knows he never will get used to
having her with him this way all the time; he takes his breath delicately
whenever he thinks of it, as if, if he weren't very careful always about
being quiet she might disappear any instant like a fairy back into a book.

He kisses her.

"Good morning, Nancy."

Her arms go round him.

"Good morning, dearest."

"It isn't that I don't want to get up, really," she explains presently.
"It's only that I like lying here and thinking about all the things that
are going to happen."

"We are lucky, you know. Lordy bless the American Express."

"And my job." She smiles and he winces.

"Oh, Ollie, _dear_."

"I was so damn silly," says Oliver muffledly.

"Both of us. But now it doesn't matter. And we're both of us going to work
and be very efficient at it--only now we'll have time and together and
Paris to do all the things we really wanted to do. You _are_ going to be a
great novelist, Oliver, you know--"

"Well, you're going to be the foremost etcher--or etcheress--since
Whistler--there. But, oh, Nancy, I don't care if I write great novels--or
any novels--or anything else--just now."

She mocks him pleasantly. "Why, Ollie, Ollie, Your Art?"

"Oh, _damn_ my art--I mean--well, I don't quite mean that. But this is
life."

"Just as large and twice as natural," says Nancy quoting, but for once
Oliver is too interested with living to be literary.

"Life," he says, with an odd shakiness, an odd triumph, "Life," and his
arms go round her shoulders.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Young People's Pride, by Stephen Vincent Benet





Produced by Stan Goodman, Shawn Wheeler and Distributed Proofreaders




YOUTH

ITS EDUCATION, REGIMEN, AND HYGIENE


BY
G. STANLEY HALL, Ph.D., LL.D.
President of Clark University and
Professor of Psychology
And Pedagogy



PREFACE


I have often been asked to select and epitomize the practical and
especially the pedagogical conclusions of my large volumes on
Adolescence, published in 1904, in such form that they may be
available at a minimum cost to parents, teachers, reading circles,
normal schools, and college classes, by whom even the larger volumes
have been often used. This, with the cooeperation of the publishers and
with the valuable aid of Superintendent C.N. Kendall of Indianapolis,
I have tried to do, following in the main the original text, with only
such minor changes and additions as were necessary to bring the topics
up to date, and adding a new chapter on moral and religions education.
For the scientific justification of my educational conclusions I must,
of course, refer to the larger volumes. The last chapter is not in
"Adolescence," but is revised from a paper printed elsewhere. I am
indebted to Dr. Theodore L. Smith of Clark University for verification
of all references, proof-reading, and many minor changes.

G. STANLEY HALL.



CONTENTS


I.--PRE-ADOLESCENCE

Introduction: Characterization of the age from eight to twelve--The
era of recapitulating the stages of primitive human development--Life
close to nature--The age also for drill, habituation, memory work, and
regermination--Adolescence superposed upon this stage of life, but
very distinct from it


II.--THE MUSCLES AND MOTOR POWERS IN GENERAL

Muscles as organs of the will, of character, and even of thought--The
muscular virtues--Fundamental and accessory muscles and functions--The
development of the mind and of the upright position--Small muscles as
organs of thought--School lays too much stress upon these--Chorea--Vast
numbers of automatic movements in children--Great variety of
spontaneous activities--Poise, control, and spurtiness--Pen and tongue
wagging--Sedentary school life vs. free out-of-door activities--Modern
decay of muscles, especially in girls--Plasticity of motor habits at
puberty


III.--INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION.

Trade classes and schools, their importance in the international
market--Our dangers and the superiority of German workmen--The effects
of a tariff--Description of schools between the kindergarten and the
industrial school--Equal salaries for teachers in France--Dangers from
machinery--The advantages of life on the old New England farm--Its
resemblance to the education we now give negroes and Indians--Its
advantage for all-sided muscular development


IV.--MANUAL TRAINING AND SLOYD.

History of the movement--Its philosophy--The value of hand training in
the development of the brain and its significance in the making of
man--A grammar of our many industries hard--The best we do can reach
but few--Very great defects in manual training methods which do not
base on science and make nothing salable--The Leipzig system--Sloyd is
hypermethodic--These crude peasant industries can never satisfy
educational needs--The gospel of work; William Morris and the arts and
crafts movement--Its spirit desirable--The magic effects of a brief
period of intense work--The natural development of the drawing
instinct in the child


V.--GYMNASTICS

The story of Jahn and the Turners--The enthusiasm which this movement
generated in Germany--The ideal of bringing out latent powers--The
concept of more perfect voluntary control--Swedish gymnastics--Doing
everything possible for the body as a machine--Liberal physical
culture--Ling's orthogenic scheme of economic postures and movements
and correcting defects--The ideal of symmetry and prescribing
exercises to bring the body to a standard--Lamentable lack of
correlation between these four systems--Illustrations of the great
good that a systematic training can effect--Athletic records--Greek
physical training


VI.--PLAY, SPORTS, AND GAMES

The view of Groos partial, and a better explanation of play proposed
as rehearsing ancestral activities--The glory of Greek physical
training, its ideals and results--The first spontaneous movements of
infancy as keys to the past--Necessity of developing basal powers
before those that are later and peculiar to the individual--Plays that
interest due to their antiquity--Play with dolls--Play distinguished
by age--Play preferences of children and their reasons--The profound
significance of rhythm--The value of dancing and also its
significance, history, and the desirability of reintroducing
it--Fighting--Boxing--Wrestling--Bushido--Foot-ball--Military
ideals--Showing off--Cold baths--Hill climbing--The playground
movement--The psychology of play--Its relation to work


VII.--FAULTS, LIES, AND CRIMES.

Classification of children's faults--Peculiar children--Real fault as
distinguished from interference with the teacher's ease--Truancy, its
nature and effects--The genesis of crime--The lie, its classes and
relations to imagination--Predatory activities--Gangs--Causes of
crime--The effects of stories of crime--Temibility--Juvenile crime and
its treatment


VIII.--BIOGRAPHIES OF YOUTH.

Knightly ideals and honor--Thirty adolescents from
Shakespeare--Goethe--C.D. Warner--Aldrich--The fugitive nature of
adolescent experience--Extravagance of autobiographies--Stories that
attach to great names--Some typical crazes--Illustrations from George
Eliot, Edison, Chatterton, Hawthorne, Whittier, Spencer, Huxley,
Lyell, Byron, Heine, Napoleon, Darwin, Martineau, Agassiz, Madame
Roland, Louisa Alcott, F.H. Burnett, Helen Keller, Marie Bashkirtseff,
Mary MacLane, Ada Negri, De Quincey, Stuart Mill, Jefferies, and
scores of others


IX.--THE GROWTH OF SOCIAL IDEALS.

Change from childish to adult friends--Influence of favorite
teachers--What children wish or plan to do or be--Property and the
money sense--Social judgments--The only child--First social
organizations--Student life--Associations for youth controlled by
adults


X.--INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION AND SCHOOL WORK.

The general change and plasticity at puberty--English teaching--Causes
of its failure, (1) too much time to other languages, (2)
subordination of literary content to form, (3) too early stress on eye
and hand instead of ear and mouth, (4) excessive use of concrete
words--Children's interest in words--Their favorites--Slang--Story
telling--Age of reading crazes--What to read--The historic
sense--Growth of memory span


XI.--THE EDUCATION OF GIRLS.

Equal opportunities of higher education now open--Brings new dangers
to women--Ineradicable sex differences begin at puberty, when the
sexes should and do diverge--Different interests--Sex tension--Girls
more mature than boys at the same age--Radical psychic and
physiological differences between the sexes--The bachelor women--Needed
reconstruction--Food--Sleep--Regimen--Manners--Religion--Regularity--
The topics for a girls' curriculum--The eternally womanly


XII.--MORAL AND RELIGIOUS TRAINING.

Dangers of muscular degeneration and overstimulus of
brain--Difficulties in teaching morals--Methods in Europe--Obedience
to commands--Good habits should be mechanized--Value of scolding--How
to flog aright--Its dangers--Moral precepts and
proverbs--Habituation--Training will through
intellect--Examinations--Concentration--Originality--Froebel and the
naive--First ideas of God--Conscience--Importance of Old and New
Testaments--Sex dangers--Love and religion--Conversion




CHAPTER I


PRE-ADOLESCENCE


Introduction: Characterization of the age from eight to twelve--The
era of recapitulating the stages of primitive human development--Life
close to nature--The age also for drill, habituation, memory, work and
regermination--Adolescence superposed upon this stage of life, but
very distinct from it.

The years from about eight to twelve constitute a unique period of
human life. The acute stage of teething is passing, the brain has
acquired nearly its adult size and weight, health is almost at its
best, activity is greater and more varied than it ever was before or
ever will be again, and there is peculiar endurance, vitality, and
resistance to fatigue. The child develops a life of its own outside
the home circle, and its natural interests are never so independent of
adult influence. Perception is very acute, and there is great immunity
to exposure, danger, accident, as well as to temptation. Reason, true
morality, religion, sympathy, love, and esthetic enjoyment are but
very slightly developed.

Everything, in short, suggests that this period may represent in the
individual what was once for a very protracted and relatively
stationary period an age of maturity in the remote ancestors of our
race, when the young of our species, who were perhaps pygmoid, shifted
for themselves independently of further parental aid. The qualities
developed during pre-adolescence are, in the evolutionary history of
the race, far older than hereditary traits of body and mind which
develop later and which may be compared to a new and higher story
built upon our primal nature. Heredity is so far both more stable and
more secure. The elements of personality are few, but are well
organised on a simple, effective plan. The momentum of these traits
inherited from our indefinitely remote ancestors is great, and they
are often clearly distinguishable from those to be added later. Thus
the boy is father of the man in a new sense, in that his qualities are
indefinitely older and existed, well compacted, untold ages before the
more distinctly human attributes were developed. Indeed there are a
few faint indications of an earlier age node, at about the age of six,
as if amid the instabilities of health we could detect signs that this
may have been the age of puberty in remote ages of the past. I have
also given reasons that lead me to the conclusion that, despite its
dominance, the function of sexual maturity and procreative power is
peculiarly mobile up and down the age-line independently of many of
the qualities usually so closely associated with it, so that much that
sex created in the phylum now precedes it in the individual.

Rousseau would leave prepubescent years to nature and to these primal
hereditary impulsions and allow the fundamental traits of savagery
their fling till twelve. Biological psychology finds many and cogent
reasons to confirm this view _if only a proper environment could be
provided_. The child revels in savagery; and if its tribal, predatory,
hunting, fishing, fighting, roving, idle, playing proclivities could
be indulged in the country and under conditions that now, alas! seem
hopelessly ideal, they could conceivably be so organized and directed
as to be far more truly humanistic and liberal than all that the best
modern school can provide. Rudimentary organs of the soul, now
suppressed, perverted, or delayed, to crop out in menacing forms
later, would be developed in their season so that we should be immune
to them in maturer years, on the principle of the Aristotelian
catharsis for which I have tried to suggest a far broader application
than the Stagirite could see in his day.

These inborn and more or less savage instincts can and should be
allowed some scope. The deep and strong cravings in the individual for
those primitive experiences and occupations in which his ancestors
became skilful through the pressure of necessity should not be
ignored, but can and should be, at least partially, satisfied in a
vicarious way, by tales from literature, history, and tradition which
present the crude and primitive virtues of the heroes of the world's
childhood. In this way, aided by his vivid visual imagination, the
child may enter upon his heritage from the past, live out each stage
of life to its fullest and realize in himself all its manifold
tendencies. Echoes only of the vaster, richer life of the remote past
of the race they must remain, but just these are the murmurings of the
only muse that can save from the omnipresent dangers of precocity.
Thus we not only rescue from the danger of loss, but utilize for
further psychic growth the results of the higher heredity, which are
the most precious and potential things on earth. So, too, in our
urbanized hothouse life, that tends to ripen everything before its
time, we must teach nature, although the very phrase is ominous. But
we must not, in so doing, wean still more from, but perpetually incite
to visit, field, forest, hill, shore, the water, flowers, animals, the
true homes of childhood in this wild, undomesticated stage from which
modern conditions have kidnapped and transported him. Books and
reading are distasteful, for the very soul and body cry out for a more
active, objective life, and to know nature and man at first hand.
These two staples, stories and nature, by these informal methods of
the home and the environment, constitute fundamental education.

But now another remove from nature seems to be made necessary by the
manifold knowledges and skills of our highly complex civilization. We
should transplant the human sapling, I concede reluctantly, as early
as eight, but not before, to the schoolhouse with its imperfect
lighting, ventilation, temperature. We must shut out nature and open
books. The child must sit on unhygienic benches and work the tiny
muscles that wag the tongue and pen, and let all the others, which
constitute nearly half its weight, decay. Even if it be prematurely,
he must be subjected to special disciplines and be apprenticed to the
higher qualities of adulthood; for he is not only a product of nature,
but a candidate for a highly developed humanity. To many, if not most,
of the influences here there can be at first but little inner
response. Insight, understanding, interest, sentiment, are for the
most part only nascent; and most that pertains to the true kingdom of
mature manhood is embryonic. The wisest requirements seem to the child
more or less alien, arbitrary, heteronomous, artificial, falsetto.
There is much passivity, often active resistance and evasion, and
perhaps spasms of obstinacy, to it all. But the senses are keen and
alert, reactions immediate and vigorous; and the memory is quick, sure
and lasting; and ideas of space, time, and physical causation, and of
many a moral and social licit and non-licit, are rapidly unfolding.
Never again will there be such susceptibility to drill and discipline,
such plasticity to habituation, or such ready adjustment to new
conditions. It is the age of external and mechanical training.
Reading, writing, drawing, manual training, musical technic, foreign
tongues and their pronunciations, the manipulation of numbers and of
geometrical elements, and many kinds of skill have now their golden
hour; and if it passes unimproved, all these can never be acquired
later without a heavy handicap of disadvantage and loss. These
necessities may be hard for the health of body, sense, mind, as well
as for morals; and pedagogic art consists in breaking the child into
them betimes as intensely and as quickly as possible with minimal
strain and with the least amount of explanation or coquetting for
natural interest, and in calling medicine confectionery. This is not
teaching in its true sense so much as it is drill, inculcation, and
regimentation. The method should be mechanical, repetitive,
authoritative, dogmatic. The automatic powers are now at their very
apex, and they can do and bear more than our degenerate pedagogy knows
or dreams of. Here we have something to learn from the schoolmasters
of the past back to the middle ages, and even from the ancients. The
greatest stress, with short periods and few hours, incessant
insistence, incitement, and little reliance upon interest, reason or
work done without the presence of the teacher, should be the guiding
principles for pressure in these essentially formal and, to the child,
contentless elements of knowledge. These should be sharply
distinguished from the indigenous, evoking, and more truly educational
factors described in the last paragraph, which are meaty,
content-full, and relatively formless as to time of day, method,
spirit, and perhaps environment and personnel of teacher, and possibly
somewhat in season of the year, almost as sharply as work differs from
play, or perhaps as the virility of man that loves to command a
phalanx, be a martinet and drill-master, differs from femininity which
excels in persuasion, sympathetic insight, story-telling, and in the
tact that discerns and utilizes spontaneous interests in the young.

Adolescence is a new birth, for the higher and more completely human
traits are now born. The qualities of body and soul that now emerge
are far newer. The child comes from and harks back to a remoter past;
the adolescent is neo-atavistic, and in him the later acquisitions of
the race slowly become prepotent. Development is less gradual and more
saltatory, suggestive of some ancient period of storm and stress when
old moorings were broken and a higher level attained. The annual rate
of growth in height, weight, and strength is increased and often
doubled, and even more. Important functions, previously non-existent,
arise. Growth of parts and organs loses its former proportions, some
permanently and some for a season. Some of these are still growing in
old age and others are soon arrested and atrophy. The old measures of
dimensions become obsolete, and old harmonies are broken. The range of
individual differences and average errors in all physical measurements
and all psychic tests increases. Some linger long in the childish
stage and advance late or slowly, while others push on with a sudden
outburst of impulsion to early maturity. Bones and muscles lead all
other tissues, as if they vied with each other; and there is frequent
flabbiness or tension as one or the other leads. Nature arms youth for
conflict with all the resources at her command--speed, power of
shoulder, biceps, back, leg, jaw--strengthens and enlarges skull,
thorax, hips, makes man aggressive and prepares woman's frame for
maternity.

       *     *     *     *     *




CHAPTER II


THE MUSCLES AND MOTOR POWERS IN GENERAL


Muscles as organs of the will, of character and even of thought--The
muscular virtues--Fundamental and accessory muscles and functions--The
development of the mind and of the upright position--Small
muscles as organs of thought--School lays too much stress upon
these--Chorea--vast numbers of automatic movements in children--Great
variety of spontaneous activities--Poise, control and spurtiness--Pen
and tongue wagging--Sedentary school life _vs_ free out-of-door
activities--Modern decay of muscles, especially in girls--Plasticity
of motor habits at puberty.

The muscles are by weight about forty-three per cent. of the average
adult male human body. They expend a large fraction of all the kinetic
energy of the adult body, which a recent estimate places as high as
one-fifth. The cortical centers for the voluntary muscles extend over
most of the lateral psychic zones of the brain, so that their culture
is brain building. In a sense they are organs of digestion, for which
function they play a very important role. Muscles are in a most
intimate and peculiar sense the organs of the will. They have built
all the roads, cities, and machines in the world, written all the
books, spoken all the words, and, in fact, done everything that man
has accomplished with matter. If they are undeveloped or grow relaxed
and flabby, the dreadful chasm between good intentions and their
execution is liable to appear and widen. Character might be in a sense
defined as a plexus of motor habits. To call conduct three-fourths of
life, with Matthew Arnold; to describe man as one-third intellect and
two-thirds will, with Schopenhauer; to urge that man is what he does
or that he is the sum of his movements, with F.W. Robertson; that
character is simply muscle habits, with Maudsley; that the age of art
is now slowly superseding the age of science, and that the artist will
drive out with the professor, with the anonymous author of "Rembrandt
als Erzicher";[1] that history is consciously willed movements, with
Bluntschli; or that we could form no conception of force or energy in
the world but for our own muscular effort; to hold that most thought
involves change of muscle tension as more or less integral to it--all
this shows how we have modified the antique Ciceronian conception
_vivere est cogitari_, [To live is to think] to _vivere est velle_,
[To live is to will] and gives us a new sense of the importance of
muscular development and regimen.[2]

Modern psychology thus sees in muscles organs of expression for all
efferent processes. Beyond all their demonstrable functions, every
change of attention and of psychic states generally plays upon them
unconsciously, modifying their tension in subtle ways so that they may
be called organs of thought and feeling as well as of will, in which
some now see the true Kantian thing-in-itself the real substance of
the world, in the anthropomorphism of force. Habits even determine the
deeper strata of belief; thought is repressed action; and deeds, not
words, are the language of complete men. The motor areas are closely
related and largely identical with the psychic, and muscle culture
develops brain-centers as nothing else yet demonstrably does. Muscles
are the vehicles of habituation, imitation, obedience, character, and
even of manners and customs. For the young, motor education is
cardinal, and is now coming to due recognition; and, for all,
education is incomplete without a motor side. Skill, endurance, and
perseverance may almost be called muscular virtues; and fatigue,
velleity, caprice, _ennui_, restlessness, lack of control and poise,
muscular faults.

To understand the momentous changes of motor functions that
characterize adolescence we must consider other than the measurable
aspects of the subject. Perhaps the best scale on which to measure all
normal growth of muscle structure and functions is found in the
progress from fundamental to accessory. The former designates the
muscles and movements of the trunk and large joints, neck, back, hips,
shoulders, knees, and elbows, sometimes called central, and which in
general man has in common with the higher and larger animals. Their
activities are few, mostly simultaneous, alternating and rhythmic, as
of the legs in walking, and predominate in hard-working men and women
with little culture or intelligence, and often in idiots. The latter
or accessory movements are those of the hand, tongue, face, and
articulatory organs, and these may be connected into a long and
greatly diversified series, as those used in writing, talking,
piano-playing. They are represented by smaller and more numerous
muscles, whose functions develop later in life and represent a higher
standpoint of evolution. These smaller muscles for finer movements
come into function later and are chiefly associated with psychic
activity, which plays upon them by incessantly changing their
tensions, if not causing actual movement. It is these that are so
liable to disorder in the many automatisms and choreic tics we see in
school children, especially if excited or fatigued. General paralysis
usually begins in the higher levels by breaking these down, so that
the first symptom of its insidious and never interrupted progress is
inability to execute the more exact and delicate movements of tongue
or hand, or both. Starting with the latest evolutionary level, it is a
devolution that may work downward till very many of the fundamental
activities are lost before death.

Nothing better illustrates this distinction than the difference
between the fore foot of animals and the human hand. The first begins
as a fin or paddle or is armed with a hoof, and is used solely for
locomotion. Some carnivora with claws use the fore limb also for
holding well as tearing, and others for digging. Arboreal life seems
to have almost created the simian hand and to have wrought a
revolution in the form and use of the forearm and its accessory
organs, the fingers. Apes and other tree-climbing creatures must not
only adjust their prehensile organ to a wide variety of distances and
sizes of branches, but must use the hands more or less freely for
picking, transporting, and eating fruit; and this has probably been a
prime factor in lifting man to the erect position, without which human
intelligence as we know it could have hardly been possible. "When we
attempt to measure the gap between man and the lower animals in terms
of the form of movement, the wonder is no less great than when we use
the term of mentality."[3] The degree of approximation to human
intelligence in anthropoid animals follows very closely the degree of
approximation to human movements.

The gradual acquirement of the erect position by the human infant
admirably repeats this long phylogenetic evolution.[4] At first the
limbs are of almost no use in locomotion, but the fundamental trunk
muscles with those that move the large joints are more or less
spasmodically active. Then comes creeping, with use of the hip
muscles, while all below the knee is useless, as also are the fingers.
Slowly the leg and foot are degraded to locomotion, slowly the great
toe becomes more limited in its action, the thumb increases in
flexibility and strength of opposition, and the fingers grow more
mobile and controllable. As the body slowly assumes the vertical
attitude, the form of the chest changes till its greatest diameter is
transverse instead of from front to back. The shoulder-blades are less
parallel than in quadrupeds, and spread out till they approximate the
same plane. This gives the arm freedom of movement laterally, so that
it can be rotated one hundred and eighty degrees in man as contrasted
to one hundred degrees in apes, thus giving man the command of almost
any point within a sphere of which the two arms are radii. The power
of grasping was partly developed from and partly added to the old
locomotor function of the fore limbs; the jerky aimless automatisms,
as well as the slow rhythmic flexion and extension of the fingers and
hand, movements which are perhaps survivals of arboreal or of even
earlier aquatic life, are cooerdinated; and the bilateral and
simultaneous rhythmic movements of the heavier muscles are
supplemented by the more finely adjusted and specialized activities
which as the end of the growth period is approached are determined
less by heredity and more by environment. In a sense, a child or a man
is the sum total of his movements or tendencies to move; and nature
and instinct chiefly determine the basal, and education the accessory
parts of our activities.

The entire accessory system is thus of vital importance for the
development of all of the arts of expression. These smaller muscles
might almost be called organs of thought. Their tension is modified
with the faintest change of soul, such as is seen in accent,
inflection, facial expressions, handwriting, and many forms of
so-called mind-reading, which, in fact, is always muscle-reading. The
day-laborer of low intelligence, with a practical vocabulary of not
over five hundred words, who can hardly move each of his fingers
without moving others or all of them, who can not move his brows or
corrugate his forehead at will, and whose inflection is very
monotonous, illustrates a condition of arrest or atrophy of this
later, finer, accessory system of muscles. On the other hand, the
child, precocious in any or all of these later respects, is very
liable to be undeveloped in the larger and more fundamental parts and
functions. The full unfoldment of each is, in fact, an inexorable
condition precedent for the normal development to full and abiding
maturity of the higher and more refined muscularity, just as
conversely the awkwardness and clumsiness of adolescence mark a
temporary loss of balance in the opposite direction. If this general
conception be correct, then nature does not finish the basis of her
pyramid in the way Ross, Mercier, and others have assumed, but lays a
part of the foundation and, after carrying it to an apex, normally
goes back and adds to the foundation to carry up the apex still higher
and, if prevented from so doing, expends her energy in building the
apex up at a sharper angle till instability results. School and
kindergarten often lay a disproportionate strain on the tiny accessory
muscles, weighing altogether but a few ounces, that wag the tongue,
move the pen, and do fine work requiring accuracy. But still at this
stage prolonged work requiring great accuracy is irksome and brings
dangers homologous to those caused by too much fine work in the
kindergarten before the first adjustment of large to small muscles,
which lasts until adolescence, is established. Then disproportion
between function and growth often causes symptoms of chorea. The chief
danger is arrest of the development and control of the smaller
muscles. Many occupations and forms of athletics, on the contrary,
place the stress mainly upon groups of fundamental muscles to the
neglect of finer motor possibilities. Some who excel in heavy
athletics no doubt coarsen their motor reactions, become not only
inexact and heavy but unresponsive to finer stimuli, as if the large
muscles were hypertrophied and the small ones arrested. On the other
hand, many young men, and probably more young women, expend too little
of their available active energy upon basal and massive muscle work,
and cultivate too much, and above all too early, the delicate
responsive work. This is, perhaps, the best physiological
characterization of precocity and issues in excessive nervous and
muscular irritability. The great influx of muscular vigor that unfolds
during adolescent years and which was originally not only necessary to
successful propagation, but expressive of virility, seems to be a very
plastic quantity, so that motor regimen and exercise at this stage is
probably more important and all-conditioning for mentality, sexuality,
and health than at any other period of life. Intensity, and for a time
a spurty diathesis, is as instinctive and desirable as are the copious
minor automatisms which spontaneously give the alphabet out of which
complex and finer motor series are later spelled by the conscious
will. Mercier and others have pointed out that, as most skilled labor,
so school work and modern activities in civilized life generally lay
premature and disproportionate strains upon those kinds of movement
requiring exactness. Stress upon basal movements is not only
compensating but is of higher therapeutic value against the disorders
of the accessory system; it constitutes the best core or prophylactic
for fidgets and tense states, and directly develops poise, control,
and psycho-physical equilibrium. Even when contractions reach choreic
intensity the best treatment is to throw activities down the scale
that measures the difference between primary and secondary movements
and to make the former predominate.

The number of movements, the frequency with which they are repeated,
their diversity, the number of combinations, and their total kinetic
quantum in young children, whether we consider movements of the body
as a whole, fundamental movements of large limbs, or finer accessory
motions, is amazing. Nearly every external stimulus is answered by a
motor response. Dresslar[5] observed a thirteen months' old baby for
four hours, and found, to follow Preyer's classification, impulsive or
spontaneous, reflex, instinctive, imitative, inhibitive, expressive,
and even deliberative movements, with marked satisfaction in rhythm,
attempts to do almost anything which appealed to him, and almost
inexhaustible efferent resources. A friend has tried to record every
word uttered by a four-year-old girl during a portion of a day, and
finds nothing less than verbigerations. A teacher noted the activities
of a fourteen-year-old boy during the study time of a single school
day[6], with similar results.

Lindley[7] studied 897 common motor automatisms in children, which he
divided into 92 classes: 45 in the region of the head, 20 in the feet
and legs, 19 in the hands and fingers. Arranged in the order of
frequency with which each was found, the list stood as follows:
fingers, feet, lips, tongue, head, body, hands, mouth, eyes, jaws,
legs, forehead, face, arms, ears. In the last five alone adolescents
exceeded children, the latter excelling the former most in those of
head, mouth, legs, and tongue, in this order. The writer believes that
there are many more automatisms than appeared in his returns.

School life, especially in the lower grades, is a rich field for the
study of these activities. They are familiar, as licking things,
clicking with the tongue, grinding the teeth, scratching, tapping,
twirling a lock of hair or chewing it, biting the nails (Berillon's
onychophagia), shrugging, corrugating, pulling buttons or twisting
garments, strings, etc., twirling pencils, thumbs, rotating, nodding
and shaking the head, squinting and winking, swaying, pouting and
grimacing, scraping the floor, rubbing hands, stroking, patting,
flicking the fingers, wagging, snapping the fingers, muffling,
squinting, picking the face, interlacing the fingers, cracking the
joints, finger plays, biting and nibbling, trotting the leg, sucking
things, etc.

The average number of automatisms per 100 persons Smith found to be in
children 176, in adolescents 110. Swaying is chiefly with children;
playing and drumming with the fingers is more common among
adolescents; the movements of fingers and feet decline little with
age, and those of eyes and forehead increase, which is significant for
the development of attention. Girls excel greatly in swaying, and
also, although less, in finger automatism; and boys lead in movements
of tongue, feet, and hands. Such movements increase, with too much
sitting, intensity of effort, such as to fix attention, and vary with
the nature of the activity willed, but involve few muscles directly
used in a given task. They increase up the kindergarten grades and
fall off rapidly in the primary grades; are greater with tasks
requiring fine and exact movements than with those involving large
movements. Automatisms are often a sign of the difficulty of tasks.
The restlessness that they often express is one of the commonest signs
of fatigue. They are mostly in the accessory muscles, while those of
the fundamental muscles (body, legs, and arms) disappear rapidly with
age; those of eye, brow, and jaw show greatest increase with age, but
their frequency in general declines with growing maturity, although
there is increased frequency of certain specialized contractions,
which indicate the gradual settling of expression in the face.

Often such movements pass over by insensible gradation into the morbid
automatism of chorea, and in yet lower levels of decay we see them in
the aimless picking and plucking movements of the fingers of the sick.
In idiots[8] arrest of higher powers often goes with hypertrophy of
these movements, as seen in head-beaters (as if, just as nature impels
those partially blind to rub the eyes for "light-hunger," so it
prompts the feeble-minded to strike the head for cerebrations),
rockers, rackers, shakers, biters, etc. Movements often pass to fixed
attitudes and postures of limbs or body, disturbing the normal balance
between flexors and extensors, the significance of which as nerve
signs or exponents of habitual brain states and tensions Warner has so
admirably shown.

Abundance and vigor of automatic movements are desirable, and even a
considerable degree of restlessness is a good sign in young children.
Many of what are now often called nerve signs and even choreic
symptoms, the fidgetiness in school on cloudy days and often after a
vacation, the motor superfluities of awkwardness, embarrassment,
extreme effort, excitement, fatigue, sleepiness, etc., are simply the
forms in which we receive the full momentum of heredity and mark a
natural richness of the raw material of intellect, feeling, and
especially of will. Hence they must be abundant. All parts should act
in all possible ways at first and untrammeled by the activity of all
other parts and functions. Some of these activities are more essential
for growth in size than are later and more conscious movements. Here
as everywhere the rule holds that powers themselves must be unfolded
before the ability to check or even to use them can develop. All
movements arising from spontaneous activity of nerve cells or centers
must be made in order even to avoid the atrophy of disease. Not only
so, but this purer kind of innateness must often be helped out to some
extent in some children by stimulating reflexes; a rich and wide
repertory of sensation must be made familiar; more or less and very
guarded, watched and limited experiences of hunger, thirst, cold,
heat, tastes, sounds, smells, colors, brightnesses, tactile
irritations, and perhaps even occasional tickling and pain to play off
the vastly complex function of laughing, crying, etc., may in some
cases be judicious. Conscious and unconscious imitation or repetition
of every sort of copy may also help to establish the immediate and
low-level connection between afferent and efferent processes that
brings the organism into direct _rapport_ and harmony with the whole
world of sense. Perhaps the more rankly and independently they are
developed to full functional integrity, each in its season, if we only
knew that season, the better. Premature control by higher centers, or
cooerdination into higher compounds of habits and ordered serial
activities, is repressive and wasteful, and the mature will of which
they are components, or which must at least domesticate them, is
stronger and more forcible if this serial stage is not unduly
abridged.

But, secondly, many, if not most, of these activities when developed a
little, group after group, as they arise, must be controlled, checked,
and organized into higher and often more serial compounds. The
inhibiting functions are at first hard. In trying to sit still the
child sets its teeth, holds the breath, clenches its fists and perhaps
makes every muscle tense with a great effort that very soon exhausts.
This repressive function is probably not worked from special nervous
centers, nor can we speak with confidence of collisions with "sums of
arrest" in a sense analogous to that of Herbart, or of stimuli that
normally cause catabolic molecular processes in the cell, being
mysteriously diverted to produce increased instability or anabolic
lability in the sense of Wundt's _Mechanik der Nerven_. The concept
now suggested by many facts is that inhibition is irradiation or long
circuiting to higher and more complex brain areas, so that the energy,
whether spontaneous or reflex, is diverted to be used elsewhere. These
combinations are of a higher order, more remote from reflex action,
and modified by some Jacksonian third level.[9] Action is now not from
independent centers, but these are slowly associated, so that
excitation may flow off from one point to any other and any reaction
may result from any stimulus.

The more unified the brain the less it suffers from localization, and
the lower is the level to which any one function can exhaust the
whole. The tendency of each group of cells to discharge or overflow
into those of lower tension than themselves increases as
correspondence in time and space widens. The more one of a number of
activities gains in power to draw on all the brain, or the more
readily the active parts are fed at cost of the resting parts, the
less is rest to be found in change from one of these activities to
another, and the less do concentration and specialization prove to be
dangerous. Before, the aim was to wake all parts to function; now it
is to connect them. Intensity of this cross-section activity now tends
to unity, so that all parts of the brain energize together. In a brain
with this switchboard function well organized, each reaction has grown
independent of its own stimulus and may result from any stimulation,
and each act, e.g., a finger movement of a peculiar nature, may tire
the whole brain. This helps us to understand why brain-workers so
often excel laborers not only in sudden dynamometric strength test,
but in sustained and long-enduring effort. In a good brain or in a
good machine, power may thus be developed over a large surface, and
all of it applied to a small one, and hence the dangers of
specialization are lessened in exact proportion as the elements of our
ego are thus compacted together. It is in the variety and delicacy of
these combinations and all that they imply, far more than in the
elements of which they are composed, that man rises farthest above the
higher animals; and of these powers later adolescence is the golden
age. The aimless and archaic movements of infancy, whether massive and
complex or in the form of isolated automatic tweaks or twinges, are
thus, by slow processes of combined analysis and synthesis, involving
changes as radical as any in all the world of growth, made over into
habits and conduct that fit the world of present environment.

But, thirdly, this long process carried out with all degrees of
completeness may be arrested at any unfinished stage. Some automatisms
refuse to be controlled by the will, and both they and it are often
overworked. Here we must distinguish constantly between (1) those
growing rankly in order to be later organized under the will, and (2)
those that have become feral after this domestication of them has lost
power from disease or fatigue, and (3) those that have never been
subjugated because the central power that should have used them to
weave the texture of willed action--the proper language of complete
manhood--was itself arrested or degenerate. With regard to many of
these movements these distinctions can be made with confidence, and in
some children more certainly than in others. In childhood, before
twelve, the efferent patterns should be developed into many more or
less indelible habits, and their colors set fast. Motor specialties
requiring exactness and grace like piano-playing, drawing, writing,
pronunciation of a foreign tongue, dancing, acting, singing, and a
host of virtuosities, must be well begun before the relative arrest of
accessory growth at the dawn of the ephebic regeneration and before
its great afflux of strength. The facts seem to show that children of
this age, such as Hancock[10] described, who could not stand with feet
close together and eyes closed without swaying much, could not walk
backward, sit still half a minute, dress alone, tie two ends of a
string together, interlace slats, wind thread, spin a top, stand on
toes or heels, hop on each foot, drive a nail, roll a hoop, skate, hit
fingers together rapidly in succession beginning at the little finger
and then reversing, etc., are the very ones in whom automatisms are
most marked or else they are those constitutionally inert, dull, or
uneducable.

In children these motor residua may persist as characteristic features
of inflection, accent, or manners; automatisms may become morbid in
stammering or stuttering, or they may be seen in gait, handwriting,
tics or tweaks, etc. Instead of disappearing with age, as they should,
they are seen in the blind as facial grimaces uncorrected by the
mirror or facial consciousness, in the deaf as inarticulate noises;
and they may tend to grow monstrous with age as if they were
disintegrated fragments of our personality, split off and aborted, or
motor parasites leaving our psycho-physic ego poorer in energy and
plasticity of adaptation, till the distraction and anarchy of the
individual nature becomes conspicuous and pathetic.

At puberty, however, when muscle habits are so plastic, when there is
a new relation between quantity or volume of motor energy and
qualitative differentiation, and between volitional control and reflex
activities, these kinetic remnants strongly tend to shoot together
into wrong aggregates if right ones are not formed. Good manners and
correct motor form generally, as well as skill, are the most economic
ways of doing things; but this is the age of wasteful ways,
awkwardness mannerisms, tensions that are a constant leakage of vital
energy, perhaps semi-imperative acts, contortions, quaint movements,
more elaborated than in childhood and often highly anesthetic and
disagreeable, motor cooerdinations that will need laborious
decomposition later. The avoidable factor in their causation is, with
some modification, not unlike that of the simpler feral movements and
faulty attitudes, carriage, and postures in children; viz., some form
of overpressure or misfit between environment and nature. As during
the years from four to eight there is great danger that overemphasis
of the activities of the accessory muscles will sow the seeds of
chorea, or aggravate predispositions to it, now again comes a greatly
increased danger, hardly existing from eight to twelve, that
overprecision, especially if fundamental activities are neglected,
will bring nervous strain and stunting precocity. This is again the
age of the basal, e.g., hill-climbing muscle, of leg and back and
shoulder work, and of the yet more fundamental heart, lung, and chest
muscles. Now again, the study of a book, under the usual conditions of
sitting in a closed space and using pen, tongue, and eye combined, has
a tendency to overstimulate the accessory muscles. This is especially
harmful for city children who are too prone to the distraction of
overmobility at an age especially exposed to maladjustment of motor
income and expenditure; and it constitutes not a liberal or
power-generating, but a highly and prematurely specialized, narrowing,
and weakening education unless offset by safeguards better than any
system of gymnastics, which is at best artificial and exaggerated.

As Bryan well says, "The efficiency of a machine depends so far as we
know upon the maximum force, rate, amplitude, and variety of direction
of its movements and upon the exactness with which below these maxima
the force, rate, amplitude, and direction of the movements can be
controlled." The motor efficiency of a man depends upon his ability in
all these respects. Moreover, the education of the small muscles and
fine adjustments of larger ones is as near mental training as physical
culture can get; for these are the thought-muscles and movements, and
their perfected function is to reflect and express by slight
modifications of tension and tone every psychic change. Only the brain
itself is more closely and immediately an organ of thought than are
these muscles and their activity, reflex, spontaneous, or imitative in
origin. Whether any of them are of value, as Lindley thinks, in
arousing the brain to activity, or as Mueller suggests, in drawing off
sensations or venting efferent impulses that would otherwise distract,
we need not here discuss. If so, this is, of course, a secondary and
late function--nature's way of making the best of things and utilizing
remnants.

With these facts and their implications in mind we can next pass to
consider the conditions under which the adolescent muscles best
develop. Here we confront one of the greatest and most difficult
problems of our age. Changes in modern motor life have been so vast
and sudden as to present some of the most comprehensive and
all-conditioning dangers that threaten civilized races. Not only have
the forms of labor been radically changed within a generation or two,
but the basal activities that shaped the body of primitive man have
been suddenly swept away by the new methods of modern industry. Even
popular sports, games, and recreations, so abundant in the early life
of all progressive peoples, have been reduced and transformed; and the
play age, that once extended on to middle life and often old age, has
been restricted. Sedentary life in schools and offices, as we have
seen, is reducing the vigor and size of our lower limbs. Our industry
is no longer under hygienic conditions; and instead of being out of
doors, in the country, or of highly diversified kinds, it is now
specialized, monotonous, carried on in closed spaces, bad air, and
perhaps poor light, especially in cities. The diseases and arrest bred
in the young by life in shops, offices, factories, and schools
increase. Work is rigidly bound to fixed hours, uniform standards,
stints and piece-products; and instead of a finished article, each
individual now achieves a part of a single process and knows little of
those that precede or follow. Machinery has relieved the large basal
muscles and laid more stress upon fine and exact movements that
involve nerve strain. The coarser forms of work that involve hard
lifting, carrying, digging, etc., are themselves specialized, and
skilled labor requires more and more brain-work. It has been estimated
that "the diminution of manual labor required to do a given quantity
of work in 1884 as compared with 1870 is no less than 70 per
cent."[11] Personal interest in and the old native sense of
responsibility for results, ownership and use of the finished
products, which have been the inspiration and soul of work in all the
past, are in more and more fields gone. Those who realize how small a
proportion of the young male population train or even engage in
amateur sports with zest and regularity, how very few and picked men
strive for records, and how immediate and amazing are the results of
judicious training, can best understand how far below his
possibilities as a motor being the average modern man goes through
life, and how far short in this respect he falls from fulfilling
nature's design for him.

For unnumbered generations primitive man in the nomad age wandered,
made perhaps annual migrations, and bore heavy burdens, while we ride
relatively unencumbered. He tilled the reluctant soil, digging with
rude implements where we use machines of many man-power. In the stone,
iron, and bronze age, he shaped stone and metals, and wrought with
infinite pains and effort, products that we buy without even knowledge
of the processes by which they are made. As hunter he followed game,
which, when found, he chased, fought, and overcame in a struggle
perhaps desperate, while we shoot it at a distance with little risk or
effort. In warfare he fought hand to hand and eye to eye, while we
kill "with as much black powder as can be put in a woman's thimble."
He caught and domesticated scores of species of wild animals and
taught them to serve him; fished with patience and skill that
compensated his crude tools, weapons, implements, and tackle; danced
to exhaustion in the service of his gods or in memory of his forebears
imitating every animal, rehearsing all his own activities in mimic
form to the point of exhaustion, while we move through a few figures
in closed spaces. He dressed hides, wove baskets which we can not
reproduce, and fabrics which we only poorly imitate by machinery, made
pottery which set our fashions, played games that invigorated body and
soul. His courtship was with feats of prowess and skill, and meant
physical effort and endurance.

Adolescent girls, especially in the middle classes, in upper grammar
and high school grades, during the golden age for nascent muscular
development, suffer perhaps most of all in this respect. Grave as are
the evils of child labor, I believe far more pubescents in this
country now suffer from too little than from too much physical
exercise, while most who suffer from work do so because it is too
uniform, one-sided, accessory, or performed under unwholesome
conditions, and not because it is excessive in amount. Modern industry
has thus largely ceased to be a means of physical development and
needs to be offset by compensating modes of activity. Many
labor-saving devices increase neural strain, so that one of the
problems of our time is how to preserve and restore nerve energy.
Under present industrial systems this must grow worse and not better
in the future. Healthy natural industries will be less and less open
to the young. This is the new situation that now confronts those
concerned for motor education, if they would only make good what is
lost.

Some of the results of these conditions are seen in average
measurements of dimensions, proportions, strength, skill, and control.
Despite the excellence of the few, the testimony of those most
familiar with the bodies of children and adults, and their physical
powers, gives evidence of the ravages of modern modes of life that,
without a wide-spread motor revival, can bode only degeneration for
our nation and our race. The number of common things that can not be
done at all; the large proportion of our youth who must be exempted
from any kinds of activity or a great amount of any; the thin limbs,
collapsed shoulders or chests, the bilateral asymmetry, weak hearts,
lungs, eyes, puny and bad muddy or pallid complexions, tired ways,
automatism, dyspeptic stomachs, the effects of youthful error or of
impoverished heredity, delicate and tender nurture, often, alas, only
too necessary, show the lamentable and cumulative effects of long
neglect of the motor abilities, the most educable of all man's powers,
and perhaps the most important for his well-being. If the unfaithful
stewards of these puny and shameful bodies had again, as in Sparta, to
strip and stand before stern judges and render them account, and be
smitten with a conviction of their weakness, guilty deformity, and
arrest of growth; if they were brought to realize how they are fallen
beings, as weak as stern theologians once deemed them depraved, and
how great their need of physical salvation, we might hope again for a
physical renaissance. Such a rebirth the world has seen but twice or
perhaps thrice, and each was followed by the two or three of the
brightest culture periods of history, and formed an epoch in the
advancement of the kingdom of man. A vast body of evidence could be
collected from the writings of anthropologists showing how superior
unspoiled savages are to civilized man in correct or esthetic
proportions of body, in many forms of endurance of fatigue, hardship,
and power to bear exposure, in the development and preservation of
teeth and hair, in keenness of senses, absence of deformities, as well
as immunity to many of our diseases. Their women are stronger and bear
hardship and exposure, monthly periods and childbirth, better.
Civilization is so hard on the body that some have called it a
disease, despite the arts that keep puny bodies alive to a greater
average age, and our greater protection from contagious and germ
diseases.

The progressive realization of these tendencies has prompted most of
the best recent and great changes motor-ward in education and also in
personal regimen. Health- and strength-giving agencies have put to
school the large motor areas of the brain, so long neglected, and have
vastly enlarged their scope. Thousands of youth are now inspired with
new enthusiasm for physical development; and new institutions of many
kinds and grades have arisen, with a voluminous literature, unnumbered
specialists, specialties, new apparatus, tests, movements, methods,
and theories; and the press, the public, and the church are awakened
to a fresh interest in the body and its powers. All this is
magnificent, but sadly inadequate to cope with the new needs and
dangers, which are vastly greater.

[Footnote 1: Dieterich. Goettingen, 1886.]

[Footnote 2: See Chap. xii.]

[Footnote 3: F. Burk in From Fundamental to Accessory. Pedagogical
Seminary, Oct., 1898, vol. 6, pp. 5-64.]

[Footnote 4: Creeping and Walking, by A.W. Trettien. American Journal
of Psychology, October, 1900, vol. 12, pp. 1-57.]

[Footnote 5: A Morning Observation of a Baby. Pedagogical Seminary,
December 1901, vol. 8, pp. 469-481.]

[Footnote 6: Kate Carman. Notes on School Activity. Pedagogical
Seminary, March, 1902, vol. 9, pp. 106-117.]

[Footnote 7: A Preliminary Study of Some of the Motor Phenomena of
Mental Effort. American Journal of Psychology, July, 1896, vol. 7, pp.
491-517.]

[Footnote 8: G.E. Johnson. Psychology and Pegagogy of Feeble-Minded
Children. Pedagogical Seminary, October, 1895, vol. 3, pp. 246-301.]

[Footnote 9: Dr. Hughlings Jackson, the eminent English pathologist,
was the first to make practical application of the evolutionary theory
of the nervous system to the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsies and
mental diseases. The practical success of this application was so
great that the Hughlings-Jackson "three-level theory" is now the
established basis of English diagnosis. He conceived the nervous
mechanism as composed of three systems, arranged in the form of a
hierarchy, the higher including the lower, and yet each having a
certain degree of independence. The first level represents the type of
simplest reflex and involuntary movement and is localized in the gray
matter of the spinal cord, medulla, and pons. The second, or middle
level, comprises those structures which receive sensory impulses from
the cells of the lowest level instead of directly from the periphery
or the non-nervous tissues. The motor cells of this middle level also
discharge into the motor mechanisms of the lowest level. Jackson
located these middle level structures in the cortex of the central
convolutions, the basal ganglia and the centers of the special senses
in the cortex. The highest level bears the same relation to the middle
level that it bears to the lowest i.e., no continuous connection
between the highest and the lowest is assumed; the structures of the
middle level mediate between them as a system of relays. According to
this hierarchical arrangement of the nervous system, the lowest level
which is the simplest and oldest "contains the mechanism for the
simple fundamental movements in reflexes and involuntary reactions.
The second level regroups these simple movements by combinations and
associations of cortical structure in wider, more complex mechanisms,
producing a higher class of movements. The highest level unifies the
whole nervous system and, according to Jackson, is the anatomical
basis of mind."

For a fuller account of this theory see Burk: From Fundamental to
Accessory in the Nervous System and of Movements. Pedagogical
Seminary, October, 1898, vol. 6, pp. 17-23.]

[Footnote 10: A Preliminary Study of Some of the Motor Phenomena of
Mental Effort. American Journal of Psychology, July, 1896, vol. 7, pp.
491-517.]

[Footnote 11: Encyclopedia of Social Reform, Funk and Wagnalls, 1896,
p. 1095]

       *     *     *     *     *




CHAPTER III


INDUSTRIAL EDUCATION


Trade classes and schools, their importance in the international
market--Our dangers and the superiority of German workmen--The effects
of a tariff--Description of schools between the kindergarten and the
industrial school--Equal salaries for teachers in France--Dangers from
machinery--The advantages of life on the old New England farm--Its
resemblance to the education we now give negroes and Indians--Its
advantage for all-sided muscular development.

We must glance at a few of the best and most typical methods of
muscular development, following the order: industrial education,
manual training, gymnastics, and play, sports, and games.

Industrial education is now imperative for every nation that would
excel in agriculture, manufacture, and trade, not only because of the
growing intensity of competition, but because of the decline of the
apprentice system and the growing intricacy of processes, requiring
only the skill needed for livelihood. Thousands of our youth of late
have been diverted from secondary schools to the monotechnic or trade
classes now established for horology, glass-work, brick-laying,
carpentry, forging, dressmaking, cooking, typesetting, bookbinding,
brewing, seamanship, work in leather, rubber, horticulture, gardening,
photography, basketry, stock-raising, typewriting, stenography and
bookkeeping, elementary commercial training for practical preparation
for clerkships, etc. In this work not only is Boston, our most
advanced city, as President Pritchett[1] has shown in detail, far
behind Berlin, but German workmen and shopmen a slowly taking the best
places even in England; and but for a high tariff, which protects our
inferiority, the competitive pressure would be still greater. In
Germany, especially, this training is far more diversified than here,
always being colored if not determined by the prevalent industry of
the region and more specialised and helped out by evening and even
Sunday classes in the school buildings, and by the still strong
apprentice system. Froebelian influence in manual training reaches
through the eight school years and is in some respects better than
ours in lower grades, but is very rarely coeducational, girls' work of
sewing, knitting, crocheting, weaving, etc., not being considered
manual training. There are now over 1,500 schools and workshops in
Germany where manual training is taught; twenty-five of these are
independent schools. The work really began in 1875 with v. Kass, and
is promoted by the great Society for Boys' Handwork. Much stress is
laid on paper and pasteboard work in lower grades, under the influence
of Kurufa of Darmstadt. Many objects for illustrating science are
made, and one course embraces the Seyner water-wheel.[2]

In France it is made more effective by the equal salaries of teachers
everywhere, thus securing better instruction in the country.
Adolescence is the golden period for acquiring the skill that comes by
practice, so essential in the struggle for survival. In general this
kind of motor education is least of all free, but subservient to the
tool, machine, process, finished product, or end in view; and to these
health and development are subordinated, so that they tend to be ever
more narrow and special. The standard here is maximal efficiency of
the capacities that earn. It may favor bad habitual attitudes,
muscular development of but one part, excessive large or small
muscles, involve too much time or effort, unhealthful conditions,
etc., but it has the great advantage of utility, which is the
mainspring of all industry. In a very few departments and places this
training has felt the influence of the arts and crafts movement and
has been faintly touched with the inspiration of beauty. While such
courses give those who follow them marked advantage over those who do
not, they are chiefly utilitarian and do little to mature or unfold
the physical powers, and may involve arrest or degeneration.

Where not one but several or many professes are taught, the case is
far better. Of all work-schools, a good farm is probably the best for
motor development. This is due to its great variety of occupations,
healthful conditions, and the incalculable phyletic reenforcement from
immemorial times. I have computed some three-score industries[3] as
the census now classifies them; that were more or less generally known
and practiced sixty years ago in a little township, which not only in
this but in other respects has many features of an ideal educational
environment for adolescent boys, combining as it does not only
physical and industrial, but civil and religious elements in wise
proportions and with pedagogic objectivity, and representing the ideal
of such a state of intelligent citizen voters as was contemplated by
the framers of our Constitution.

Contrast this life with that of a "hand" in a modern shoe factory, who
does all day but one of the eighty-one stages or processes from a
tanned hide to a finished shoe, or of a man in a shirt shop who is one
of thirty-nine, each of whom does as piece-work a single step
requiring great exactness, speed, and skill, and who never knows how a
whole shirt is made, and we shall see that the present beginning of a
revival of interest in muscular development comes none too early. So
liberal is muscular education of this kind that its work in somewhat
primitive form has been restored and copied many features by many
educational institutions for adolescent