e your brokenhearted
husband D B Murphy.

The sailor, who scarcely seemed to be a Dublin resident, turned to one of
the jarvies with the request:

--You don't happen to have such a thing as a spare chaw about you?

The jarvey addressed as it happened had not but the keeper took a die of
plug from his good jacket hanging on a nail and the desired object was
passed from hand to hand.

--Thank you, the sailor said.

He deposited the quid in his gob and, chewing and with some slow
stammers, proceeded:

--We come up this morning eleven o'clock. The threemaster ROSEVEAN from
Bridgwater with bricks. I shipped to get over. Paid off this afternoon.
There's my discharge. See? D. B. Murphy. A. B. S.

In confirmation of which statement he extricated from an inside pocket
and handed to his neighbour a not very cleanlooking folded document.

--You must have seen a fair share of the world, the keeper remarked,
leaning on the counter.

--Why, the sailor answered upon reflection upon it, I've circumnavigated
a bit since I first joined on. I was in the Red Sea. I was in China and
North America and South America. We was chased by pirates one voyage. I
seen icebergs plenty, growlers. I was in Stockholm and the Black Sea, the
Dardanelles under Captain Dalton, the best bloody man that ever scuttled
a ship. I seen Russia. GOSPODI POMILYOU. That's how the Russians prays.

--You seen queer sights, don't be talking, put in a jarvey.

--Why, the sailor said, shifting his partially chewed plug. I seen queer
things too, ups and downs. I seen a crocodile bite the fluke of an anchor
same as I chew that quid.

He took out of his mouth the pulpy quid and, lodging it between his
teeth, bit ferociously:

--Khaan! Like that. And I seen maneaters in Peru that eats corpses and
the livers of horses. Look here. Here they are. A friend of mine sent me.

He fumbled out a picture postcard from his inside pocket which seemed to
be in its way a species of repository and pushed it along the table. The
printed matter on it stated: CHOZA DE INDIOS. BENI, BOLIVIA.

All focussed their attention at the scene exhibited, a group of savage
women in striped loincloths, squatted, blinking, suckling, frowning,
sleeping amid a swarm of infants (there must have been quite a score of
them) outside some primitive shanties of osier.

--Chews coca all day, the communicative tarpaulin added. Stomachs like
breadgraters. Cuts off their diddies when they can't bear no more
children.

See them sitting there stark ballocknaked eating a dead horse's liver
raw.

His postcard proved a centre of attraction for Messrs the greenhorns for
several minutes if not more.

--Know how to keep them off? he inquired generally.

Nobody volunteering a statement he winked, saying:

--Glass. That boggles 'em. Glass.

Mr Bloom, without evincing surprise, unostentatiously turned over the
card to peruse the partially obliterated address and postmark. It ran as
follows: TARJETA POSTAL, SENOR A BOUDIN, GALERIA BECCHE, SANTIAGO, CHILE.
There was no message evidently, as he took particular notice. Though not
an implicit believer in the lurid story narrated (or the eggsniping
transaction for that matter despite William Tell and the Lazarillo-Don
Cesar de Bazan incident depicted in MARITANA on which occasion the
former's ball passed through the latter's hat) having detected a
discrepancy between his name (assuming he was the person he represented
himself to be and not sailing under false colours after having boxed the
compass on the strict q.t. somewhere) and the fictitious addressee of the
missive which made him nourish some suspicions of our friend's BONA FIDES
nevertheless it reminded him in a way of a longcherished plan he meant to
one day realise some Wednesday or Saturday of travelling to London via
long sea not to say that he had ever travelled extensively to any great
extent but he was at heart a born adventurer though by a trick of fate he
had consistently remained a landlubber except you call going to Holyhead
which was his longest. Martin Cunningham frequently said he would work a
pass through Egan but some deuced hitch or other eternally cropped up
with the net result that the scheme fell through. But even suppose it did
come to planking down the needful and breaking Boyd's heart it was not so
dear, purse permitting, a few guineas at the outside considering the fare
to Mullingar where he figured on going was five and six, there and back.
The trip would benefit health on account of the bracing ozone and be in
every way thoroughly pleasurable, especially for a chap whose liver was
out of order, seeing the different places along the route, Plymouth,
Falmouth, Southampton and so on culminating in an instructive tour of the
sights of the great metropolis, the spectacle of our modern Babylon where
doubtless he would see the greatest improvement, tower, abbey, wealth of
Park lane to renew acquaintance with. Another thing just struck him as a
by no means bad notion was he might have a gaze around on the spot to see
about trying to make arrangements about a concert tour of summer music
embracing the most prominent pleasure resorts, Margate with mixed bathing
and firstrate hydros and spas, Eastbourne, Scarborough, Margate and so
on, beautiful Bournemouth, the Channel islands and similar bijou spots,
which might prove highly remunerative. Not, of course, with a hole and
corner scratch company or local ladies on the job, witness Mrs C P M'Coy
type lend me your valise and I'll post you the ticket. No, something top
notch, an all star Irish caste, the Tweedy-Flower grand opera company
with his own legal consort as leading lady as a sort of counterblast to
the Elster Grimes and Moody-Manners, perfectly simple matter and he was
quite sanguine of success, providing puffs in the local papers could be
managed by some fellow with a bit of bounce who could pull the
indispensable wires and thus combine business with pleasure. But who?
That was the rub.  Also, without being actually positive, it struck him a
great field was to be opened up in the line of opening up new routes to
keep pace with the times APROPOS of the Fishguard-Rosslare route which,
it was mooted, was once more on the TAPIS in the circumlocution
departments with the usual quantity of red tape and dillydallying of
effete fogeydom and dunderheads generally. A great opportunity there
certainly was for push and enterprise to meet the travelling needs of the
public at large, the average man, i.e. Brown, Robinson and Co.

It was a subject of regret and absurd as well on the face of it and no
small blame to our vaunted society that the man in the street, when the
system really needed toning up, for the matter of a couple of paltry
pounds was debarred from seeing more of the world they lived in instead
of being always and ever cooped up since my old stick-in-the-mud took me
for a wife. After all, hang it, they had their eleven and more humdrum
months of it and merited a radical change of VENUE after the grind of
city life in the summertime for choice when dame Nature is at her
spectacular best constituting nothing short of a new lease of life. There
were equally excellent opportunities for vacationists in the home island,
delightful sylvan spots for rejuvenation, offering a plethora of
attractions as well as a bracing tonic for the system in and around
Dublin and its picturesque environs even, Poulaphouca to which there was
a steamtram, but also farther away from the madding crowd in Wicklow,
rightly termed the garden of Ireland, an ideal neighbourhood for elderly
wheelmen so long as it didn't come down, and in the wilds of Donegal
where if report spoke true the COUP D'OEIL was exceedingly grand though
the lastnamed locality was not easily getatable so that the influx of
visitors was not as yet all that it might be considering the signal
benefits to be derived from it while Howth with its historic associations
and otherwise, Silken Thomas, Grace O'Malley, George IV, rhododendrons
several hundred feet above sealevel was a favourite haunt with all sorts
and conditions of men especially in the spring when young men's fancy,
though it had its own toll of deaths by falling off the cliffs by design
or accidentally, usually, by the way, on their left leg, it being only
about three quarters of an hour's run from the pillar. Because of course
uptodate tourist travelling was as yet merely in its infancy, so to
speak, and the accommodation left much to be desired. Interesting to
fathom it seemed to him from a motive of curiosity, pure and simple, was
whether it was the traffic that created the route or viceversa or the two
sides in fact. He turned back the other side of the card, picture, and
passed it along to Stephen.

--I seen a Chinese one time, related the doughty narrator, that had
little pills like putty and he put them in the water and they opened and
every pill was something different. One was a ship, another was a house,
another was a flower. Cooks rats in your soup, he appetisingly added, the
chinks does.

Possibly perceiving an expression of dubiosity on their faces the
globetrotter went on, adhering to his adventures.

--And I seen a man killed in Trieste by an Italian chap. Knife in his
back. Knife like that.

Whilst speaking he produced a dangerouslooking claspknife quite in
keeping with his character and held it in the striking position.

--In a knockingshop it was count of a tryon between two smugglers. Fellow
hid behind a door, come up behind him. Like that. PREPARE TO MEET YOUR
GOD, says he. Chuk! It went into his back up to the butt.

His heavy glance drowsily roaming about kind of defied their further
questions even should they by any chance want to.

--That's a good bit of steel, repeated he, examining his formidable
STILETTO.

After which harrowing DENOUEMENT sufficient to appal the stoutest he
snapped the blade to and stowed the weapon in question away as before in
his chamber of horrors, otherwise pocket.

--They're great for the cold steel, somebody who was evidently quite in
the dark said for the benefit of them all. That was why they thought the
park murders of the invincibles was done by foreigners on account of them
using knives.

At this remark passed obviously in the spirit of WHERE IGNORANCE IS BLISS
Mr B. and Stephen, each in his own particular way, both instinctively
exchanged meaning glances, in a religious silence of the strictly ENTRE
NOUS variety however, towards where Skin-the-Goat, ALIAS the keeper, not
turning a hair, was drawing spurts of liquid from his boiler affair. His
inscrutable face which was really a work of art, a perfect study in
itself, beggaring description, conveyed the impression that he didn't
understand one jot of what was going on. Funny, very!

There ensued a somewhat lengthy pause. One man was reading in fits and
starts a stained by coffee evening journal, another the card with the
natives CHOZA DE, another the seaman's discharge. Mr Bloom, so far as he
was personally concerned, was just pondering in pensive mood. He vividly
recollected when the occurrence alluded to took place as well as
yesterday, roughly some score of years previously in the days of the land
troubles, when it took the civilised world by storm, figuratively
speaking, early in the eighties, eightyone to be correct, when he was
just turned fifteen.

--Ay, boss, the sailor broke in. Give us back them papers.

The request being complied with he clawed them up with a scrape.

--Have you seen the rock of Gibraltar? Mr Bloom inquired.

The sailor grimaced, chewing, in a way that might be read as yes, ay or
no.

--Ah, you've touched there too, Mr Bloom said, Europa point, thinking he
had, in the hope that the rover might possibly by some reminiscences but
he failed to do so, simply letting spirt a jet of spew into the sawdust,
and shook his head with a sort of lazy scorn.

--What year would that be about? Mr B interrogated. Can you recall the
boats?

Our SOI-DISANT sailor munched heavily awhile hungrily before answering:

--I'm tired of all them rocks in the sea, he said, and boats and ships.
Salt junk all the time.

Tired seemingly, he ceased. His questioner perceiving that he was not
likely to get a great deal of change out of such a wily old customer,
fell to woolgathering on the enormous dimensions of the water about the
globe, suffice it to say that, as a casual glance at the map revealed, it
covered fully three fourths of it and he fully realised accordingly what
it meant to rule the waves. On more than one occasion, a dozen at the
lowest, near the North Bull at Dollymount he had remarked a superannuated
old salt, evidently derelict, seated habitually near the not particularly
redolent sea on the wall, staring quite obliviously at it and it at him,
dreaming of fresh woods and pastures new as someone somewhere sings. And
it left him wondering why. Possibly he had tried to find out the secret
for himself, floundering up and down the antipodes and all that sort of
thing and over and under, well, not exactly under, tempting the fates.
And the odds were twenty to nil there was really no secret about it at
all. Nevertheless, without going into the MINUTIAE of the business, the
eloquent fact remained that the sea was there in all its glory and in the
natural course of things somebody or other had to sail on it and fly in
the face of providence though it merely went to show how people usually
contrived to load that sort of onus on to the other fellow like the hell
idea and the lottery and insurance which were run on identically the same
lines so that for that very reason if no other lifeboat Sunday was a
highly laudable institution to which the public at large, no matter where
living inland or seaside, as the case might be, having it brought home to
them like that should extend its gratitude also to the harbourmasters and
coastguard service who had to man the rigging and push off and out amid
the elements whatever the season when duty called IRELAND EXPECTS THAT
EVERY MAN and so on and sometimes had a terrible time of it in the
wintertime not forgetting the Irish lights, Kish and others, liable to
capsize at any moment, rounding which he once with his daughter had
experienced some remarkably choppy, not to say stormy, weather.

--There was a fellow sailed with me in the Rover, the old seadog, himself
a rover, proceeded, went ashore and took up a soft job as gentleman's
valet at six quid a month. Them are his trousers I've on me and he gave
me an oilskin and that jackknife. I'm game for that job, shaving and
brushup. I hate roaming about. There's my son now, Danny, run off to sea
and his mother got him took in a draper's in Cork where he could be
drawing easy money.

--What age is he? queried one hearer who, by the way, seen from the side,
bore a distant resemblance to Henry Campbell, the townclerk, away from
the carking cares of office, unwashed of course and in a seedy getup and
a strong suspicion of nosepaint about the nasal appendage.

--Why, the sailor answered with a slow puzzled utterance, my son, Danny?
He'd be about eighteen now, way I figure it.

The Skibbereen father hereupon tore open his grey or unclean anyhow shirt
with his two hands and scratched away at his chest on which was to be
seen an image tattooed in blue Chinese ink intended to represent an
anchor.

--There was lice in that bunk in Bridgwater, he remarked, sure as nuts. I
must get a wash tomorrow or next day. It's them black lads I objects to.
I hate those buggers. Suck your blood dry, they does.

Seeing they were all looking at his chest he accommodatingly dragged his
shirt more open so that on top of the timehonoured symbol of the
mariner's hope and rest they had a full view of the figure 16 and a young
man's sideface looking frowningly rather.

--Tattoo, the exhibitor explained. That was done when we were Iying
becalmed off Odessa in the Black Sea under Captain Dalton. Fellow, the
name of Antonio, done that. There he is himself, a Greek.

--Did it hurt much doing it? one asked the sailor.

That worthy, however, was busily engaged in collecting round the. Someway
in his. Squeezing or.

--See here, he said, showing Antonio. There he is cursing the mate. And
there he is now, he added, the same fellow, pulling the skin with his
fingers, some special knack evidently, and he laughing at a yarn.

And in point of fact the young man named Antonio's livid face did
actually look like forced smiling and the curious effect excited the
unreserved admiration of everybody including Skin-the-Goat, who this time
stretched over.

--Ay, ay, sighed the sailor, looking down on his manly chest. He's gone
too. Ate by sharks after. Ay, ay.

He let go of the skin so that the profile resumed the normal expression
of before.

--Neat bit of work, one longshoreman said.

--And what's the number for? loafer number two queried.

--Eaten alive? a third asked the sailor.

--Ay, ay, sighed again the latter personage, more cheerily this time with
some sort of a half smile for a brief duration only in the direction of
the questioner about the number. Ate. A Greek he was.

And then he added with rather gallowsbird humour considering his alleged
end:


    --AS BAD AS OLD ANTONIO,
    FOR HE LEFT ME ON MY OWNIO.


The face of a streetwalker glazed and haggard under a black straw hat
peered askew round the door of the shelter palpably reconnoitring on her
own with the object of bringing more grist to her mill. Mr Bloom,
scarcely knowing which way to look, turned away on the moment flusterfied
but outwardly calm, and, picking up from the table the pink sheet of the
Abbey street organ which the jarvey, if such he was, had laid aside, he
picked it up and looked at the pink of the paper though why pink. His
reason for so doing was he recognised on the moment round the door the
same face he had caught a fleeting glimpse of that afternoon on Ormond
quay, the partially idiotic female, namely, of the lane who knew the lady
in the brown costume does be with you (Mrs B.) and begged the chance of
his washing. Also why washing which seemed rather vague than not, your
washing. Still candour compelled him to admit he had washed his wife's
undergarments when soiled in Holles street and women would and did too a
man's similar garments initialled with Bewley and Draper's marking ink
(hers were, that is) if they really loved him, that is to say, love me,
love my dirty shirt. Still just then, being on tenterhooks, he desired
the female's room more than her company so it came as a genuine relief
when the keeper made her a rude sign to take herself off. Round the side
of the Evening Telegraph he just caught a fleeting glimpse of her face
round the side of the door with a kind of demented glassy grin showing
that she was not exactly all there, viewing with evident amusement the
group of gazers round skipper Murphy's nautical chest and then there was
no more of her.

--The gunboat, the keeper said.

--It beats me, Mr Bloom confided to Stephen, medically I am speaking, how
a wretched creature like that from the Lock hospital reeking with disease
can be barefaced enough to solicit or how any man in his sober senses, if
he values his health in the least. Unfortunate creature! Of course I
suppose some man is ultimately responsible for her condition. Still no
matter what the cause is from ...

Stephen had not noticed her and shrugged his shoulders, merely remarking:

--In this country people sell much more than she ever had and do a
roaring trade. Fear not them that sell the body but have not power to buy
the soul. She is a bad merchant. She buys dear and sells cheap.

The elder man, though not by any manner of means an old maid or a prude,
said it was nothing short of a crying scandal that ought to be put a stop
to INSTANTER to say that women of that stamp (quite apart from any
oldmaidish squeamishness on the subject), a necessary evil, w ere not
licensed and medically inspected by the proper authorities, a thing, he
could truthfully state, he, as a PATERFAMILIAS, was a stalwart advocate
of from the very first start. Whoever embarked on a policy of the sort,
he said, and ventilated the matter thoroughly would confer a lasting boon
on everybody concerned.

--You as a good catholic, he observed, talking of body and soul, believe
in the soul. Or do you mean the intelligence, the brainpower as such, as
distinct from any outside object, the table, let us say, that cup. I
believe in that myself because it has been explained by competent men as
the convolutions of the grey matter. Otherwise we would never have such
inventions as X rays, for instance. Do you?

Thus cornered, Stephen had to make a superhuman effort of memory to try
and concentrate and remember before he could say:

--They tell me on the best authority it is a simple substance and
therefore incorruptible. It would be immortal, I understand, but for the
possibility of its annihilation by its First Cause Who, from all I can
hear, is quite capable of adding that to the number of His other
practical jokes, CORRUPTIO PER SE and CORRUPTIO PER ACCIDENS both being
excluded by court etiquette.

Mr Bloom thoroughly acquiesced in the general gist of this though the
mystical finesse involved was a bit out of his sublunary depth still he
felt bound to enter a demurrer on the head of simple, promptly rejoining:

--Simple? I shouldn't think that is the proper word. Of course, I grant
you, to concede a point, you do knock across a simple soul once in a blue
moon. But what I am anxious to arrive at is it is one thing for instance
to invent those rays Rontgen did or the telescope like Edison, though I
believe it was before his time Galileo was the man, I mean, and the same
applies to the laws, for example, of a farreaching natural phenomenon
such as electricity but it's a horse of quite another colour to say you
believe in the existence of a supernatural God.

--O that, Stephen expostulated, has been proved conclusively by several
of the bestknown passages in Holy Writ, apart from circumstantial
evidence.

On this knotty point however the views of the pair, poles apart as they
were both in schooling and everything else with the marked difference in
their respective ages, clashed.

--Has been? the more experienced of the two objected, sticking to his
original point with a smile of unbelief. I'm not so sure about that.
That's a matter for everyman's opinion and, without dragging in the
sectarian side of the business, I beg to differ with you IN TOTO there.
My belief is, to tell you the candid truth, that those bits were genuine
forgeries all of them put in by monks most probably or it's the big
question of our national poet over again, who precisely wrote them like
HAMLET and Bacon, as, you who know your Shakespeare infinitely better
than I, of course I needn't tell you. Can't you drink that coffee, by the
way? Let me stir it. And take a piece of that bun. It's like one of our
skipper's bricks disguised. Still no-one can give what he hasn't got. Try
a bit.

--Couldn't, Stephen contrived to get out, his mental organs for the
moment refusing to dictate further.

Faultfinding being a proverbially bad hat Mr Bloom thought well to stir
or try to the clotted sugar from the bottom and reflected with something
approaching acrimony on the Coffee Palace and its temperance (and
lucrative) work. To be sure it was a legitimate object and beyond yea or
nay did a world of good, shelters such as the present one they were in
run on teetotal lines for vagrants at night, concerts, dramatic evenings
and useful lectures (admittance free) by qualified men for the lower
orders. On the other hand he had a distinct and painful recollection they
paid his wife, Madam Marion Tweedy who had been prominently associated
with it at one time, a very modest remuneration indeed for her
pianoplaying. The idea, he was strongly inclined to believe, was to do
good and net a profit, there being no competition to speak of. Sulphate
of copper poison SO4 or something in some dried peas he remembered
reading of in a cheap eatinghouse somewhere but he couldn't remember when
it was or where. Anyhow inspection, medical inspection, of all eatables
seemed to him more than ever necessary which possibly accounted for the
vogue of Dr Tibble's Vi-Cocoa on account of the medical analysis
involved.

--Have a shot at it now, he ventured to say of the coffee after being
stirred.

 Thus prevailed on to at any rate taste it Stephen lifted the heavy mug
from the brown puddle it clopped out of when taken up by the handle and
took a sip of the offending beverage.

--Still it's solid food, his good genius urged, I'm a stickler for solid
food, his one and only reason being not gormandising in the least but
regular meals as the SINE QUA NON for any kind of proper work, mental or
manual. You ought to eat more solid food. You would feel a different man.

--Liquids I can eat, Stephen said. But O, oblige me by taking away that
knife. I can't look at the point of it. It reminds me of Roman history.

Mr Bloom promptly did as suggested and removed the incriminated article,
a blunt hornhandled ordinary knife with nothing particularly Roman or
antique about it to the lay eye, observing that the point was the least
conspicuous point about it.

--Our mutual friend's stories are like himself, Mr Bloom APROPOS of
knives remarked to his CONFIDANTE SOTTO VOCE. Do you think they are
genuine? He could spin those yarns for hours on end all night long and
lie like old boots. Look at him.

Yet still though his eyes were thick with sleep and sea air life was full
of a host of things and coincidences of a terrible nature and it was
quite within the bounds of possibility that it was not an entire
fabrication though at first blush there was not much inherent probability
in all the spoof he got off his chest being strictly accurate gospel.

He had been meantime taking stock of the individual in front of him and
Sherlockholmesing him up ever since he clapped eyes on him. Though a
wellpreserved man of no little stamina, if a trifle prone to baldness,
there was something spurious in the cut of his jib that suggested a jail
delivery and it required no violent stretch of imagination to associate
such a weirdlooking specimen with the oakum and treadmill fraternity. He
might even have done for his man supposing it was his own case he told,
as people often did about others, namely, that he killed him himself and
had served his four or five goodlooking years in durance vile to say
nothing of the Antonio personage (no relation to the dramatic personage
of identical name who sprang from the pen of our national poet) who
expiated his crimes in the melodramatic manner above described. On the
other hand he might be only bluffing, a pardonable weakness because
meeting unmistakable mugs, Dublin residents, like those jarvies waiting
news from abroad would tempt any ancient mariner who sailed the ocean
seas to draw the long bow about the schooner HESPERUS and etcetera. And
when all was said and done the lies a fellow told about himself couldn't
probably hold a proverbial candle to the wholesale whoppers other fellows
coined about him.

--Mind you, I'm not saying that it's all a pure invention, he resumed.
Analogous scenes are occasionally, if not often, met with. Giants, though
that is rather a far cry, you see once in a way, Marcella the midget
queen. In those waxworks in Henry street I myself saw some Aztecs, as
they are called, sitting bowlegged, they couldn't straighten their legs
if you paid them because the muscles here, you see, he proceeded,
indicating on his companion the brief outline of the sinews or whatever
you like to call them behind the right knee, were utterly powerless from
sitting that way so long cramped up, being adored as gods. There's an
example again of simple souls.

However reverting to friend Sinbad and his horrifying adventures (who
reminded him a bit of Ludwig, ALIAS Ledwidge, when he occupied the boards
of the Gaiety when Michael Gunn was identified with the management in the
FLYING DUTCHMAN, a stupendous success, and his host of admirers came in
large numbers, everyone simply flocking to hear him though ships of any
sort, phantom or the reverse, on the stage usually fell a bit flat as
also did trains) there was nothing intrinsically incompatible about it,
he conceded. On the contrary that stab in the back touch was quite in
keeping with those italianos though candidly he was none the less free to
admit those icecreamers and friers in the fish way not to mention the
chip potato variety and so forth over in little Italy there near the
Coombe were sober thrifty hardworking fellows except perhaps a bit too
given to pothunting the harmless necessary animal of the feline
persuasion of others at night so as to have a good old succulent tuckin
with garlic DE RIGUEUR off him or her next day on the quiet and, he
added, on the cheap.

--Spaniards, for instance, he continued, passionate temperaments like
that, impetuous as Old Nick, are given to taking the law into their own
hands and give you your quietus doublequick with those poignards they
carry in the abdomen. It comes from the great heat, climate generally. My
wife is, so to speak, Spanish, half that is. Point of fact she could
actually claim Spanish nationality if she wanted, having been born in
(technically) Spain, i.e. Gibraltar. She has the Spanish type. Quite
dark, regular brunette, black. I for one certainly believe climate
accounts for character. That's why I asked you if you wrote your poetry
in Italian.

--The temperaments at the door, Stephen interposed with, were very
passionate about ten shillings. ROBERTO RUBA ROBA SUA.

--Quite so, Mr Bloom dittoed.

--Then, Stephen said staring and rambling on to himself or some unknown
listener somewhere, we have the impetuosity of Dante and the isosceles
triangle miss Portinari he fell in love with and Leonardo and san Tommaso
Mastino.

--It's in the blood, Mr Bloom acceded at once. All are washed in the
blood of the sun. Coincidence I just happened to be in the Kildare street
museum today, shortly prior to our meeting if I can so call it, and I
was just looking at those antique statues there. The splendid proportions
of hips, bosom. You simply don't knock against those kind of women here.
An exception here and there. Handsome yes, pretty in a way you find but
what I'm talking about is the female form. Besides they have so little
taste in dress, most of them, which greatly enhances a woman's natural
beauty, no matter what you say. Rumpled stockings, it may be, possibly
is, a foible of mine but still it's a thing I simply hate to see.

Interest, however, was starting to flag somewhat all round and then the
others got on to talking about accidents at sea, ships lost in a fog, goo
collisions with icebergs, all that sort of thing. Shipahoy of course had
his own say to say. He had doubled the cape a few odd times and weathered
a monsoon, a kind of wind, in the China seas and through all those perils
of the deep there was one thing, he declared, stood to him or words to
that effect, a pious medal he had that saved him.

So then after that they drifted on to the wreck off Daunt's rock, wreck
of that illfated Norwegian barque nobody could think of her name for the
moment till the jarvey who had really quite a look of Henry Campbell
remembered it PALME on Booterstown strand. That was the talk of the town
that year (Albert William Quill wrote a fine piece of original verse of
distinctive merit on the topic for the Irish TIMES), breakers running
over her and crowds and crowds on the shore in commotion petrified with
horror. Then someone said something about the case of the S. S. LADY
CAIRNS of Swansea run into by the MONA which was on an opposite tack in
rather muggyish weather and lost with all hands on deck. No aid was
given. Her master, the MONA'S, said he was afraid his collision bulkhead
would give way. She had no water, it appears, in her hold.

At this stage an incident happened. It having become necessary for him to
unfurl a reef the sailor vacated his seat.

--Let me cross your bows mate, he said to his neighbour who was just
gently dropping off into a peaceful doze.

He made tracks heavily, slowly with a dumpy sort of a gait to the door,
stepped heavily down the one step there was out of the shelter and bore
due left. While he was in the act of getting his bearings Mr Bloom who
noticed when he stood up that he had two flasks of presumably ship's rum
sticking one out of each pocket for the private consumption of his
burning interior, saw him produce a bottle and uncork it or unscrew and,
applying its nozzle to his lips, take a good old delectable swig out of
it with a gurgling noise. The irrepressible Bloom, who also had a shrewd
suspicion that the old stager went out on a manoeuvre after the
counterattraction in the shape of a female who however had disappeared to
all intents and purposes, could by straining just perceive him, when duly
refreshed by his rum puncheon exploit, gaping up at the piers and girders
of the Loop line rather out of his depth as of course it was all
radically altered since his last visit and greatly improved. Some person
or persons invisible directed him to the male urinal erected by the
cleansing committee all over the place for the purpose but after a brief
space of time during which silence reigned supreme the sailor, evidently
giving it a wide berth, eased himself closer at hand, the noise of his
bilgewater some little time subsequently splashing on the ground where it
apparently awoke a horse of the cabrank. A hoof scooped anyway for new
foothold after sleep and harness jingled. Slightly disturbed in his
sentrybox by the brazier of live coke the watcher of the corporation
stones who, though now broken down and fast breaking up, was none other
in stern reality than the Gumley aforesaid, now practically on the parish
rates, given the temporary job by Pat Tobin in all human probability from
dictates of humanity knowing him before shifted about and shuffled in his
box before composing his limbs again in to the arms of Morpheus, a truly
amazing piece of hard lines in its most virulent form on a fellow most
respectably connected and familiarised with decent home comforts all his
life who came in for a cool 100 pounds a year at one time which of course
the doublebarrelled ass proceeded to make general ducks and drakes of.
And there he was at the end of his tether after having often painted the
town tolerably pink without a beggarly stiver. He drank needless to be
told and it pointed only once more a moral when he might quite easily be
in a large way of business if--a big if, however--he had contrived to
cure himself of his particular partiality.

All meantime were loudly lamenting the falling off in Irish shipping,
coastwise and foreign as well, which was all part and parcel of the same
thing. A Palgrave Murphy boat was put off the ways at Alexandra basin,
the only launch that year. Right enough the harbours were there only no
ships ever called.

There were wrecks and wreckers, the keeper said, who was evidently AU
FAIT.

What he wanted to ascertain was why that ship ran bang against the only
rock in Galway bay when the Galway harbour scheme was mooted by a Mr
Worthington or some name like that, eh? Ask the then captain, he advised
them, how much palmoil the British government gave him for that day's
work, Captain John Lever of the Lever Line.

--Am I right, skipper? he queried of the sailor, now returning after his
private potation and the rest of his exertions.

That worthy picking up the scent of the fagend of the song or words
growled in wouldbe music but with great vim some kind of chanty or other
in seconds or thirds. Mr Bloom's sharp ears heard him then expectorate
the plug probably (which it was), so that he must have lodged it for the
time being in his fist while he did the drinking and making water jobs
and found it a bit sour after the liquid fire in question. Anyhow in he
rolled after his successful libation-CUM-potation, introducing an
atmosphere of drink into the SOIREE, boisterously trolling, like a
veritable son of a seacook:


    --THE BISCUITS WAS AS HARD AS BRASS
      AND THE BEEF AS SALT AS LOT'S WIFE'S ARSE.
      O, JOHNNY LEVER!
      JOHNNY LEVER, O!


After which effusion the redoubtable specimen duly arrived on the scene
and regaining his seat he sank rather than sat heavily on the form
provided. Skin-the-Goat, assuming he was he, evidently with an axe to
grind, was airing his grievances in a forcible-feeble philippic anent the
natural resources of Ireland or something of that sort which he described
in his lengthy dissertation as the richest country bar none on the face
of God's earth, far and away superior to England, with coal in large
quantities, six million pounds worth of pork exported every year, ten
millions between butter and eggs and all the riches drained out of it by
England levying taxes on the poor people that paid through the nose
always and gobbling up the best meat in the market and a lot more surplus
steam in the same vein. Their conversation accordingly became general and
all agreed that that was a fact. You could grow any mortal thing in Irish
soil, he stated, and there was that colonel Everard down there in Navan
growing tobacco. Where would you find anywhere the like of Irish bacon?
But a day of reckoning, he stated CRESCENDO with no uncertain voice,
thoroughly monopolising all the conversation, was in store for mighty
England, despite her power of pelf on account of her crimes. There would
be a fall and the greatest fall in history. The Germans and the Japs were
going to have their little lookin, he affirmed. The Boers were the
beginning of the end. Brummagem England was toppling already and her
downfall would be Ireland, her Achilles heel, which he explained to them
about the vulnerable point of Achilles, the Greek hero, a point his
auditors at once seized as he completely gripped their attention by
showing the tendon referred to on his boot. His advice to every Irishman
was: stay in the land of your birth and work for Ireland and live for
Ireland. Ireland, Parnell said, could not spare a single one of her sons.

Silence all round marked the termination of his FINALE. The impervious
navigator heard these lurid tidings, undismayed.

--Take a bit of doing, boss, retaliated that rough diamond palpably a bit
peeved in response to the foregoing truism.

To which cold douche referring to downfall and so on the keeper concurred
but nevertheless held to his main view.

--Who's the best troops in the army? the grizzled old veteran irately
interrogated. And the best jumpers and racers? And the best admirals and
generals we've got? Tell me that.

--The Irish, for choice, retorted the cabby like Campbell, facial
blemishes apart.

--That's right, the old tarpaulin corroborated. The Irish catholic
peasant. He's the backbone of our empire. You know Jem Mullins?

While allowing him his individual opinions as everyman the keeper added
he cared nothing for any empire, ours or his, and considered no Irishman
worthy of his salt that served it. Then they began to have a few
irascible words when it waxed hotter, both, needless to say, appealing to
the listeners who followed the passage of arms with interest so long as
they didn't indulge in recriminations and come to blows.

From inside information extending over a series of years Mr Bloom was
rather inclined to poohpooh the suggestion as egregious balderdash for,
pending that consummation devoutly to be or not to be wished for, he was
fully cognisant of the fact that their neighbours across the channel,
unless they were much bigger fools than he took them for, rather
concealed their strength than the opposite. It was quite on a par with
the quixotic idea in certain quarters that in a hundred million years the
coal seam of the sister island would be played out and if, as time went
on, that turned out to be how the cat jumped all he could personally say
on the matter was that as a host of contingencies, equally relevant to
the issue, might occur ere then it was highly advisable in the interim to
try to make the most of both countries even though poles apart. Another
little interesting point, the amours of whores and chummies, to put it in
common parlance, reminded him Irish soldiers had as often fought for
England as against her, more so, in fact. And now, why? So the scene
between the pair of them, the licensee of the place rumoured to be or
have been Fitzharris, the famous invincible, and the other, obviously
bogus, reminded him forcibly as being on all fours with the confidence
trick, supposing, that is, it was prearranged as the lookeron, a student
of the human soul if anything, the others seeing least of the game. And
as for the lessee or keeper, who probably wasn't the other person at all,
he (B.) couldn't help feeling and most properly it was better to give
people like that the goby unless you were a blithering idiot altogether
and refuse to have anything to do with them as a golden rule in private
life and their felonsetting, there always being the offchance of a
Dannyman coming forward and turning queen's evidence or king's now like
Denis or Peter Carey, an idea he utterly repudiated. Quite apart from
that he disliked those careers of wrongdoing and crime on principle. Yet,
though such criminal propensities had never been an inmate of his bosom
in any shape or form, he certainly did feel and no denying it (while
inwardly remaining what he was) a certain kind of admiration for a man
who had actually brandished a knife, cold steel, with the courage of his
political convictions (though, personally, he would never be a party to
any such thing), off the same bat as those love vendettas of the south,
have her or swing for her, when the husband frequently, after some words
passed between the two concerning her relations with the other lucky
mortal (he having had the pair watched), inflicted fatal injuries on his
adored one as a result of an alternative postnuptial LIAISON by plunging
his knife into her, until it just struck him that Fitz, nicknamed Skin-
the-Goat, merely drove the car for the actual perpetrators of the outrage
and so was not, if he was reliably informed, actually party to the ambush
which, in point of fact, was the plea some legal luminary saved his skin
on. In any case that was very ancient history by now and as for our
friend, the pseudo Skin-the-etcetera, he had transparently outlived his
welcome. He ought to have either died naturally or on the scaffold high.
Like actresses, always farewell positively last performance then come up
smiling again. Generous to a fault of course, temperamental, no
economising or any idea of the sort, always snapping at the bone for the
shadow. So similarly he had a very shrewd suspicion that Mr Johnny Lever
got rid of some l s d. in the course of his perambulations round the
docks in the congenial atmosphere of the OLD IRELAND tavern, come back to
Erin and so on. Then as for the other he had heard not so long before the
same identical lingo as he told Stephen how he simply but effectually
silenced the offender.

--He took umbrage at something or other, that muchinjured but on the
whole eventempered person declared, I let slip. He called me a jew and in
a heated fashion offensively. So I without deviating from plain facts in
the least told him his God, I mean Christ, was a jew too and all his
family like me though in reality I'm not. That was one for him. A soft
answer turns away wrath. He hadn't a word to say for himself as everyone
saw. Am I not right?

 He turned a long you are wrong gaze on Stephen of timorous dark pride at
the soft impeachment with a glance also of entreaty for he seemed to
glean in a kind of a way that it wasn't all exactly.

--EX QUIBUS, Stephen mumbled in a noncommittal accent, their two or four
eyes conversing, CHRISTUS or Bloom his name is or after all any other,
SECUNDUM CARNEM.

--Of course, Mr B. proceeded to stipulate, you must look at both sides of
the question. It is hard to lay down any hard and fast rules as to right
and wrong but room for improvement all round there certainly is though
every country, they say, our own distressful included, has the government
it deserves. But with a little goodwill all round. It's all very fine to
boast of mutual superiority but what about mutual equality. I resent
violence and intolerance in any shape or form. It never reaches anything
or stops anything. A revolution must come on the due instalments plan.
It's a patent absurdity on the face of it to hate people because they
live round the corner and speak another vernacular, in the next house so
to speak.

--Memorable bloody bridge battle and seven minutes' war, Stephen
assented, between Skinner's alley and Ormond market.

Yes, Mr Bloom thoroughly agreed, entirely endorsing the remark, that was
overwhelmingly right. And the whole world was full of that sort of thing.

--You just took the words out of my mouth, he said. A hocuspocus of
conflicting evidence that candidly you couldn't remotely ...

All those wretched quarrels, in his humble opinion, stirring up bad
blood, from some bump of combativeness or gland of some kind, erroneously
supposed to be about a punctilio of honour and a flag, were very largely
a question of the money question which was at the back of everything
greed and jealousy, people never knowing when to stop.

--They accuse, remarked he audibly.

He turned away from the others who probably and spoke nearer to, so as
the others in case they.

--Jews, he softly imparted in an aside in Stephen's ear, are accused of
ruining. Not a vestige of truth in it, I can safely say. History, would
you be surprised to learn, proves up to the hilt Spain decayed when the
inquisition hounded the jews out and England prospered when Cromwell, an
uncommonly able ruffian who in other respects has much to answer for,
imported them. Why? Because they are imbued with the proper spirit. They
are practical and are proved to be so. I don't want to indulge in any
because you know the standard works on the subject and then orthodox as
you are. But in the economic, not touching religion, domain the priest
spells poverty. Spain again, you saw in the war, compared with goahead
America. Turks. It's in the dogma. Because if they didn't believe they'd
go straight to heaven when they die they'd try to live better, at least
so I think. That's the juggle on which the p.p's raise the wind on false
pretences. I'm, he resumed with dramatic force, as good an Irishman as
that rude person I told you about at the outset and I want to see
everyone, concluded he, all creeds and classes PRO RATA having a
comfortable tidysized income, in no niggard fashion either, something in
the neighbourhood of 300 pounds per annum. That's the vital issue at
stake and it's feasible and would be provocative of friendlier
intercourse between man and man. At least that's my idea for what it's
worth. I call that patriotism. UBI PATRIA, as we learned a smattering of
in our classical days in ALMA MATER, VITA BENE. Where you can live well,
the sense is, if you work.

Over his untastable apology for a cup of coffee, listening to this
synopsis of things in general, Stephen stared at nothing in particular.
He could hear, of course, all kinds of words changing colour like those
crabs about Ringsend in the morning burrowing quickly into all colours of
different sorts of the same sand where they had a home somewhere beneath
or seemed to. Then he looked up and saw the eyes that said or didn't say
the words the voice he heard said, if you work.

--Count me out, he managed to remark, meaning work.

The eyes were surprised at this observation because as he, the person who
owned them pro tem. observed or rather his voice speaking did, all must
work, have to, together.

--I mean, of course, the other hastened to affirm, work in the widest
possible sense. Also literary labour not merely for the kudos of the
thing. Writing for the newspapers which is the readiest channel nowadays.
That's work too. Important work. After all, from the little I know of
you, after all the money expended on your education you are entitled to
recoup yourself and command your price. You have every bit as much right
to live by your pen in pursuit of your philosophy as the peasant has.
What? You both belong to Ireland, the brain and the brawn. Each is
equally important.

--You suspect, Stephen retorted with a sort of a half laugh, that I may
be 1160 important because I belong to the FAUBOURG SAINT PATRICE called
Ireland for short.

--I would go a step farther, Mr Bloom insinuated.

--But I suspect, Stephen interrupted, that Ireland must be important
because it belongs to me.

--What belongs, queried Mr Bloom bending, fancying he was perhaps under
some misapprehension. Excuse me. Unfortunately, I didn't catch the latter
portion. What was it you ...?

Stephen, patently crosstempered, repeated and shoved aside his mug of
coffee or whatever you like to call it none too politely, adding:  1170

--We can't change the country. Let us change the subject.

At this pertinent suggestion Mr Bloom, to change the subject, looked down
but in a quandary, as he couldn't tell exactly what construction to put
on belongs to which sounded rather a far cry. The rebuke of some kind was
clearer than the other part. Needless to say the fumes of his recent orgy
spoke then with some asperity in a curious bitter way foreign to his
sober state. Probably the homelife to which Mr B attached the utmost
importance had not been all that was needful or he hadn't been
familiarised with the right sort of people. With a touch of fear for the
young man beside him whom he furtively scrutinised with an air of some
consternation remembering he had just come back from Paris, the eyes more
especially reminding him forcibly of father and sister, failing to throw
much light on the subject, however, he brought to mind instances of
cultured fellows that promised so brilliantly nipped in the bud of
premature decay and nobody to blame but themselves. For instance there
was the case of O'Callaghan, for one, the halfcrazy faddist, respectably
connected though of inadequate means, with his mad vagaries among whose
other gay doings when rotto and making himself a nuisance to everybody
all round he was in the habit of ostentatiously sporting in public a suit
of brown paper (a fact). And then the usual DENOUEMENT after the fun had
gone on fast and furious he got 1190 landed into hot water and had to be
spirited away by a few friends, after a strong hint to a blind horse from
John Mallon of Lower Castle Yard, so as not to be made amenable under
section two of the criminal law amendment act, certain names of those
subpoenaed being handed in but not divulged for reasons which will occur
to anyone with a pick of brains. Briefly, putting two and two together,
six sixteen which he pointedly turned a deaf ear to, Antonio and so
forth, jockeys and esthetes and the tattoo which was all the go in the
seventies or thereabouts even in the house of lords because early in life
the occupant of the throne, then heir apparent, the other members of the
upper ten and other high personages simply following in the footsteps of
the head of the state, he reflected about the errors of notorieties and
crowned heads running counter to morality such as the Cornwall case a
number of years before under their veneer in a way scarcely intended by
nature, a thing good Mrs Grundy, as the law stands, was terribly down on
though not for the reason they thought they were probably whatever it was
except women chiefly who were always fiddling more or less at one another
it being largely a matter of dress and all the rest of it. Ladies who
like distinctive underclothing should, and every welltailored man must,
trying to make the gap wider between them by innuendo and give more of a
genuine filip to acts of impropriety between the two, she unbuttoned his
and then he untied her, mind the pin, whereas savages in the cannibal
islands, say, at ninety degrees in the shade not caring a continental.
However, reverting to the original, there were on the other hand others
who had forced their way to the top from the lowest rung by the aid of
their bootstraps. Sheer force of natural genius, that. With brains, sir.

For which and further reasons he felt it was his interest and duty even
to wait on and profit by the unlookedfor occasion though why he could not
exactly tell being as it was already several shillings to the bad having
in fact let himself in for it. Still to cultivate the acquaintance of
someone of no uncommon calibre who could provide food for reflection
would amply repay any small. Intellectual stimulation, as such, was, he
felt, from time to time a firstrate tonic for the mind. Added to which
was the coincidence of meeting, discussion, dance, row, old salt of the
here today and gone tomorrow type, night loafers, the whole galaxy of
events, all went to make up a miniature cameo of the world we live in
especially as the lives of the submerged tenth, viz. coalminers, divers,
scavengers etc., were very much under the microscope lately. To improve
the shining hour he wondered whether he might meet with anything
approaching the same luck as Mr Philip Beaufoy if taken down in writing
suppose he were to pen something out of the common groove (as he fully
intended doing) at the rate of one guinea per column. MY EXPERIENCES, let
us say, IN A CABMAN'S SHELTER.

The pink edition extra sporting of the TELEGRAPH tell a graphic lie lay,
as luck would have it, beside his elbow and as he was just puzzling
again, far from satisfied, over a country belonging to him and the
preceding rebus the vessel came from Bridgwater and the postcard was
addressed A. Boudin find the captain's age, his eyes went aimlessly over
the respective captions which came under his special province the
allembracing give us this day our daily press. First he got a bit of a
start but it turned out to be only something about somebody named H. du
Boyes, agent for typewriters or something like that. Great battle, Tokio.
Lovemaking in Irish, 200 pounds damages. Gordon Bennett. Emigration
Swindle. Letter from His Grace. William. Ascot meeting, the Gold Cup.
Victory of outsider THROWAWAY recalls Derby of '92 when Capt. Marshall's
dark horse SIR HUGO captured the blue ribband at long odds. New York
disaster. Thousand lives lost. Foot and Mouth. Funeral of the late Mr
Patrick Dignam.

So to change the subject he read about Dignam R. I. P. which, he
reflected, was anything but a gay sendoff. Or a change of address anyway.

--THIS MORNING (Hynes put it in of course) THE REMAINS OF THE LATE MR
PATRICK DIGNAM WERE REMOVED FROM HIS RESIDENCE, NO 9 NEWBRIDGE AVENUE,
SANDYMOUNT, FOR INTERMENT IN GLASNEVIN. THE DECEASED GENTLEMAN WAS A MOST
POPULAR AND GENIAL PERSONALITY IN CITY LIFE AND HIS DEMISE AFTER A BRIEF
ILLNESS CAME AS A GREAT SHOCK TO CITIZENS OF ALL CLASSES BY WHOM HE IS
DEEPLY REGRETTED. THE OBSEQUIES, AT WHICH MANY FRIENDS OF THE DECEASED
WERE PRESENT, WERE CARRIED OUT (certainly Hynes wrote it with a nudge
from Corny) BY MESSRS H. J. O'NEILL AND SON, 164 NORTH STRAND ROAD. THE
MOURNERS INCLUDED: PATK. DIGNAM (SON), BERNARD CORRIGAN (BROTHER-IN-LAW),
JNO. HENRY MENTON, SOLR, MARTIN CUNNINGHAM, JOHN POWER, .)EATONDPH 1/8
ADOR DORADOR DOURADORA (must be where he called Monks the dayfather about
Keyes's ad) THOMAS KERNAN, SIMON DEDALUS, STEPHEN DEDALUS B. ,4., EDW. J.
LAMBERT, CORNELIUS T. KELLEHER, JOSEPH M'C HYNES, L. BOOM, CP M'COY,--
M'LNTOSH AND SEVERAL OTHERS.

 Nettled not a little by L. BOOM (as it incorrectly stated) and the line
of bitched type but tickled to death simultaneously by C. P. M'Coy and
Stephen Dedalus B. A. who were conspicuous, needless to say, by their
total absence (to say nothing of M'Intosh) L. Boom pointed it out to his
companion B. A. engaged in stifling another yawn, half nervousness, not
forgetting the usual crop of nonsensical howlers of misprints.

--Is that first epistle to the Hebrews, he asked as soon as his bottom
jaw would let him, in? Text: open thy mouth and put thy foot in it.

--It is. Really, Mr Bloom said (though first he fancied he alluded to the
archbishop till he added about foot and mouth with which there could be
no possible connection) overjoyed to set his mind at rest and a bit
flabbergasted at Myles Crawford's after all managing to. There.

While the other was reading it on page two Boom (to give him for the
nonce his new misnomer) whiled away a few odd leisure moments in fits and
starts with the account of the third event at Ascot on page three, his
side. Value 1000 sovs with 3000 sovs in specie added. For entire colts
and fillies. Mr F. Alexander's THROWAWAY, b. h. by RIGHTAWAY, 5 yrs, 9 st
4 lbs (W. Lane) 1, lord Howard de Walden's ZINFANDEL (M. Cannon) z, Mr W.
Bass's SCEPTRE 3. Betting 5 to 4 on ZINFANDEL, 20 to 1 THROWAWAY (off).
SCEPTRE a shade heavier, 5 to 4 on ZINFANDEL, 20 to 1 THROWAWAY (off).
THROWAWAY and ZINFANDEL stood close order. It was anybody's race then the
rank outsider drew to the fore, got long lead, beating lord Howard de
Walden's chestnut colt and Mr W. Bass's bay filly SCEPTRE on a 2 1/2 mile
course. Winner trained by Braime so that Lenehan's version of the
business was all pure buncombe. Secured the verdict cleverly by a length.
1000 sovs with 3000 in specie. Also ran: J de Bremond's (French horse
Bantam Lyons was anxiously inquiring after not in yet but expected any
minute) MAXIMUM II. Different ways of bringing off a coup. Lovemaking
damages. Though that halfbaked Lyons ran off at a tangent in his
impetuosity to get left. Of course gambling eminently lent itself to that
sort of thing though as the event turned out the poor fool hadn't much
reason to congratulate himself on his pick, the forlorn hope. Guesswork
it reduced itself to eventually.

--There was every indication they would arrive at that, he, Bloom, said.

--Who? the other, whose hand by the way was hurt, said.

One morning you would open the paper, the cabman affirmed, and read:
RETURN OF PARNELL. He bet them what they liked. A Dublin fusilier was in
that shelter one night and said he saw him in South Africa. Pride it was
killed him. He ought to have done away with himself or lain low for a
time after committee room no 15 until he was his old self again with no-
one to point a finger at him. Then they would all to a man have gone down
on their marrowbones to him to come back when he had recovered his
senses. Dead he wasn't. Simply absconded somewhere. The coffin they
brought over was full of stones. He changed his name to De Wet, the Boer
general. He made a mistake to fight the priests. And so forth and so on.

All the same Bloom (properly so dubbed) was rather surprised at their
memories for in nine cases out of ten it was a case of tarbarrels and not
singly but in their thousands and then complete oblivion because it was
twenty odd years. Highly unlikely of course there was even a shadow of
truth in the stones and, even supposing, he thought a return highly
inadvisable, all things considered. Something evidently riled them in his
death. Either he petered out too tamely of acute pneumonia just when his
various different political arrangements were nearing completion or
whether it transpired he owed his death to his having neglected to change
his boots and clothes-after a wetting when a cold resulted and failing to
consult a specialist he being confined to his room till he eventually
died of it amid widespread regret before a fortnight was at an end or
quite possibly they were distressed to find the job was taken out of
their hands. Of course nobody being acquainted with his movements even
before there was absolutely no clue as to his whereabouts which were
decidedly of the ALICE, WHERE ART THOU order even prior to his starting
to go under several aliases such as Fox and Stewart so the remark which
emanated from friend cabby might be within the bounds of possibility.
Naturally then it would prey on his mind as a born leader of men which
undoubtedly he was and a commanding figure, a sixfooter or at any rate
five feet ten or eleven in his stockinged feet, whereas Messrs So and So
who, though they weren't even a patch on the former man, ruled the roost
after their redeeming features were very few and far between. It
certainly pointed a moral, the idol with feet of clay, and then
seventytwo of his trusty henchmen rounding on him with mutual
mudslinging. And the identical same with murderers. You had to come back.
That haunting sense kind of drew you. To show the understudy in the title
ROLE how to. He saw him once on the auspicious occasion when they broke
up the type in the INSUPPRESSIBLE or was it UNITED IRELAND, a privilege
he keenly appreciated, and, in point of fact, handed him his silk hat
when it was knocked off and he said THANK YOU, excited as he undoubtedly
was under his frigid exterior notwithstanding the little misadventure
mentioned between the cup and the lip: what's bred in the bone. Still as
regards return. You were a lucky dog if they didn't set the terrier at
you directly you got back. Then a lot of shillyshally usually followed,
Tom for and Dick and Harry against. And then, number one, you came up
against the man in possession and had to produce your credentials like
the claimant in the Tichborne case, Roger Charles Tichborne, BELLA was
the boat's name to the best of his recollection he, the heir, went down
in as the evidence went to show and there was a tattoo mark too in Indian
ink, lord Bellew was it, as he might very easily have picked up the
details from some pal on board ship and then, when got up to tally with
the description given, introduce himself with: EXCUSE ME, MY NAME IS SO
AND SO or some such commonplace remark. A more prudent course, as Bloom
said to the not over effusive, in fact like the distinguished personage
under discussion beside him, would have been to sound the lie of the land
first.

--That bitch, that English whore, did for him, the shebeen proprietor
commented. She put the first nail in his coffin.

--Fine lump of a woman all the same, the SOI-DISANT townclerk Henry
Campbell remarked, and plenty of her. She loosened many a man's thighs. I
seen her picture in a barber's. The husband was a captain or an officer.

--Ay, Skin-the-Goat amusingly added, he was and a cottonball one.

This gratuitous contribution of a humorous character occasioned a fair
amount of laughter among his ENTOURAGE. As regards Bloom he, without the
faintest suspicion of a smile, merely gazed in the direction of the door
and reflected upon the historic story which had aroused extraordinary
interest at the time when the facts, to make matters worse, were made
public with the usual affectionate letters that passed between them full
of sweet nothings. First it was strictly Platonic till nature intervened
and an attachment sprang up between them till bit by bit matters came to
a climax and the matter became the talk of the town till the staggering
blow came as a welcome intelligence to not a few evildisposed, however,
who were resolved upon encompassing his downfall though the thing was
public property all along though not to anything like the sensational
extent that it subsequently blossomed into. Since their names were
coupled, though, since he was her declared favourite, where was the
particular necessity to proclaim it to the rank and file from the
housetops, the fact, namely, that he had shared her bedroom which came
out in the witnessbox on oath when a thrill went through the packed court
literally electrifying everybody in the shape of witnesses swearing to
having witnessed him on such and such a particular date in the act of
scrambling out of an upstairs apartment with the assistance of a ladder
in night apparel, having gained admittance in the same fashion, a fact
the weeklies, addicted to the lubric a little, simply coined shoals of
money out of. Whereas the simple fact of the case was it was simply a
case of the husband not being up to the scratch, with nothing in common
between them beyond the name, and then a real man arriving on the scene,
strong to the verge of weakness, falling a victim to her siren charms and
forgetting home ties, the usual sequel, to bask in the loved one's
smiles. The eternal question of the life connubial, needless to say,
cropped up. Can real love, supposing there happens to be another chap in
the case, exist between married folk? Poser. Though it was no concern of
theirs absolutely if he regarded her with affection, carried away by a
wave of folly. A magnificent specimen of manhood he was truly augmented
obviously by gifts of a high order, as compared with the other military
supernumerary that is (who was just the usual everyday FAREWELL, MY
GALLANT CAPTAIN kind of an individual in the light dragoons, the l8th
hussars to be accurate) and inflammable doubtless (the fallen leader,
that is, not the other) in his own peculiar way which she of course,
woman, quickly perceived as highly likely to carve his way to fame which
he almost bid fair to do till the priests and ministers of the gospel as
a whole, his erstwhile staunch adherents, and his beloved evicted tenants
for whom he had done yeoman service in the rural parts of the country by
taking up the cudgels on their behalf in a way that exceeded their most
sanguine expectations, very effectually cooked his matrimonial goose,
thereby heaping coals of fire on his head much in the same way as the
fabled ass's kick. Looking back now in a retrospective kind of
arrangement all seemed a kind of dream. And then coming back was the
worst thing you ever did because it went without saying you would feel
out of place as things always moved with the times. Why, as he reflected,
Irishtown strand, a locality he had not been in for quite a number of
years looked different somehow since, as it happened, he went to reside
on the north side. North or south, however, it was just the wellknown
case of hot passion, pure and simple, upsetting the applecart with a
vengeance and just bore out the very thing he was saying as she also was
Spanish or half so, types that wouldn't do things by halves, passionate
abandon of the south, casting every shred of decency to the winds.

--Just bears out what I was saying, he, with glowing bosom said to
Stephen, about blood and the sun. And, if I don't greatly mistake she was
Spanish too.

--The king of Spain's daughter, Stephen answered, adding something or
other rather muddled about farewell and adieu to you Spanish onions and
the first land called the Deadman and from Ramhead to Scilly was so and
so many.

--Was she? Bloom ejaculated, surprised though not astonished by any
means, I never heard that rumour before. Possible, especially there, it
was as she lived there. So, Spain.

Carefully avoiding a book in his pocket SWEETS OF, which reminded him by
the by of that Cap l street library book out of date, he took out his
pocketbook and, turning over the various contents it contained rapidly
finally he.

--Do you consider, by the by, he said, thoughtfully selecting a faded
photo which he laid on the table, that a Spanish type?

Stephen, obviously addressed, looked down on the photo showing a large
sized lady with her fleshy charms on evidence in an open fashion as she
was in the full bloom of womanhood in evening dress cut ostentatiously
low for the occasion to give a liberal display of bosom, with more than
vision of breasts, her full lips parted and some perfect teeth, standing
near, ostensibly with gravity, a piano on the rest of which was IN OLD
MADRID, a ballad, pretty in its way, which was then all the vogue. Her
(the lady's) eyes, dark, large, looked at Stephen, about to smile about
something to be admired, Lafayette of Westmoreland street, Dublin's
premier photographic artist, being responsible for the esthetic
execution.

--Mrs Bloom, my wife the PRIMA DONNA Madam Marion Tweedy, Bloom
indicated. Taken a few years since. In or about ninety six. Very like her
then.

Beside the young man he looked also at the photo of the lady now his 1440
legal wife who, he intimated, was the accomplished daughter of Major
Brian Tweedy and displayed at an early age remarkable proficiency as a
singer having even made her bow to the public when her years numbered
barely sweet sixteen. As for the face it was a speaking likeness in
expression but it did not do justice to her figure which came in for a
lot of notice usually and which did not come out to the best advantage in
that getup. She could without difficulty, he said, have posed for the
ensemble, not to dwell on certain opulent curves of the. He dwelt, being
a bit of an artist in his spare time, on the female form in general
developmentally because, as it so happened, no later than that afternoon
he had seen those Grecian statues, 1450 perfectly developed as works of
art, in the National Museum. Marble could give the original, shoulders,
back, all the symmetry, all the rest. Yes, puritanisme, it does though
Saint Joseph's sovereign thievery alors (Bandez!) Figne toi trop. Whereas
no photo could because it simply wasn't art in a word.

The spirit moving him he would much have liked to follow Jack Tar's good
example and leave the likeness there for a very few minutes to speak for
itself on the plea he so that the other could drink in the beauty for
himself, her stage presence being, frankly, a treat in itself which the
camera could not at all do justice to. But it was scarcely professional
etiquette so. Though it was a warm pleasant sort of a night now yet
wonderfully cool for the season considering, for sunshine after storm.
And he did feel a kind of need there and then to follow suit like a kind
of inward voice and satisfy a possible need by moving a motion.
Nevertheless he sat tight just viewing the slightly soiled photo creased
by opulent curves, none the worse for wear however, and looked away
thoughtfully with the intention of not further increasing the other's
possible embarrassment while gauging her symmetry of heaving EMBONPOINT.
In fact the slight soiling was only an added charm like the case of linen
slightly soiled, good as new, much better in fact with the starch out.
Suppose she was gone when he? I looked for the lamp which she told me
came into his mind but merely as a passing fancy of his because he then
recollected the morning littered bed etcetera and the book about Ruby
with met him pike hoses (SIC) in it which must have fell down
sufficiently appropriately beside the domestic chamberpot with apologies
to Lindley Murray.

The vicinity of the young man he certainly relished, educated, DISTINGUE
and impulsive into the bargain, far and away the pick of the bunch though
you wouldn't think he had it in him yet you would. Besides he said the
picture was handsome which, say what you like, it was though at the
moment she was distinctly stouter. And why not? An awful lot of
makebelieve went on about that sort of thing involving a lifelong slur
with the usual splash page of gutterpress about the same old matrimonial
tangle alleging misconduct with professional golfer or the newest stage
favourite instead of being honest and aboveboard about the whole
business. How they were fated to meet and an attachment sprang up between
the two so that their names were coupled in the public eye was told in
court with letters containing the habitual mushy and compromising
expressions leaving no loophole to show that they openly cohabited two or
three times a week at some wellknown seaside hotel and relations, when
the thing ran its normal course, became in due course intimate. Then the
decree NISI and the King's proctor tries to show cause why and, he
failing to quash it, NISI was made absolute. But as for that the two
misdemeanants, wrapped up as they largely were in one another, could
safely afford to ignore it as they very largely did till the matter was
put in the hands of a solicitor who filed a petition for the party
wronged in due course. He, B, enjoyed the distinction of being close to
Erin's uncrowned king in the flesh when the thing occurred on the
historic FRACAS when the fallen leader's, who notoriously stuck to his
guns to the last drop even when clothed in the mantle of adultery,
(leader's) trusty henchmen to the number of ten or a dozen or possibly
even more than that penetrated into the printing works of the
INSUPPRESSIBLE or no it was UNITED IRELAND (a by no means by the by
appropriate appellative) and broke up the typecases with hammers or
something like that all on account of some scurrilous effusions from the
facile pens of the O'Brienite scribes at the usual mudslinging occupation
reflecting on the erstwhile tribune's private morals. Though palpably a
radically altered man he was still a commanding figure though carelessly
garbed as usual with that look of settled purpose which went a long way
with the shillyshallyers till they discovered to their vast discomfiture
that their idol had feet of clay after placing him upon a pedestal which
she, however, was the first to perceive. As those were particularly hot
times in the general hullaballoo Bloom sustained a minor injury from a
nasty prod of some chap's elbow in the crowd that of course congregated
lodging some place about the pit of the stomach, fortunately not of a
grave character. His hat (Parnell's) a silk one was inadvertently knocked
off and, as a matter of strict history, Bloom was the man who picked it
up in the crush after witnessing the occurrence meaning to return it to
him (and return it to him he did with the utmost celerity) who panting
and hatless and whose thoughts were miles away from his hat at the time
all the same being a gentleman born with a stake in the country he, as a
matter of fact, having gone into it more for the kudos of the thing than
anything else, what's bred in the bone instilled into him in infancy at
his mother's knee in the shape of knowing what good form was came out at
once because he turned round to the donor and thanked him with perfect
APLOMB, saying: THANK YOU, SIR, though in a very different tone of voice
from the ornament of the legal profession whose headgear Bloom also set
to rights earlier in the course of the day, history repeating itself with
a difference, after the burial of a mutual friend when they had left him
alone in his glory after the grim task of having committed his remains to
the grave.

On the other hand what incensed him more inwardly was the blatant jokes
of the cabman and so on who passed it all off as a jest, laughing 1530
immoderately, pretending to understand everything, the why and the
wherefore, and in reality not knowing their own minds, it being a case
for the two parties themselves unless it ensued that the legitimate
husband happened to be a party to it owing to some anonymous letter from
the usual boy Jones, who happened to come across them at the crucial
moment in a loving position locked in one another's arms, drawing
attention to their illicit proceedings and leading up to a domestic
rumpus and the erring fair one begging forgiveness of her lord and master
upon her knees and promising to sever the connection and not receive his
visits any more if only the aggrieved husband would overlook the matter
and let bygones be bygones with tears in her eyes though possibly with
her tongue in her fair cheek at the same time as quite possibly there
were several others. He personally, being of a sceptical bias, believed
and didn't make the smallest bones about saying so either that man or men
in the plural were always hanging around on the waiting list about a
lady, even supposing she was the best wife in the world and they got on
fairly well together for the sake of argument, when, neglecting her
duties, she chose to be tired of wedded life and was on for a little
flutter in polite debauchery to press their attentions on her with
improper intent, the upshot being that her affections centred on another,
the cause of many LIAISONS between still attractive married women getting
on for fair and forty and younger men, no doubt as several famous cases
of feminine infatuation proved up to the hilt.

It was a thousand pities a young fellow, blessed with an allowance of
brains as his neighbour obviously was, should waste his valuable time
with profligate women who might present him with a nice dose to last him
his lifetime. In the nature of single blessedness he would one day take
unto himself a wife when Miss Right came on the scene but in the interim
ladies' society was a CONDITIO SINE QUA NON though he had the gravest
possible doubts, not that he wanted in the smallest to pump Stephen about
Miss Ferguson (who was very possibly the particular lodestar who brought
him down to Irishtown so early in the morning), as to whether he would
find much satisfaction basking in the boy and girl courtship idea and the
company of smirking misses without a penny to their names bi or triweekly
with the orthodox preliminary canter of complimentplaying and walking out
leading up to fond lovers' ways and flowers and chocs. To think of him
house and homeless, rooked by some landlady worse than any stepmother,
was really too bad at his age. The queer suddenly things he popped out
with attracted the elder man who was several years the other's senior or
like his father but something substantial he certainly ought to eat even
were it only an eggflip made on unadulterated maternal nutriment or,
failing that, the homely Humpty Dumpty boiled.

--At what o'clock did you dine? he questioned of the slim form and tired
though unwrinkled face.

--Some time yesterday, Stephen said.

--Yesterday! exclaimed Bloom till he remembered it was already tomorrow
Friday. Ah, you mean it's after twelve!

--The day before yesterday, Stephen said, improving on himself.

Literally astounded at this piece of intelligence Bloom reflected. Though
they didn't see eye to eye in everything a certain analogy there somehow
was as if both their minds were travelling, so to speak, in the one train
of thought. At his age when dabbling in politics roughly some score of
years previously when he had been a QUASI aspirant to parliamentary
honours in the Buckshot Foster days he too recollected in retrospect
(which was a source of keen satisfaction in itself) he had a sneaking
regard for those same ultra ideas. For instance when the evicted tenants
question, then at its first inception, bulked largely in people's mind
though, it goes without saying, not contributing a copper or pinning his
faith absolutely to its dictums, some of which wouldn't exactly hold
water, he at the outset in principle at all events was in thorough
sympathy with peasant possession as voicing the trend of modern opinion
(a partiality, however, which, realising his mistake, he was subsequently
partially cured of) and even was twitted with going a step farther than
Michael Davitt in the striking views he at one time inculcated as a
backtothelander, which was one reason he strongly resented the innuendo
put upon him in so barefaced a fashion by our friend at the gathering of
the clans in Barney Kiernan's so that he, though often considerably
misunderstood and the least pugnacious of mortals, be it repeated,
departed from his customary habit to give him (metaphorically) one in the
gizzard though, so far as politics themselves were concerned, he was only
too conscious of the casualties invariably resulting from propaganda and
displays of mutual animosity and the misery and suffering it entailed as
a foregone conclusion on fine young fellows, chiefly, destruction of the
fittest, in a word.

Anyhow upon weighing up the pros and cons, getting on for one, as it was,
it was high time to be retiring for the night. The crux was it was a bit
risky to bring him home as eventualities might possibly ensue (somebody
having a temper of her own sometimes) and spoil the hash altogether as on
the night he misguidedly brought home a dog (breed unknown) with a lame
paw (not that the cases were either identical or the reverse though he
had hurt his hand too) to Ontario Terrace as he very distinctly
remembered, having been there, so to speak. On the other hand it was
altogether far and away too late for the Sandymount or Sandycove
suggestion so that he was in some perplexity as to which of the two
alternatives. Everything pointed to the fact that it behoved him to avail
himself to the full of the opportunity, all things considered. His
initial impression was he was a shade standoffish or not over effusive
but it grew on him someway. For one thing he mightn't what you call jump
at the idea, if approached, and what mostly worried him was he didn't
know how to lead up to it or word it exactly, supposing he did entertain
the proposal, as it would afford him very great personal pleasure if he
would allow him to help to put coin in his way or some wardrobe, if found
suitable. At all events he wound up by concluding, eschewing for the
nonce hidebound precedent, a cup of Epps's cocoa and a shakedown for the
night plus the use of a rug or two and overcoat doubled into a pillow at
least he would be in safe hands and as warm as a toast on a trivet he
failed to perceive any very vast amount of harm in that always with the
proviso no rumpus of any sort was kicked up. A move had to be made
because that merry old soul, the grasswidower in question who appeared to
be glued to the spot, didn't appear in any particular hurry to wend his
way home to his dearly beloved Queenstown and it was highly likely some
sponger's bawdyhouse of retired beauties where age was no bar off Sheriff
street lower would be the best clue to that equivocal character's
whereabouts for a few days to come, alternately racking their feelings
(the mermaids') with sixchamber revolver anecdotes verging on the
tropical calculated to freeze the marrow of anybody's bones and mauling
their largesized charms betweenwhiles with rough and tumble gusto to the
accompaniment of large potations of potheen and the usual blarney about
himself for as to who he in reality was let x equal my right name and
address, as Mr Algebra remarks PASSIM. At the same time he inwardly
chuckled over his gentle repartee to the blood and ouns champion about
his god being a jew. People could put up with being bitten by a wolf but
what properly riled them was a bite from a sheep. The most vulnerable
point too of tender Achilles. Your god was a jew. Because mostly they
appeared to imagine he came from Carrick-on-Shannon or somewhereabouts in
the county Sligo.

--I propose, our hero eventually suggested after mature reflection while
prudently pocketing her photo, as it's rather stuffy here you just come
home with me and talk things over. My diggings are quite close in the
vicinity. You can't drink that stuff. Do you like cocoa? Wait. I'll just
pay this lot.

The best plan clearly being to clear out, the remainder being plain
sailing, he beckoned, while prudently pocketing the photo, to the keeper
of the shanty who didn't seem to.

--Yes, that's the best, he assured Stephen to whom for the matter of that
Brazen Head or him or anywhere else was all more or less.

All kinds of Utopian plans were flashing through his (B's) busy brain,
education (the genuine article), literature, journalism, prize titbits,
up to date billing, concert tours in English watering resorts packed with
hydros and seaside theatres, turning money away, duets in Italian with
the accent perfectly true to nature and a quantity of other things, no
necessity, of course, to tell the world and his wife from the housetops
about it, and a slice of luck. An opening was all was wanted. Because he
more than suspected he had his father's voice to bank his hopes on which
it was quite on the cards he had so it would be just as well, by the way
no harm, to trail the conversation in the direction of that particular
red herring just to.

The cabby read out of the paper he had got hold of that the former
viceroy, earl Cadogan, had presided at the cabdrivers' association dinner
in London somewhere. Silence with a yawn or two accompanied this
thrilling announcement. Then the old specimen in the corner who appeared
to have some spark of vitality left read out that sir Anthony MacDonnell
had left Euston for the chief secretary's lodge or words to that effect.
To which absorbing piece of intelligence echo answered why.

--Give us a squint at that literature, grandfather, the ancient mariner
put in, manifesting some natural impatience.

--And welcome, answered the elderly party thus addressed.

The sailor lugged out from a case he had a pair of greenish goggles which
he very slowly hooked over his nose and both ears.

--Are you bad in the eyes? the sympathetic personage like the townclerk
queried.

--Why, answered the seafarer with the tartan beard, who seemingly was a
bit of a literary cove in his own small way, staring out of seagreen
portholes as you might well describe them as, I uses goggles reading.
Sand in the Red Sea done that. One time I could read a book in the dark,
manner of speaking. THE ARABIAN NIGHTS ENTERTAINMENT was my favourite and
RED AS A ROSE IS SHE.

Hereupon he pawed the journal open and pored upon Lord only knows what,
found drowned or the exploits of King Willow, Iremonger having made a
hundred and something second wicket not out for Notts, during which time
(completely regardless of Ire) the keeper was intensely occupied
loosening an apparently new or secondhand boot which manifestly pinched
him as he muttered against whoever it was sold it, all of them who were
sufficiently awake enough to be picked out by their facial expressions,
that is to say, either simply looking on glumly or passing a trivial
remark.

To cut a long story short Bloom, grasping the situation, was the first to
rise from his seat so as not to outstay their welcome having first and
foremost, being as good as his word that he would foot the bill for the
occasion, taken the wise precaution to unobtrusively motion to mine host
as a parting shot a scarcely perceptible sign when the others were not
looking to the effect that the amount due was forthcoming, making a grand
total of fourpence (the amount he deposited unobtrusively in four
coppers, literally the last of the Mohicans), he having previously
spotted on the printed pricelist for all who ran to read opposite him in
unmistakable figures, coffee 2d, confectionery do, and honestly well
worth twice the money once in a way, as Wetherup used to remark.

--Come, he counselled to close the SEANCE.

Seeing that the ruse worked and the coast was clear they left the shelter
or shanty together and the ELITE society of oilskin and company whom
nothing short of an earthquake would move out of their DOLCE FAR NIENTE.
Stephen, who confessed to still feeling poorly and fagged out, paused at
the, for a moment, the door.

--One thing I never understood, he said to be original on the spur of the
moment. Why they put tables upside down at night, I mean chairs upside
down, on the tables in cafes. To which impromptu the neverfailing Bloom
replied without a moment's hesitation, saying straight off:

--To sweep the floor in the morning.

So saying he skipped around, nimbly considering, frankly at the same time
apologetic to get on his companion's right, a habit of his, by the bye,
his right side being, in classical idiom, his tender Achilles. The night
air was certainly now a treat to breathe though Stephen was a bit weak on
his pins.

--It will (the air) do you good, Bloom said, meaning also the walk, in a
moment. The only thing is to walk then you'll feel a different man. Come.
It's not far. Lean on me.

Accordingly he passed his left arm in Stephen's right and led him on
accordingly.

--Yes, Stephen said uncertainly because he thought he felt a strange kind
of flesh of a different man approach him, sinewless and wobbly and all
that.

Anyhow they passed the sentrybox with stones, brazier etc. where the
municipal supernumerary, ex Gumley, was still to all intents and purposes
wrapped in the arms of Murphy, as the adage has it, dreaming of fresh
fields and pastures new. And APROPOS of coffin of stones the analogy was
not at all bad as it was in fact a stoning to death on the part of
seventytwo out of eighty odd constituencies that ratted at the time of
the split and chiefly the belauded peasant class, probably the selfsame
evicted tenants he had put in their holdings.

So they turned on to chatting about music, a form of art for which Bloom,
as a pure amateur, possessed the greatest love, as they made tracks arm
in arm across Beresford place. Wagnerian music, though confessedly grand
in its way, was a bit too heavy for Bloom and hard to follow at the first
go-off but the music of Mercadante's HUGUENOTS, Meyerbeer's SEVEN LAST
WORDS ON THE CROSS and Mozart's TWELFTH MASS he simply revelled in, the
GLORIA in that being, to his mind, the acme of first class music as such,
literally knocking everything else into a cocked hat. He infinitely
preferred the sacred music of the catholic church to anything the
opposite shop could offer in that line such as those Moody and Sankey
hymns or BID ME TO LIVE AND I WILL LIVE THY PROTESTANT TO BE. He also
yielded to none in his admiration of Rossini's STABAT MATER, a work
simply abounding in immortal numbers, in which his wife, Madam Marion
Tweedy, made a hit, a veritable sensation, he might safely say, greatly
adding to her other laureis and putting the others totally in the shade,
in the jesuit fathers' church in upper Gardiner street, the sacred
edifice being thronged to the doors to hear her with virtuosos, or
VIRTUOSI rather. There was the unanimous opinion that there was none to
come up to her and suffice it to say in a place of worship for music of a
sacred character there was a generally voiced desire for an encore. On
the whole though favouring preferably light opera of the DON GIOVANNI
description and MARTHA, a gem in its line, he had a PENCHANT, though with
only a surface knowledge, for the severe classical school such as
Mendelssohn. And talking of that, taking it for granted he knew all about
the old favourites, he mentioned PAR EXCELLENCE Lionel's air in MARTHA,
M'APPARI, which, curiously enough, he had heard or overheard, to be more
accurate, on yesterday, a privilege he keenly appreciated, from the lips
of Stephen's respected father, sung to perfection, a study of the number,
in fact, which made all the others take a back seat. Stephen, in reply to
a politely put query, said he didn't sing it but launched out into
praises of Shakespeare's songs, at least of in or about that period, the
lutenist Dowland who lived in Fetter lane near Gerard the herbalist, who
ANNO LUDENDO HAUSI, DOULANDUS, an instrument he was contemplating
purchasing from Mr Arnold Dolmetsch, whom B. did not quite recall though
the name certainly sounded familiar, for sixtyfive guineas and Farnaby
and son with their DUX and COMES conceits and Byrd (William) who played
the virginals, he said, in the Queen's chapel or anywhere else he found
them and one Tomkins who made toys or airs and John Bull.

On the roadway which they were approaching whilst still speaking beyond
the swingchains a horse, dragging a sweeper, paced on the paven ground,
brushing a long swathe of mire up so that with the noise Bloom was not
perfectly certain whether he had caught aright the allusion to sixtyfive
guineas and John Bull. He inquired if it was John Bull the political
celebrity of that ilk, as it struck him, the two identical names, as a
striking coincidence.

By the chains the horse slowly swerved to turn, which perceiving, Bloom,
who was keeping a sharp lookout as usual, plucked the other's sleeve
gently, jocosely remarking:

--Our lives are in peril tonight. Beware of the steamroller.

They thereupon stopped. Bloom looked at the head of a horse not worth
anything like sixtyfive guineas, suddenly in evidence in the dark quite
near so that it seemed new, a different grouping of bones and even flesh
because palpably it was a fourwalker, a hipshaker, a blackbuttocker, a
taildangler, a headhanger putting his hind foot foremost the while the
lord of his creation sat on the perch, busy with his thoughts. But such a
good poor brute he was sorry he hadn't a lump of sugar but, as he wisely
reflected, you could scarcely be prepared for every emergency that might
crop up. He was just a big nervous foolish noodly kind of a horse,
without a second care in the world. But even a dog, he reflected, take
that mongrel in Barney Kiernan's, of the same size, would be a holy
horror to face. But it was no animal's fault in particular if he was
built that way like the camel, ship of the desert, distilling grapes into
potheen in his hump. Nine tenths of them all could be caged or trained,
nothing beyond the art of man barring the bees. Whale with a harpoon
hairpin, alligator tickle the small of his back and he sees the joke,
chalk a circle for a rooster, tiger my eagle eye. These timely
reflections anent the brutes of the field occupied his mind somewhat
distracted from Stephen's words while the ship of the street was
manoeuvring and Stephen went on about the highly interesting old.

--What's this I was saying? Ah, yes! My wife, he intimated, plunging IN
MEDIAS RES, would have the greatest of pleasure in making your
acquaintance as she is passionately attached to music of any kind.

He looked sideways in a friendly fashion at the sideface of Stephen,
image of his mother, which was not quite the same as the usual handsome
blackguard type they unquestionably had an insatiable hankering after as
he was perhaps not that way built.

Still, supposing he had his father's gift as he more than suspected, it
opened up new vistas in his mind such as Lady Fingall's Irish industries,
concert on the preceding Monday, and aristocracy in general.

Exquisite variations he was now describing on an air YOUTH HERE HAS END
by Jans Pieter Sweelinck, a Dutchman of Amsterdam where the frows come
from. Even more he liked an old German song of JOHANNES JEEP about the
clear sea and the voices of sirens, sweet murderers of men, which boggled
Bloom a bit:


    VON DER SIRENEN LISTIGKEIT
    TUN DIE POETEN DICHTEN.


These opening bars he sang and translated EXTEMPORE. Bloom, nodding, said
he perfectly understood and begged him to go on by all means which he
did.

A phenomenally beautiful tenor voice like that, the rarest of boons,
which Bloom appreciated at the very first note he got out, could easily,
if properly handled by some recognised authority on voice production such
as Barraclough and being able to read music into the bargain, command its
own price where baritones were ten a penny and procure for its fortunate
possessor in the near future an ENTREE into fashionable houses in the
best residential quarters of financial magnates in a large way of
business and titled people where with his university degree of B. A. (a
huge ad in its way) and gentlemanly bearing to all the more influence the
good impression he would infallibly score a distinct success, being
blessed with brains which also could be utilised for the purpose and
other requisites, if his clothes were properly attended to so as to the
better worm his way into their good graces as he, a youthful tyro in--
society's sartorial niceties, hardly understood how a little thing like
that could militate against you. It was in fact only a matter of months
and he could easily foresee him participating in their musical and
artistic CONVERSAZIONES during the festivities of the Christmas season,
for choice, causing a slight flutter in the dovecotes of the fair sex and
being made a lot of by ladies out for sensation, cases of which, as he
happened to know, were on record--in fact, without giving the show away,
he himself once upon a time, if he cared to, could easily have. Added to
which of course would be the pecuniary emolument by no means to be
sneezed at, going hand in hand with his tuition fees. Not, he
parenthesised, that for the sake of filthy lucre he need necessarily
embrace the lyric platform as a walk in life for any lengthy space of
time. But a step in the required direction it was beyond yea or nay and
both monetarily and mentally it contained no reflection on his dignity in
the smallest and it often turned in uncommonly handy to be handed a
cheque at a muchneeded moment when every little helped. Besides, though
taste latterly had deteriorated to a degree, original music like that,
different from the conventional rut, would rapidly have a great vogue as
it would be a decided novelty for Dublin's musical world after the usual
hackneyed run of catchy tenor solos foisted on a confiding public by Ivan
St Austell and Hilton St Just and their GENUS OMNE. Yes, beyond a shadow
of a doubt he could with all the cards in his hand and he had a capital
opening to make a name for himself and win a high place in the city's
esteem where he could command a stiff figure and, booking ahead, give a
grand concert for the patrons of the King street house, given a backerup,
if one were forthcoming to kick him upstairs, so to speak, a big IF,
however, with some impetus of the goahead sort to obviate the inevitable
procrastination which often tripped -up a too much feted prince of good
fellows. And it need not detract from the other by one iota as, being his
own master, he would have heaps of time to practise literature in his
spare moments when desirous of so doing without its clashing with his
vocal career or containing anything derogatory whatsoever as it was a
matter for himself alone. In fact, he had the ball at his feet and that
was the very reason why the other, possessed of a remarkably sharp nose
for smelling a rat of any sort, hung on to him at all.

The horse was just then. And later on at a propitious opportunity he
purposed (Bloom did), without anyway prying into his private affairs on
the FOOLS STEP IN WHERE ANGELS principle, advising him to sever his
connection with a certain budding practitioner who, he noticed, was prone
to disparage and even to a slight extent with some hilarious pretext when
not present, deprecate him, or whatever you like to call it which in
Bloom's humble opinion threw a nasty sidelight on that side of a person's
character, no pun intended.

The horse having reached the end of his tether, so to speak, halted and,
rearing high a proud feathering tail, added his quota by letting fall on
the floor which the brush would soon brush up and polish, three smoking
globes of turds. Slowly three times, one after another, from a full
crupper he mired. And humanely his driver waited till he (or she) had
ended, patient in his scythed car.

Side by side Bloom, profiting by the CONTRETEMPS, with Stephen passed
through the gap of the chains, divided by the upright, and, stepping over
a strand of mire, went across towards Gardiner street lower, Stephen
singing more boldly, but not loudly, the end of the ballad.


    UND ALLE SCHIFFE BRUCKEN.


The driver never said a word, good, bad or indifferent, but merely
watched the two figures, as he sat on his lowbacked car, both black, one
full, one lean, walk towards the railway bridge, TO BE MARRIED BY FATHER
MAHER. As they walked they at times stopped and walked again continuing
their TETE-A-TETE (which, of course, he was utterly out of) about sirens
enemies of man's reason, mingled with a number of other topics of the
same category, usurpers, historical cases of the kind while the man in
the sweeper car or you might as well call it in the sleeper car who in
any case couldn't possibly hear because they were too far simply sat in
his seat near the end of lower Gardiner street AND LOOKED AFTER THEIR
LOWBACKED CAR.


    * * * * * * *


What parallel courses did Bloom and Stephen follow returning?

Starting united both at normal walking pace from Beresford place they
followed in the order named Lower and Middle Gardiner streets and
Mountjoy square, west: then, at reduced pace, each bearing left,
Gardiner's place by an inadvertence as far as the farther corner of
Temple street: then, at reduced pace with interruptions of halt, bearing
right, Temple street, north, as far as Hardwicke place. Approaching,
disparate, at relaxed walking pace they crossed both the circus before
George's church diametrically, the chord in any circle being less than
the arc which it subtends.

Of what did the duumvirate deliberate during their itinerary?

Music, literature, Ireland, Dublin, Paris, friendship, woman,
prostitution, diet, the influence of gaslight or the light of arc and
glowlamps on the growth of adjoining paraheliotropic trees, exposed
corporation emergency dustbuckets, the Roman catholic church,
ecclesiastical celibacy, the Irish nation, jesuit education, careers, the
study of medicine, the past day, the maleficent influence of the
presabbath, Stephen's collapse.

Did Bloom discover common factors of similarity between their respective
like and unlike reactions to experience?

Both were sensitive to artistic impressions, musical in preference to
plastic or pictorial. Both preferred a continental to an insular manner
of life, a cisatlantic to a transatlantic place of residence. Both
indurated by early domestic training and an inherited tenacity of
heterodox resistance professed their disbelief in many orthodox
religious, national, social and ethical doctrines. Both admitted the
alternately stimulating and obtunding influence of heterosexual
magnetism.

Were their views on some points divergent?

Stephen dissented openly from Bloom's views on the importance of dietary
and civic selfhelp while Bloom dissented tacitly from Stephen's views on
the eternal affirmation of the spirit of man in literature. Bloom
assented covertly to Stephen's rectification of the anachronism involved
in assigning the date of the conversion of the Irish nation to
christianity from druidism by Patrick son of Calpornus, son of Potitus,
son of Odyssus, sent by pope Celestine I in the year 432 in the reign of
Leary to the year 260 or thereabouts in the reign of Cormac MacArt (died
266 A.D.), suffocated by imperfect deglutition of aliment at Sletty and
interred at Rossnaree. The collapse which Bloom ascribed to gastric
inanition and certain chemical compounds of varying degrees of
adulteration and alcoholic strength, accelerated by mental exertion and
the velocity of rapid circular motion in a relaxing atmosphere, Stephen
attributed to the reapparition of a matutinal cloud (perceived by both
from two different points of observation Sandycove and Dublin) at first
no bigger than a woman's hand.

Was there one point on which their views were equal and negative?

The influence of gaslight or electric light on the growth of adjoining
paraheliotropic trees.

Had Bloom discussed similar subjects during nocturnal perambulations in
the past?

In 1884 with Owen Goldberg and Cecil Turnbull at night on public
thoroughfares between Longwood avenue and Leonard's corner and Leonard's
corner and Synge street and Synge street and Bloomfield avenue.

In 1885 with Percy Apjohn in the evenings, reclined against the wall
between Gibraltar villa and Bloomfield house in Crumlin, barony of
Uppercross. In 1886 occasionally with casual acquaintances and
prospective purchasers on doorsteps, in front parlours, in third class
railway carriages of suburban lines. In 1888 frequently with major Brian
Tweedy and his daughter Miss Marion Tweedy, together and separately on
the lounge in Matthew Dillon's house in Roundtown. Once in 1892 and once
in 1893 with Julius (Juda) Mastiansky, on both occasions in the parlour
of his (Bloom's) house in Lombard street, west.

What reflection concerning the irregular sequence of dates 1884, 1885,
1886, 1888, 1892, 1893, 1904 did Bloom make before their arrival at their
destination?

He reflected that the progressive extension of the field of individual
development and experience was regressively accompanied by a restriction
of the converse domain of interindividual relations.

As in what ways?

From inexistence to existence he came to many and was as one received:
existence with existence he was with any as any with any: from existence
to nonexistence gone he would be by all as none perceived.

What act did Bloom make on their arrival at their destination?

At the housesteps of the 4th Of the equidifferent uneven numbers, number
7 Eccles street, he inserted his hand mechanically into the back pocket
of his trousers to obtain his latchkey.

Was it there?

It was in the corresponding pocket of the trousers which he had worn on
the day but one preceding.

Why was he doubly irritated?

Because he had forgotten and because he remembered that he had reminded
himself twice not to forget.

What were then the alternatives before the, premeditatedly (respectively)
and inadvertently, keyless couple?

To enter or not to enter. To knock or not to knock.

Bloom's decision?

A stratagem. Resting his feet on the dwarf wall, he climbed over the area
railings, compressed his hat on his head, grasped two points at the lower
union of rails and stiles, lowered his body gradually by its length of
five feet nine inches and a half to within two feet ten inches of the
area pavement and allowed his body to move freely in space by separating
himself from the railings and crouching in preparation for the impact of
the fall.

Did he fall?

By his body's known weight of eleven stone and four pounds in avoirdupois
measure, as certified by the graduated machine for periodical
selfweighing in the premises of Francis Froedman, pharmaceutical chemist
of 19 Frederick street, north, on the last feast of the Ascension, to
wit, the twelfth day of May of the bissextile year one thousand nine
hundred and four of the christian era (jewish era five thousand six
hundred and sixtyfour, mohammadan era one thousand three hundred and
twentytwo), golden number 5, epact 13, solar cycle 9, dominical letters C
B, Roman indiction 2, Julian period 6617, MCMIV.

Did he rise uninjured by concussion?

Regaining new stable equilibrium he rose uninjured though concussed by
the impact, raised the latch of the area door by the exertion of force at
its freely moving flange and by leverage of the first kind applied at its
fulcrum, gained retarded access to the kitchen through the subadjacent
scullery, ignited a lucifer match by friction, set free inflammable coal
gas by turningon the ventcock, lit a high flame which, by regulating, he
reduced to quiescent candescence and lit finally a portable candle.

What discrete succession of images did Stephen meanwhile perceive?

Reclined against the area railings he perceived through the transparent
kitchen panes a man regulating a gasflame of 14 CP, a man lighting a
candle of 1 CP, a man removing in turn each of his two boots, a man
leaving the kitchen holding a candle.

Did the man reappear elsewhere?

After a lapse of four minutes the glimmer of his candle was discernible
through the semitransparent semicircular glass fanlight over the
halldoor. The halldoor turned gradually on its hinges. In the open space
of the doorway the man reappeared without his hat, with his candle.

Did Stephen obey his sign?

Yes, entering softly, he helped to close and chain the door and followed
softly along the hallway the man's back and listed feet and lighted
candle past a lighted crevice of doorway on the left and carefully down a
turning staircase of more than five steps into the kitchen of Bloom's
house.

What did Bloom do?

He extinguished the candle by a sharp expiration of breath upon its
flame, drew two spoonseat deal chairs to the hearthstone, one for Stephen
with its back to the area window, the other for himself when necessary,
knelt on one knee, composed in the grate a pyre of crosslaid resintipped
sticks and various coloured papers and irregular polygons of best Abram
coal at twentyone shillings a ton from the yard of Messrs Flower and
M'Donald of 14 D'Olier street, kindled it at three projecting points of
paper with one ignited lucifer match, thereby releasing the potential
energy contained in the fuel by allowing its carbon and hydrogen elements
to enter into free union with the oxygen of the air.

Of what similar apparitions did Stephen think?

Of others elsewhere in other times who, kneeling on one knee or on two,
had kindled fires for him, of Brother Michael in the infirmary of the
college of the Society of Jesus at Clongowes Wood, Sallins, in the county
of Kildare: of his father, Simon Dedalus, in an unfurnished room of his
first residence in Dublin, number thirteen Fitzgibbon street: of his
godmother Miss Kate Morkan in the house of her dying sister Miss Julia
Morkan at 15 Usher's Island: of his aunt Sara, wife of Richie (Richard)
Goulding, in the kitchen of their lodgings at 62 Clanbrassil street: of
his mother Mary, wife of Simon Dedalus, in the kitchen of number twelve
North Richmond street on the morning of the feast of Saint Francis Xavier
1898: of the dean of studies, Father Butt, in the physics' theatre of
university College, 16 Stephen's Green, north: of his sister Dilly
(Delia) in his father's house in Cabra.

What did Stephen see on raising his gaze to the height of a yard from the
fire towards the opposite wall?

Under a row of five coiled spring housebells a curvilinear rope,
stretched between two holdfasts athwart across the recess beside the
chimney pier, from which hung four smallsized square handkerchiefs folded
unattached consecutively in adjacent rectangles and one pair of ladies'
grey hose with Lisle suspender tops and feet in their habitual position
clamped by three erect wooden pegs two at their outer extremities and the
third at their point of junction.

What did Bloom see on the range?

On the right (smaller) hob a blue enamelled saucepan: on the left
(larger) hob a black iron kettle.

What did Bloom do at the range?

He removed the saucepan to the left hob, rose and carried the iron kettle
to the sink in order to tap the current by turning the faucet to let it
flow.

Did it flow?

Yes. From Roundwood reservoir in county Wicklow of a cubic capacity of
2400 million gallons, percolating through a subterranean aqueduct of
filter mains of single and double pipeage constructed at an initial plant
cost of 5 pounds per linear yard by way of the Dargle, Rathdown, Glen of
the Downs and Callowhill to the 26 acre reservoir at Stillorgan, a
distance of 22 statute miles, and thence, through a system of relieving
tanks, by a gradient of 250 feet to the city boundary at Eustace bridge,
upper Leeson street, though from prolonged summer drouth and daily supply
of 12 1/2 million gallons the water had fallen below the sill of the
overflow weir for which reason the borough surveyor and waterworks
engineer, Mr Spencer Harty, C. E., on the instructions of the waterworks
committee had prohibited the use of municipal water for purposes other
than those of consumption (envisaging the possibility of recourse being
had to the impotable water of the Grand and Royal canals as in 1893)
particularly as the South Dublin Guardians, notwithstanding their ration
of 15 gallons per day per pauper supplied through a 6 inch meter, had
been convicted of a wastage of 20,000 gallons per night by a reading of
their meter on the affirmation of the law agent of the corporation, Mr
Ignatius Rice, solicitor, thereby acting to the detriment of another
section of the public, selfsupporting taxpayers, solvent, sound.

What in water did Bloom, waterlover, drawer of water, watercarrier,
returning to the range, admire?

Its universality: its democratic equality and constancy to its nature in
seeking its own level: its vastness in the ocean of Mercator's
projection: its unplumbed profundity in the Sundam trench of the Pacific
exceeding 8000 fathoms: the restlessness of its waves and surface
particles visiting in turn all points of its seaboard: the independence
of its units: the variability of states of sea: its hydrostatic
quiescence in calm: its hydrokinetic turgidity in neap and spring tides:
its subsidence after devastation: its sterility in the circumpolar
icecaps, arctic and antarctic: its climatic and commercial significance:
its preponderance of 3 to 1 over the dry land of the globe: its
indisputable hegemony extending in square leagues over all the region
below the subequatorial tropic of Capricorn: the multisecular stability
of its primeval basin: its luteofulvous bed: its capacity to dissolve and
hold in solution all soluble substances including millions of tons of the
most precious metals: its slow erosions of peninsulas and islands, its
persistent formation of homothetic islands, peninsulas and
downwardtending promontories: its alluvial deposits: its weight and
volume and density: its imperturbability in lagoons and highland tarns:
its gradation of colours in the torrid and temperate and frigid zones:
its vehicular ramifications in continental lakecontained streams and
confluent oceanflowing rivers with their tributaries and transoceanic
currents, gulfstream, north and south equatorial courses: its violence in
seaquakes, waterspouts, Artesian wells, eruptions, torrents, eddies,
freshets, spates, groundswells, watersheds, waterpartings, geysers,
cataracts, whirlpools, maelstroms, inundations, deluges, cloudbursts: its
vast circumterrestrial ahorizontal curve: its secrecy in springs and
latent humidity, revealed by rhabdomantic or hygrometric instruments and
exemplified by the well by the hole in the wall at Ashtown gate,
saturation of air, distillation of dew: the simplicity of its
composition, two constituent parts of hydrogen with one constituent part
of oxygen: its healing virtues: its buoyancy in the waters of the Dead
Sea: its persevering penetrativeness in runnels, gullies, inadequate
dams, leaks on shipboard: its properties for cleansing, quenching thirst
and fire, nourishing vegetation: its infallibility as paradigm and
paragon: its metamorphoses as vapour, mist, cloud, rain, sleet, snow,
hail: its strength in rigid hydrants: its variety of forms in loughs and
bays and gulfs and bights and guts and lagoons and atolls and
archipelagos and sounds and fjords and minches and tidal estuaries and
arms of sea: its solidity in glaciers, icebergs, icefloes: its docility
in working hydraulic millwheels, turbines, dynamos, electric power
stations, bleachworks, tanneries, scutchmills: its utility in canals,
rivers, if navigable, floating and graving docks: its potentiality
derivable from harnessed tides or watercourses falling from level to
level: its submarine fauna and flora (anacoustic, photophobe),
numerically, if not literally, the inhabitants of the globe: its ubiquity
as constituting 90 percent of the human body: the noxiousness of its
effluvia in lacustrine marshes, pestilential fens, faded flowerwater,
stagnant pools in the waning moon.

Having set the halffilled kettle on the now burning coals, why did he
return to the stillflowing tap?

To wash his soiled hands with a partially consumed tablet of Barrington's
lemonflavoured soap, to which paper still adhered, (bought thirteen hours
previously for fourpence and still unpaid for), in fresh cold
neverchanging everchanging water and dry them, face and hands, in a long
redbordered holland cloth passed over a wooden revolving roller.

What reason did Stephen give for declining Bloom's offer?

That he was hydrophobe, hating partial contact by immersion or total by
submersion in cold water, (his last bath having taken place in the month
of October of the preceding year), disliking the aqueous substances of
glass and crystal, distrusting aquacities of thought and language.

What impeded Bloom from giving Stephen counsels of hygiene and
prophylactic to which should be added suggestions concerning a
preliminary wetting of the head and contraction of the muscles with rapid
splashing of the face and neck and thoracic and epigastric region in case
of sea or river bathing, the parts of the human anatomy most sensitive to
cold being the nape, stomach and thenar or sole of foot?

The incompatibility of aquacity with the erratic originality of genius.

What additional didactic counsels did he similarly repress?

Dietary: concerning the respective percentage of protein and caloric
energy in bacon, salt ling and butter, the absence of the former in the
lastnamed and the abundance of the latter in the firstnamed.

Which seemed to the host to be the predominant qualities of his guest?

Confidence in himself, an equal and opposite power of abandonment and
recuperation.

What concomitant phenomenon took place in the vessel of liquid by the
agency of fire?

The phenomenon of ebullition. Fanned by a constant updraught of
ventilation between the kitchen and the chimneyflue, ignition was
communicated from the faggots of precombustible fuel to polyhedral masses
of bituminous coal, containing in compressed mineral form the foliated
fossilised decidua of primeval forests which had in turn derived their
vegetative existence from the sun, primal source of heat (radiant),
transmitted through omnipresent luminiferous diathermanous ether. Heat
(convected), a mode of motion developed by such combustion, was
constantly and increasingly conveyed from the source of calorification to
the liquid contained in the vessel, being radiated through the uneven
unpolished dark surface of the metal iron, in part reflected, in part
absorbed, in part transmitted, gradually raising the temperature of the
water from normal to boiling point, a rise in temperature expressible as
the result of an expenditure of 72 thermal units needed to raise 1 pound
of water from 50 degrees to 212 degrees Fahrenheit.

What announced the accomplishment of this rise in temperature?

A double falciform ejection of water vapour from under the kettlelid at
both sides simultaneously.

For what personal purpose could Bloom have applied the water so boiled?

To shave himself.

What advantages attended shaving by night?

A softer beard: a softer brush if intentionally allowed to remain from
shave to shave in its agglutinated lather: a softer skin if unexpectedly
encountering female acquaintances in remote places at incustomary hours:
quiet reflections upon the course of the day: a cleaner sensation when
awaking after a fresher sleep since matutinal noises, premonitions and
perturbations, a clattered milkcan, a postman's double knock, a paper
read, reread while lathering, relathering the same spot, a shock, a
shoot, with thought of aught he sought though fraught with nought might
cause a faster rate of shaving and a nick on which incision plaster with
precision cut and humected and applied adhered: which was to be done.

Why did absence of light disturb him less than presence of noise?

Because of the surety of the sense of touch in his firm full masculine
feminine passive active hand.

What quality did it (his hand) possess but with what counteracting
influence?

The operative surgical quality but that he was reluctant to shed human
blood even when the end justified the means, preferring, in their natural
order, heliotherapy, psychophysicotherapeutics, osteopathic surgery.

What lay under exposure on the lower, middle and upper shelves of the
kitchen dresser, opened by Bloom?

On the lower shelf five vertical breakfast plates, six horizontal
breakfast saucers on which rested inverted breakfast cups, a
moustachecup, uninverted, and saucer of Crown Derby, four white
goldrimmed eggcups, an open shammy purse displaying coins, mostly copper,
and a phial of aromatic (violet) comfits. On the middle shelf a chipped
eggcup containing pepper, a drum of table salt, four conglomerated black
olives in oleaginous paper, an empty pot of Plumtree's potted meat, an
oval wicker basket bedded with fibre and containing one Jersey pear, a
halfempty bottle of William Gilbey and Co's white invalid port, half
disrobed of its swathe of coralpink tissue paper, a packet of Epps's
soluble cocoa, five ounces of Anne Lynch's choice tea at 2/- per lb in a
crinkled leadpaper bag, a cylindrical canister containing the best
crystallised lump sugar, two onions, one, the larger, Spanish, entire,
the other, smaller, Irish, bisected with augmented surface and more
redolent, a jar of Irish Model Dairy's cream, a jug of brown crockery
containing a naggin and a quarter of soured adulterated milk, converted
by heat into water, acidulous serum and semisolidified curds, which added
to the quantity subtracted for Mr Bloom's and Mrs Fleming's breakfasts,
made one imperial pint, the total quantity originally delivered, two
cloves, a halfpenny and a small dish containing a slice of fresh
ribsteak. On the upper shelf a battery of jamjars (empty) of various
sizes and proveniences.

What attracted his attention lying on the apron of the dresser?

Four polygonal fragments of two lacerated scarlet betting tickets,
numbered 8 87, 88 6.

What reminiscences temporarily corrugated his brow?

Reminiscences of coincidences, truth stranger than fiction, preindicative
of the result of the Gold Cup flat handicap, the official and definitive
result of which he had read in the EVENING TELEGRAPH, late pink edition,
in the cabman's shelter, at Butt bridge.

Where had previous intimations of the result, effected or projected, been
received by him?

In Bernard Kiernan's licensed premises 8, 9 and 10 little Britain street:
in David Byrne's licensed premises, 14 Duke street: in O'Connell street
lower, outside Graham Lemon's when a dark man had placed in his hand a
throwaway (subsequently thrown away), advertising Elijah, restorer of the
church in Zion: in Lincoln place outside the premises of F. W. Sweny and
Co (Limited), dispensing chemists, when, when Frederick M. (Bantam) Lyons
had rapidly and successively requested, perused and restituted the copy
of the current issue of the FREEMAN'S JOURNAL AND NATIONAL PRESS which he
had been about to throw away (subsequently thrown away), he had proceeded
towards the oriental edifice of the Turkish and Warm Baths, 11 Leinster
street, with the light of inspiration shining in his countenance and
bearing in his arms the secret of the race, graven in the language of
prediction.

What qualifying considerations allayed his perturbations?

The difficulties of interpretation since the significance of any event
followed its occurrence as variably as the acoustic report followed the
electrical discharge and of counterestimating against an actual loss by
failure to interpret the total sum of possible losses proceeding
originally from a successful interpretation.

His mood?

He had not risked, he did not expect, he had not been disappointed, he
was satisfied.

What satisfied him?

To have sustained no positive loss. To have brought a positive gain to
others. Light to the gentiles.

How did Bloom prepare a collation for a gentile?

He poured into two teacups two level spoonfuls, four in all, of Epps's
soluble cocoa and proceeded according to the directions for use printed
on the label, to each adding after sufficient time for infusion the
prescribed ingredients for diffusion in the manner and in the quantity
prescribed.

What supererogatory marks of special hospitality did the host show his
guest?

Relinquishing his symposiarchal right to the moustache cup of imitation
Crown Derby presented to him by his only daughter, Millicent (Milly), he
substituted a cup identical with that of his guest and served
extraordinarily to his guest and, in reduced measure, to himself the
viscous cream ordinarily reserved for the breakfast of his wife Marion
(Molly).

Was the guest conscious of and did he acknowledge these marks of
hospitality?

His attention was directed to them by his host jocosely, and he accepted
them seriously as they drank in jocoserious silence Epps's massproduct,
the creature cocoa.

Were there marks of hospitality which he contemplated but suppressed,
reserving them for another and for himself on future occasions to
complete the act begun?

The reparation of a fissure of the length of 1 1/2 inches in the right
side of his guest's jacket. A gift to his guest of one of the four lady's
handkerchiefs, if and when ascertained to be in a presentable condition.

Who drank more quickly?

Bloom, having the advantage of ten seconds at the initiation and taking,
from the concave surface of a spoon along the handle of which a steady
flow of heat was conducted, three sips to his opponent's one, six to two,
nine to three.

What cerebration accompanied his frequentative act?

Concluding by inspection but erroneously that his silent companion was
engaged in mental composition he reflected on the pleasures derived from
literature of instruction rather than of amusement as he himself had
applied to the works of William Shakespeare more than once for the
solution of difficult problems in imaginary or real life.

Had he found their solution?

In spite of careful and repeated reading of certain classical passages,
aided by a glossary, he had derived imperfect conviction from the text,
the answers not bearing in all points.

What lines concluded his first piece of original verse written by him,
potential poet, at the age of 11 in 1877 on the occasion of the offering
of three prizes of 10/-, 5/- and 2/6 respectively for competition by the
SHAMROCK, a weekly newspaper?


    AN AMBITION TO SQUINT
    AT MY VERSES IN PRINT
    MAKES ME HOPE THAT FOR THESE YOU'LL FIND ROOM.
    IF YOU SO CONDESCEND
    THEN PLEASE PLACE AT THE END
    THE NAME OF YOURS TRULY, L. BLOOM.


Did he find four separating forces between his temporary guest and him?

Name, age, race, creed.

What anagrams had he made on his name in youth?


    Leopold Bloom
    Ellpodbomool
    Molldopeloob
    Bollopedoom
    Old Ollebo, M. P.


What acrostic upon the abbreviation of his first name had he (kinetic
poet) sent to Miss Marion (Molly) Tweedy on the 14 February 1888?

    POETS OFT HAVE SUNG IN RHYME
    OF MUSIC SWEET THEIR PRAISE DIVINE.
    LET THEM HYMN IT NINE TIMES NINE.
    DEARER FAR THAN SONG OR WINE.
    YOU ARE MINE. THE WORLD IS MINE.


What had prevented him from completing a topical song (music by R. G.
Johnston) on the events of the past, or fixtures for the actual, years,
entitled IF BRIAN BORU COULD BUT COME BACK AND SEE OLD DUBLIN NOW,
commissioned by Michael Gunn, lessee of the Gaiety Theatre, 46, 47, 48,
49 South King street, and to be introduced into the sixth scene, the
valley of diamonds, of the second edition (30 January 1893) of the grand
annual Christmas pantomime SINBAD THE SAILOR (produced by R Shelton 26
December 1892, written by Greenleaf Whittier, scenery by George A.
Jackson and Cecil Hicks, costumes by Mrs and Miss Whelan under the
personal supervision of Mrs Michael Gunn, ballets by Jessie Noir,
harlequinade by Thomas Otto) and sung by Nelly Bouverist, principal girl?

Firstly, oscillation between events of imperial and of local interest,
the anticipated diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria (born 1820, acceded
1837) and the posticipated opening of the new municipal fish market:
secondly, apprehension of opposition from extreme circles on the
questions of the respective visits of Their Royal Highnesses the duke and
duchess of York (real) and of His Majesty King Brian Boru (imaginary):
thirdly, a conflict between professional etiquette and professional
emulation concerning the recent erections of the Grand Lyric Hall on
Burgh Quay and the Theatre Royal in Hawkins street: fourthly, distraction
resultant from compassion for Nelly Bouverist's non-intellectual, non-
political, non-topical expression of countenance and concupiscence caused
by Nelly Bouverist's revelations of white articles of non-intellectual,
non-political, non-topical underclothing while she (Nelly Bouverist) was
in the articles: fifthly, the difficulties of the selection of
appropriate music and humorous allusions from EVERYBODY'S BOOK OF JOKES
(1000 pages and a laugh in every one): sixthly, the rhymes, homophonous
and cacophonous, associated with the names of the new lord mayor, Daniel
Tallon, the new high sheriff, Thomas Pile and the new solicitorgeneral,
Dunbar Plunket Barton.

What relation existed between their ages?

16 years before in 1888 when Bloom was of Stephen's present age Stephen
was 6. 16 years after in 1920 when Stephen would be of Bloom's present
age Bloom would be 54. In 1936 when Bloom would be 70 and Stephen 54
their ages initially in the ratio of 16 to 0 would be as 17 1/2 to 13
1/2, the proportion increasing and the disparity diminishing according as
arbitrary future years were added, for if the proportion existing in 1883
had continued immutable, conceiving that to be possible, till then 1904
when Stephen was 22 Bloom would be 374 and in 1920 when Stephen would be
38, as Bloom then was, Bloom would be 646 while in 1952 when Stephen
would have attained the maximum postdiluvian age of 70 Bloom, being 1190
years alive having been born in the year 714, would have surpassed by 221
years the maximum antediluvian age, that of Methusalah, 969 years, while,
if Stephen would continue to live until he would attain that age in the
year 3072 A.D., Bloomwould have been obliged to have been alive 83,300
years, having been obliged to have been born in the year 81,396 B.C.

What events might nullify these calculations?

The cessation of existence of both or either, the inauguration of a new
era or calendar, the annihilation of the world and consequent
extermination of the human species, inevitable but impredictable.

How many previous encounters proved their preexisting acquaintance?

Two. The first in the lilacgarden of Matthew Dillon's house, Medina
Villa, Kimmage road, Roundtown, in 1887, in the company of Stephen's
mother, Stephen being then of the age of 5 and reluctant to give his hand
in salutation. The second in the coffeeroom of Breslin's hotel on a rainy
Sunday in the January of 1892, in the company of Stephen's father and
Stephen's granduncle, Stephen being then 5 years older.

Did Bloom accept the invitation to dinner given then by the son and
afterwards seconded by the father?

Very gratefully, with grateful appreciation, with sincere appreciative
gratitude, in appreciatively grateful sincerity of regret, he declined.

Did their conversation on the subject of these reminiscences reveal a
third connecting link between them?

Mrs Riordan (Dante), a widow of independent means, had resided in the
house of Stephen's parents from 1 September 1888 to 29 December 1891 and
had also resided during the years 1892, 1893 and 1894 in the City Arms
Hotel owned by Elizabeth O'Dowd of 54 Prussia street where, during parts
of the years 1893 and 1894, she had been a constant informant of Bloom
who resided also in the same hotel, being at that time a clerk in the
employment of Joseph Cuffe of 5 Smithfield for the superintendence of
sales in the adjacent Dublin Cattle market on the North Circular road.

Had he performed any special corporal work of mercy for her?

He had sometimes propelled her on warm summer evenings, an infirm widow
of independent, if limited, means, in her convalescent bathchair with
slow revolutions of its wheels as far as the corner of the North Circular
road opposite Mr Gavin Low's place of business where she had remained for
a certain time scanning through his onelensed binocular fieldglasses
unrecognisable citizens on tramcars, roadster bicycles equipped with
inflated pneumatic tyres, hackney carriages, tandems, private and hired
landaus, dogcarts, ponytraps and brakes passing from the city to the
Phoenix Park and vice versa.

Why could he then support that his vigil with the greater equanimity?

Because in middle youth he had often sat observing through a rondel of
bossed glass of a multicoloured pane the spectacle offered with continual
changes of the thoroughfare without, pedestrians, quadrupeds,
velocipedes, vehicles, passing slowly, quickly, evenly, round and round
and round the rim of a round and round precipitous globe.

What distinct different memories had each of her now eight years
deceased?

The older, her bezique cards and counters, her Skye terrier, her
suppositious wealth, her lapses of responsiveness and incipient catarrhal
deafness: the younger, her lamp of colza oil before the statue of the
Immaculate Conception, her green and maroon brushes for Charles Stewart
Parnell and for Michael Davitt, her tissue papers.

Were there no means still remaining to him to achieve the rejuvenation
which these reminiscences divulged to a younger companion rendered the
more desirable?

The indoor exercises, formerly intermittently practised, subsequently
abandoned, prescribed in Eugen Sandow's PHYSICAL STRENGTH AND HOW TO
OBTAIN IT which, designed particularly for commercial men engaged in
sedentary occupations, were to be made with mental concentration in front
of a mirror so as to bring into play the various families of muscles and
produce successively a pleasant rigidity, a more pleasant relaxation and
the most pleasant repristination of juvenile agility.

Had any special agility been his in earlier youth?

Though ringweight lifting had been beyond his strength and the full
circle gyration beyond his courage yet as a High school scholar he had
excelled in his stable and protracted execution of the half lever
movement on the parallel bars in consequence of his abnormally developed
abdominal muscles.

Did either openly allude to their racial difference?

Neither.

What, reduced to their simplest reciprocal form, were Bloom's thoughts
about Stephen's thoughts about Bloom and about Stephen's thoughts about
Bloom's thoughts about Stephen?

He thought that he thought that he was a jew whereas he knew that he knew
that he knew that he was not.

What, the enclosures of reticence removed, were their respective
parentages?

Bloom, only born male transubstantial heir of Rudolf Virag (subsequently
Rudolph Bloom) of Szombathely, Vienna, Budapest, Milan, London and Dublin
and of Ellen Higgins, second daughter of Julius Higgins (born Karoly) and
Fanny Higgins (born Hegarty). Stephen, eldest surviving male
consubstantial heir of Simon Dedalus of Cork and Dublin and of Mary,
daughter of Richard and Christina Goulding (born Grier).

Had Bloom and Stephen been baptised, and where and by whom, cleric or
layman?

Bloom (three times), by the reverend Mr Gilmer Johnston M. A., alone, in
the protestant church of Saint Nicholas Without, Coombe, by James
O'Connor, Philip Gilligan and James Fitzpatrick, together, under a pump
in the village of Swords, and by the reverend Charles Malone C. C., in
the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar. Stephen (once) by the reverend
Charles Malone C. C., alone, in the church of the Three Patrons, Rathgar.

Did they find their educational careers similar?

Substituting Stephen for Bloom Stoom would have passed successively
through a dame's school and the high school. Substituting Bloom for
Stephen Blephen would have passed successively through the preparatory,
junior, middle and senior grades of the intermediate and through the
matriculation, first arts, second arts and arts degree courses of the
royal university.

Why did Bloom refrain from stating that he had frequented the university
of life?

Because of his fluctuating incertitude as to whether this observation had
or had not been already made by him to Stephen or by Stephen to him.

What two temperaments did they individually represent?

The scientific. The artistic.

What proofs did Bloom adduce to prove that his tendency was towards
applied, rather than towards pure, science?

Certain possible inventions of which he had cogitated when reclining in a
state of supine repletion to aid digestion, stimulated by his
appreciation of the importance of inventions now common but once
revolutionary, for example, the aeronautic parachute, the reflecting
telescope, the spiral corkscrew, the safety pin, the mineral water
siphon, the canal lock with winch and sluice, the suction pump.

Were these inventions principally intended for an improved scheme of
kindergarten?

Yes, rendering obsolete popguns, elastic airbladders, games of hazard,
catapults. They comprised astronomical kaleidoscopes exhibiting the
twelve constellations of the zodiac from Aries to Pisces, miniature
mechanical orreries, arithmetical gelatine lozenges, geometrical to
correspond with zoological biscuits, globemap playing balls, historically
costumed dolls.

What also stimulated him in his cogitations?

The financial success achieved by Ephraim Marks and Charles A. James, the
former by his 1d bazaar at 42 George's street, south, the latter at his
6-1/2d shop and world's fancy fair and waxwork exhibition at 30 Henry
street, admission 2d, children 1d: and the infinite possibilities
hitherto unexploited of the modern art of advertisement if condensed in
triliteral monoideal symbols, vertically of maximum visibility (divined),
horizontally of maximum legibility (deciphered) and of magnetising
efficacy to arrest involuntary attention, to interest, to convince, to
decide.

Such as?

K. II. Kino's 11/- Trousers. House of Keys. Alexander J. Keyes.

Such as not?

Look at this long candle. Calculate when it burns out and you receive
gratis 1 pair of our special non-compo boots, guaranteed 1 candle power.
Address: Barclay and Cook, 18 Talbot street.

Bacilikil (Insect Powder). Veribest (Boot Blacking). Uwantit (Combined
pocket twoblade penknife with corkscrew, nailfile and pipecleaner).

Such as never?

What is home without Plumtree's Potted Meat?

Incomplete.

With it an abode of bliss.

Manufactured by George Plumtree, 23 Merchants' quay, Dublin, put up in 4
oz pots, and inserted by Councillor Joseph P. Nannetti, M. P., Rotunda
Ward, 19 Hardwicke street, under the obituary notices and anniversaries
of deceases. The name on the label is Plumtree. A plumtree in a meatpot,
registered trade mark. Beware of imitations. Peatmot. Trumplee. Moutpat.
Plamtroo.

Which example did he adduce to induce Stephen to deduce that originality,
though producing its own reward, does not invariably conduce to success?

His own ideated and rejected project of an illuminated showcart, drawn by
a beast of burden, in which two smartly dressed girls were to be seated
engaged in writing.

What suggested scene was then constructed by Stephen?

Solitary hotel in mountain pass. Autumn. Twilight. Fire lit. In dark
corner young man seated. Young woman enters. Restless. Solitary. She
sits. She goes to window. She stands. She sits. Twilight. She thinks. On
solitary hotel paper she writes. She thinks. She writes. She sighs.
Wheels and hoofs. She hurries out. He comes from his dark corner. He
seizes solitary paper. He holds it towards fire. Twilight. He reads.
Solitary.

What?

In sloping, upright and backhands: Queen's Hotel, Queen's Hotel, Queen's
Hotel. Queen's Ho...

What suggested scene was then reconstructed by Bloom?

The Queen's Hotel, Ennis, county Clare, where Rudolph Bloom (Rudolf
Virag) died on the evening of the 27 June 1886, at some hour unstated, in
consequence of an overdose of monkshood (aconite) selfadministered in the
form of a neuralgic liniment composed of 2 parts of aconite liniment to I
of chloroform liniment (purchased by him at 10.20 a.m. on the morning of
27 June 1886 at the medical hall of Francis Dennehy, 17 Church street,
Ennis) after having, though not in consequence of having, purchased at
3.15 p.m. on the afternoon of 27 June 1886 a new boater straw hat, extra
smart (after having, though not in consequence of having, purchased at
the hour and in the place aforesaid, the toxin aforesaid), at the general
drapery store of James Cullen, 4 Main street, Ennis.

Did he attribute this homonymity to information or coincidence or
intuition?

Coincidence.

Did he depict the scene verbally for his guest to see?

He preferred himself to see another's face and listen to another's words
by which potential narration was realised and kinetic temperament
relieved.

Did he see only a second coincidence in the second scene narrated to him,
described by the narrator as A PISGAH SIGHT OF PALESTINE OR THE PARABLE
OF THE PLUMS?

It, with the preceding scene and with others unnarrated but existent by
implication, to which add essays on various subjects or moral apothegms
(e.g. MY FAVOURITE HERO OR PROCRASTINATION IS THE THIEF OF TIME) composed
during schoolyears, seemed to him to contain in itself and in conjunction
with the personal equation certain possibilities of financial, social,
personal and sexual success, whether specially collected and selected as
model pedagogic themes (of cent per cent merit) for the use of
preparatory and junior grade students or contributed in printed form,
following the precedent of Philip Beaufoy or Doctor Dick or Heblon's
STUDIES IN BLUE, to a publication of certified circulation and solvency
or employed verbally as intellectual stimulation for sympathetic
auditors, tacitly appreciative of successful narrative and confidently
augurative of successful achievement, during the increasingly longer
nights gradually following the summer solstice on the day but three
following, videlicet, Tuesday, 21 June (S. Aloysius Gonzaga), sunrise
3.33 a.m., sunset 8.29 p.m.

Which domestic problem as much as, if not more than, any other frequently
engaged his mind?

What to do with our wives.

What had been his hypothetical singular solutions?

Parlour games (dominos, halma, tiddledywinks, spilikins, cup and ball,
nap, spoil five, bezique, twentyfive, beggar my neighbour, draughts,
chess or backgammon): embroidery, darning or knitting for the policeaided
clothing society: musical duets, mandoline and guitar, piano and flute,
guitar and piano: legal scrivenery or envelope addressing: biweekly
visits to variety entertainments: commercial activity as pleasantly
commanding and pleasingly obeyed mistress proprietress in a cool dairy
shop or warm cigar divan: the clandestine satisfaction of erotic
irritation in masculine brothels, state inspected and medically
controlled: social visits, at regular infrequent prevented intervals and
with regular frequent preventive superintendence, to and from female
acquaintances of recognised respectability in the vicinity: courses of
evening instruction specially designed to render liberal instruction
agreeable.

What instances of deficient mental development in his wife inclined him
in favour of the lastmentioned (ninth) solution?

In disoccupied moments she had more than once covered a sheet of paper
with signs and hieroglyphics which she stated were Greek and Irish and
Hebrew characters. She had interrogated constantly at varying intervals
as to the correct method of writing the capital initial of the name of a
city in Canada, Quebec. She understood little of political complications,
internal, or balance of power, external. In calculating the addenda of
bills she frequently had recourse to digital aid. After completion of
laconic epistolary compositions she abandoned the implement of
calligraphy in the encaustic pigment, exposed to the corrosive action of
copperas, green vitriol and nutgall. Unusual polysyllables of foreign
origin she interpreted phonetically or by false analogy or by both:
metempsychosis (met him pike hoses), ALIAS (a mendacious person mentioned
in sacred scripture).

What compensated in the false balance of her intelligence for these and
such deficiencies of judgment regarding persons, places and things?

The false apparent parallelism of all perpendicular arms of all balances,
proved true by construction. The counterbalance of her proficiency of
judgment regarding one person, proved true by experiment.

How had he attempted to remedy this state of comparative ignorance?

Variously. By leaving in a conspicuous place a certain book open at a
certain page: by assuming in her, when alluding explanatorily, latent
knowledge: by open ridicule in her presence of some absent other's
ignorant lapse.

With what success had he attempted direct instruction?

She followed not all, a part of the whole, gave attention with interest
comprehended with surprise, with care repeated, with greater difficulty
remembered, forgot with ease, with misgiving reremembered, rerepeated
with error.

What system had proved more effective?

Indirect suggestion implicating selfinterest.

Example?

She disliked umbrella with rain, he liked woman with umbrella, she
disliked new hat with rain, he liked woman with new hat, he bought new
hat with rain, she carried umbrella with new hat.

Accepting the analogy implied in his guest's parable which examples of
postexilic eminence did he adduce?

Three seekers of the pure truth, Moses of Egypt, Moses Maimonides, author
of MORE NEBUKIM (Guide of the Perplexed) and Moses Mendelssohn of such
eminence that from Moses (of Egypt) to Moses (Mendelssohn) there arose
none like Moses (Maimonides).

What statement was made, under correction, by Bloom concerning a fourth
seeker of pure truth, by name Aristotle, mentioned, with permission, by
Stephen?

That the seeker mentioned had been a pupil of a rabbinical philosopher,
name uncertain.

Were other anapocryphal illustrious sons of the law and children of a
selected or rejected race mentioned?

Felix Bartholdy Mendelssohn (composer), Baruch Spinoza (philosopher),
Mendoza (pugilist), Ferdinand Lassalle (reformer, duellist).

What fragments of verse from the ancient Hebrew and ancient Irish
languages were cited with modulations of voice and translation of texts
by guest to host and by host to guest?

By Stephen: SUIL, SUIL, SUIL ARUN, SUIL GO SIOCAIR AGUS SUIL GO CUIN
(walk, walk, walk your way, walk in safety, walk with care).

By Bloom: KIFELOCH, HARIMON RAKATEJCH M'BAAD L'ZAMATEJCH (thy temple amid
thy hair is as a slice of pomegranate).

How was a glyphic comparison of the phonic symbols of both languages made
in substantiation of the oral comparison?

By juxtaposition. On the penultimate blank page of a book of inferior
literary style, entituled SWEETS OF SIN (produced by Bloom and so
manipulated that its front cover carne in contact with the surface of the
table) with a pencil (supplied by Stephen) Stephen wrote the Irish
characters for gee, eh, dee, em, simple and modified, and Bloom in turn
wrote the Hebrew characters ghimel, aleph, daleth and (in the absence of
mem) a substituted qoph, explaining their arithmetical values as ordinal
and cardinal numbers, videlicet 3, 1, 4, and 100.

Was the knowledge possessed by both of each of these languages, the
extinct and the revived, theoretical or practical?

Theoretical, being confined to certain grammatical rules of accidence and
syntax and practically excluding vocabulary.

What points of contact existed between these languages and between the
peoples who spoke them?

The presence of guttural sounds, diacritic aspirations, epenthetic and
servile letters in both languages: their antiquity, both having been
taught on the plain of Shinar 242 years after the deluge in the seminary
instituted by Fenius Farsaigh, descendant of Noah, progenitor of Israel,
and ascendant of Heber and Heremon, progenitors of Ireland: their
archaeological, genealogical, hagiographical, exegetical, homiletic,
toponomastic, historical and religious literatures comprising the works
of rabbis and culdees, Torah, Talmud (Mischna and Ghemara), Massor,
Pentateuch, Book of the Dun Cow, Book of Ballymote, Garland of Howth,
Book of Kells: their dispersal, persecution, survival and revival: the
isolation of their synagogical and ecclesiastical rites in ghetto (S.
Mary's Abbey) and masshouse (Adam and Eve's tavern): the proscription of
their national costumes in penal laws and jewish dress acts: the
restoration in Chanah David of Zion and the possibility of Irish
political autonomy or devolution.

What anthem did Bloom chant partially in anticipation of that multiple,
ethnically irreducible consummation?


    KOLOD BALEJWAW PNIMAH
    NEFESCH, JEHUDI, HOMIJAH.


Why was the chant arrested at the conclusion of this first distich?

In consequence of defective mnemotechnic.


How did the chanter compensate for this deficiency?

By a periphrastic version of the general text.


In what common study did their mutual reflections merge?

The increasing simplification traceable from the Egyptian epigraphic
hieroglyphs to the Greek and Roman alphabets and the anticipation of
modern stenography and telegraphic code in the cuneiform inscriptions
(Semitic) and the virgular quinquecostate ogham writing (Celtic). Did the
guest comply with his host's request?

Doubly, by appending his signature in Irish and Roman characters.


What was Stephen's auditive sensation?

He heard in a profound ancient male unfamiliar melody the accumulation of
the past.


What was Bloom's visual sensation?

He saw in a quick young male familiar form the predestination of a future.


What were Stephen's and Bloom's quasisimultaneous volitional
quasisensations of concealed identities?

Visually, Stephen's: The traditional figure of hypostasis, depicted by
Johannes Damascenus, Lentulus Romanus and Epiphanius Monachus as
leucodermic, sesquipedalian with winedark hair. Auditively, Bloom's: The
traditional accent of the ecstasy of catastrophe.

What future careers had been possible for Bloom in the past and with what
exemplars?

In the church, Roman, Anglican or Nonconformist: exemplars, the very
reverend John Conmee S. J., the reverend T. Salmon, D. D., provost of
Trinity college, Dr Alexander J. Dowie. At the bar, English or Irish:
exemplars, Seymour Bushe, K. C., Rufus Isaacs, K. C. On the stage modern
or Shakespearean: exemplars, Charles Wyndham, high comedian Osmond Tearle
(died 1901), exponent of Shakespeare.

Did the host encourage his guest to chant in a modulated voice a strange
legend on an allied theme?

Reassuringly, their place, where none could hear them talk, being
secluded, reassured, the decocted beverages, allowing for subsolid
residual sediment of a mechanical mixture, water plus sugar plus cream
plus cocoa, having been consumed.

Recite the first (major) part of this chanted legend.


    LITTLE HARRY HUGHES AND HIS SCHOOLFELLOWS ALL
    WENT OUT FOR TO PLAY BALL.
    AND THE VERY FIRST BALL LITTLE HARRY HUGHES PLAYED
    HE DROVE IT O'ER THE JEW'S GARDEN WALL.
    AND THE VERY SECOND BALL LITTLE HARRY HUGHES PLAYED
    HE BROKE THE JEW'S WINDOWS ALL.


How did the son of Rudolph receive this first part?

With unmixed feeling. Smiling, a jew he heard with pleasure and saw the
unbroken kitchen window.

Recite the second part (minor) of the legend.


    THEN OUT THERE CAME THE JEW'S DAUGHTER
    AND SHE ALL DRESSED IN GREEN.
    "COME BACK, COME BACK, YOU PRETTY LITTLE BOY,
    AND PLAY YOUR BALL AGAIN."

    "I CAN'T COME BACK AND I WON'T COME BACK
    WITHOUT MY SCHOOLFELLOWS ALL.
    FOR IF MY MASTER HE DID HEAR
    HE'D MAKE IT A SORRY BALL."

    SHE TOOK HIM BY THE LILYWHITE HAND
    AND LED HIM ALONG THE HALL
    UNTIL SHE LED HIM TO A ROOM
    WHERE NONE COULD HEAR HIM CALL.

    SHE TOOK A PENKNIFE OUT OF HER POCKET
    AND CUT OFF  HIS LITTLE HEAD.
    AND NOW HE'LL PLAY HIS BALL NO MORE
    FOR HE LIES AMONG THE DEAD.


How did the father of Millicent receive this second part?

With mixed feelings. Unsmiling, he heard and saw with wonder a jew's
daughter, all dressed in green.

Condense Stephen's commentary.

One of all, the least of all, is the victim predestined. Once by
inadvertence twice by design he challenges his destiny. It comes when he
is abandoned and challenges him reluctant and, as an apparition of hope
and youth, holds him unresisting. It leads him to a strange habitation,
to a secret infidel apartment, and there, implacable, immolates him,
consenting.

Why was the host (victim predestined) sad?

He wished that a tale of a deed should be told of a deed not by him
should by him not be told.

Why was the host (reluctant, unresisting) still?

In accordance with the law of the conservation of energy.

Why was the host (secret infidel) silent?

He weighed the possible evidences for and against ritual murder: the
incitations of the hierarchy, the superstition of the populace, the
propagation of rumour in continued fraction of veridicity, the envy of
opulence, the influence of retaliation, the sporadic reappearance of
atavistic delinquency, the mitigating circumstances of fanaticism,
hypnotic suggestion and somnambulism.

From which (if any) of these mental or physical disorders was he not
totally immune?

From hypnotic suggestion: once, waking, he had not recognised his
sleeping apartment: more than once, waking, he had been for an indefinite
time incapable of moving or uttering sounds. From somnambulism: once,
sleeping, his body had risen, crouched and crawled in the direction of a
heatless fire and, having attained its destination, there, curled,
unheated, in night attire had lain, sleeping.

Had this latter or any cognate phenomenon declared itself in any member
of his family?

Twice, in Holles street and in Ontario terrace, his daughter Millicent
(Milly) at the ages of 6 and 8 years had uttered in sleep an exclamation
of terror and had replied to the interrogations of two figures in night
attire with a vacant mute expression.

What other infantile memories had he of her?

15 June 1889. A querulous newborn female infant crying to cause and
lessen congestion. A child renamed Padney Socks she shook with shocks her
moneybox: counted his three free moneypenny buttons, one, tloo, tlee: a
doll, a boy, a sailor she cast away: blond, born of two dark, she had
blond ancestry, remote, a violation, Herr Hauptmann Hainau, Austrian
army, proximate, a hallucination, lieutenant Mulvey, British navy.

What endemic characteristics were present?

Conversely the nasal and frontal formation was derived in a direct line
of lineage which, though interrupted, would continue at distant intervals
to more distant intervals to its most distant intervals.

What memories had he of her adolescence?

She relegated her hoop and skippingrope to a recess. On the duke's lawn,
entreated by an English visitor, she declined to permit him to make and
take away her photographic image (objection not stated). On the South
Circular road in the company of Elsa Potter, followed by an individual of
sinister aspect, she went half way down Stamer street and turned abruptly
back (reason of change not stated). On the vigil of the 15th anniversary
of her birth she wrote a letter from Mullingar, county Westmeath, making
a brief allusion to a local student (faculty and year not stated).

Did that first division, portending a second division, afflict him?

Less than he had imagined, more than he had hoped.

What second departure was contemporaneously perceived by him similarly,
if differently?

A temporary departure of his cat.

Why similarly, why differently?

Similarly, because actuated by a secret purpose the quest of a new male

(Mullingar student) or of a healing herb (valerian). Differently, because
of different possible returns to the inhabitants or to the habitation.

In other respects were their differences similar?

In passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in
unexpectedness.

As?

Inasmuch as leaning she sustained her blond hair for him to ribbon it for
her (cf neckarching cat). Moreover, on the free surface of the lake in
Stephen's green amid inverted reflections of trees her uncommented spit,
describing concentric circles of waterrings, indicated by the constancy
of its permanence the locus of a somnolent prostrate fish (cf
mousewatching cat).

Again, in order to remember the date, combatants, issue and consequences
of a famous military engagement she pulled a plait of her hair (cf
earwashing cat). Furthermore, silly Milly, she dreamed of having had an
unspoken unremembered conversation with a horse whose name had been
Joseph to whom (which) she had offered a tumblerful of lemonade which it
(he) had appeared to have accepted (cf hearthdreaming cat). Hence, in
passivity, in economy, in the instinct of tradition, in unexpectedness,
their differences were similar.

In what way had he utilised gifts 1) an owl, 2) a clock, given as
matrimonial auguries, to interest and to instruct her?

As object lessons to explain: 1) the nature and habits of oviparous
animals, the possibility of aerial flight, certain abnormalities of
vision, the secular process of imbalsamation: 2) the principle of the
pendulum, exemplified in bob, wheelgear and regulator, the translation in
terms of human or social regulation of the various positions of clockwise
moveable indicators on an unmoving dial, the exactitude of the recurrence
per hour of an instant in each hour when the longer and the shorter
indicator were at the same angle of inclination, VIDELICET, 5 5/11
minutes past each hour per hour in arithmetical progression.

In what manners did she reciprocate?

She remembered: on the 27th anniversary of his birth she presented to him
a breakfast moustachecup of imitation Crown Derby porcelain ware. She
provided: at quarter day or thereabouts if or when purchases had been
made by him not for her she showed herself attentive to his necessities,
anticipating his desires. She admired: a natural phenomenon having been
explained by him to her she expressed the immediate desire to possess
without gradual acquisition a fraction of his science, the moiety, the
quarter, a thousandth part.

What proposal did Bloom, diambulist, father of Milly, somnambulist, make
to Stephen, noctambulist?

To pass in repose the hours intervening between Thursday (proper) and
Friday (normal) on an extemporised cubicle in the apartment immediately
above the kitchen and immediately adjacent to the sleeping apartment of
his host and hostess.

What various advantages would or might have resulted from a prolongation
of such an extemporisation?

For the guest: security of domicile and seclusion of study. For the host:
rejuvenation of intelligence, vicarious satisfaction. For the hostess:
disintegration of obsession, acquisition of correct Italian
pronunciation.

Why might these several provisional contingencies between a guest and a
hostess not necessarily preclude or be precluded by a permanent
eventuality of reconciliatory union between a schoolfellow and a jew's
daughter?

Because the way to daughter led through mother, the way to mother through
daughter.

To what inconsequent polysyllabic question of his host did the guest
return a monosyllabic negative answer?

If he had known the late Mrs Emily Sinico, accidentally killed at Sydney
Parade railway station, 14 October 1903.

What inchoate corollary statement was consequently suppressed by the
host?

A statement explanatory of his absence on the occasion of the interment
of Mrs Mary Dedalus (born Goulding), 26 June 1903, vigil of the
anniversary of the decease of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag).

Was the proposal of asylum accepted?

Promptly, inexplicably, with amicability, gratefully it was declined.
What exchange of money took place between host and guest?

The former returned to the latter, without interest, a sum of money
(1-7-0), one pound seven shillings sterling, advanced by the latter to
the former.

What counterproposals were alternately advanced, accepted, modified,
declined, restated in other terms, reaccepted, ratified, reconfirmed?

To inaugurate a prearranged course of Italian instruction, place the
residence of the instructed. To inaugurate a course of vocal instruction,
place the residence of the instructress. To inaugurate a series of static
semistatic and peripatetic intellectual dialogues, places the residence
of both speakers (if both speakers were resident in the same place), the
Ship hotel and tavern, 6 Lower Abbey street (W. and E. Connery,
proprietors), the National Library of Ireland, 10 Kildare street, the
National Maternity Hospital, 29, 30 and 31 Holles street, a public
garden, the vicinity of a place of worship, a conjunction of two or more
public thoroughfares, the point of bisection of a right line drawn
between their residences (if both speakers were resident in different
places).

What rendered problematic for Bloom the realisation of these mutually
selfexcluding propositions?

The irreparability of the past: once at a performance of Albert Hengler's
circus in the Rotunda, Rutland square, Dublin, an intuitive particoloured
clown in quest of paternity had penetrated from the ring to a place in
the auditorium where Bloom, solitary, was seated and had publicly
declared to an exhilarated audience that he (Bloom) was his (the clown's)
papa. The imprevidibility of the future: once in the summer of 1898 he
(Bloom) had marked a florin (2/-) with three notches on the milled edge
and tendered it m payment of an account due to and received by J. and T.
Davy, family grocers, 1 Charlemont Mall, Grand Canal, for circulation on
the waters of civic finance, for possible, circuitous or direct, return.

Was the clown Bloom's son?

No.

Had Bloom's coin returned?

Never.

Why would a recurrent frustration the more depress him?

Because at the critical turningpoint of human existence he desired to
amend many social conditions, the product of inequality and avarice and
international animosity.

He believed then that human life was infinitely perfectible, eliminating
these conditions?

There remained the generic conditions imposed by natural, as distinct
from human law, as integral parts of the human whole: the necessity of
destruction to procure alimentary sustenance: the painful character of
the ultimate functions of separate existence, the agonies of birth and
death: the monotonous menstruation of simian and (particularly) human
females extending from the age of puberty to the menopause: inevitable
accidents at sea, in mines and factories: certain very painful maladies
and their resultant surgical operations, innate lunacy and congenital
criminality, decimating epidemics: catastrophic cataclysms which make
terror the basis of human mentality: seismic upheavals the epicentres of
which are located in densely populated regions: the fact of vital growth,
through convulsions of metamorphosis, from infancy through maturity to
decay.

Why did he desist from speculation?

Because it was a task for a superior intelligence to substitute other
more acceptable phenomena in the place of the less acceptable phenomena
to be removed.

Did Stephen participate in his dejection?

He affirmed his significance as a conscious rational animal proceeding
syllogistically from the known to the unknown and a conscious rational
reagent between a micro and a macrocosm ineluctably constructed upon the
incertitude of the void.

Was this affirmation apprehended by Bloom?

Not verbally. Substantially.

What comforted his misapprehension?

That as a competent keyless citizen he had proceeded energetically from
the unknown to the known through the incertitude of the void.

In what order of precedence, with what attendant ceremony was the exodus
from the house of bondage to the wilderness of inhabitation effected?


Lighted Candle in Stick borne by
BLOOM
Diaconal Hat on Ashplant borne by
STEPHEN:


With what intonation secreto of what commemorative psalm?

The 113th, MODUS PEREGRINUS: IN EXITU ISRAEL DE EGYPTO: DOMUS JACOB DE
POPULO BARBARO.


What did each do at the door of egress?

Bloom set the candlestick on the floor. Stephen put the hat on his head.


For what creature was the door of egress a door of ingress?

For a cat.


What spectacle confronted them when they, first the host, then the guest,
emerged silently, doubly dark, from obscurity by a passage from the rere
of the house into the penumbra of the garden?

The heaventree of stars hung with humid nightblue fruit.

With what meditations did Bloom accompany his demonstration to his
companion of various constellations?

Meditations of evolution increasingly vaster: of the moon invisible in
incipient lunation, approaching perigee: of the infinite lattiginous
scintillating uncondensed milky way, discernible by daylight by an
observer placed at the lower end of a cylindrical vertical shaft 5000 ft
deep sunk from the surface towards the centre of the earth: of Sirius
(alpha in Canis Maior) 10 lightyears (57,000,000,000,000 miles) distant
and in volume 900 times the dimension of our planet: of Arcturus: of the
precession of equinoxes: of Orion with belt and sextuple sun theta and
nebula in which 100 of our solar systems could be contained: of moribund
and of nascent new stars such as Nova in 1901: of our system plunging
towards the constellation of Hercules: of the parallax or parallactic
drift of socalled fixed stars, in reality evermoving wanderers from
immeasurably remote eons to infinitely remote futures in comparison with
which the years, threescore and ten, of allotted human life formed a
parenthesis of infinitesimal brevity.

Were there obverse meditations of involution increasingly less vast?

Of the eons of geological periods recorded in the stratifications of the
earth: of the myriad minute entomological organic existences concealed in
cavities of the earth, beneath removable stones, in hives and mounds, of
microbes, germs, bacteria, bacilli, spermatozoa: of the incalculable
trillions of billions of millions of imperceptible molecules contained by
cohesion of molecular affinity in a single pinhead: of the universe of
human serum constellated with red and white bodies, themselves universes
of void space constellated with other bodies, each, in continuity, its
universe of divisible component bodies of which each was again divisible
in divisions of redivisible component bodies, dividends and divisors ever
diminishing without actual division till, if the progress were carried
far enough, nought nowhere was never reached.

Why did he not elaborate these calculations to a more precise result?

Because some years previously in 1886 when occupied with the problem of
the quadrature of the circle he had learned of .the existence of a number
computed to a relative degree of accuracy to be of such magnitude and of
so many places, e.g., the 9th power of the 9th power of 9, that, the
result having been obtained, 33 closely printed volumes of 1000 pages
each of innumerable quires and reams of India paper would have to be
requisitioned in order to contain the complete tale of its printed
integers of units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands, millions, tens of millions, hundreds of millions, billions,
the nucleus of the nebula of every digit of every series containing
succinctly the potentiality of being raised to the utmost kinetic
elaboration of any power of any of its powers.

Did he find the problems of the inhabitability of the planets and their
satellites by a race, given in species, and of the possible social and
moral redemption of said race by a redeemer, easier of solution?

Of a different order of difficulty. Conscious that the human organism,
normally capable of sustaining an atmospheric pressure of 19 tons, when
elevated to a considerable altitude in the terrestrial atmosphere
suffered with arithmetical progression of intensity, according as the
line of demarcation between troposphere and stratosphere was approximated
from nasal hemorrhage, impeded respiration and vertigo, when proposing
this problem for solution, he had conjectured as a working hypothesis
which could not be proved impossible that a more adaptable and
differently anatomically constructed race of beings might subsist
otherwise under Martian, Mercurial, Veneral, Jovian, Saturnian, Neptunian
or Uranian sufficient and equivalent conditions, though an apogean
humanity of beings created in varying forms with finite differences
resulting similar to the whole and to one another would probably there as
here remain inalterably and inalienably attached to vanities, to vanities
of vanities and to all that is vanity.

And the problem of possible redemption?

The minor was proved by the major.

Which various features of the constellations were in turn considered?

The various colours significant of various degrees of vitality (white,
yellow, crimson, vermilion, cinnabar): their degrees of brilliancy: their
magnitudes revealed up to and including the 7th: their positions: the
waggoner's star: Walsingham way: the chariot of David: the annular
cinctures of Saturn: the condensation of spiral nebulae into suns: the
interdependent gyrations of double suns: the independent synchronous
discoveries of Galileo, Simon Marius, Piazzi, Le Verrier, Herschel,
Galle: the systematisations attempted by Bode and Kepler of cubes of
distances and squares of times of revolution: the almost infinite
compressibility of hirsute comets and their vast elliptical egressive and
reentrant orbits from perihelion to aphelion: the sidereal origin of
meteoric stones: the Libyan floods on Mars about the period of the birth
of the younger astroscopist: the annual recurrence of meteoric showers
about the period of the feast of S. Lawrence (martyr, lo August): the
monthly recurrence known as the new moon with the old moon in her arms:
the posited influence of celestial on human bodies: the appearance of a
star (1st magnitude) of exceeding brilliancy dominating by night and day
(a new luminous sun generated by the collision and amalgamation in
incandescence of two nonluminous exsuns) about the period of the birth of
William Shakespeare over delta in the recumbent neversetting
constellation of Cassiopeia and of a star (2nd magnitude) of similar
origin but of lesser brilliancy which had appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of the Corona Septentrionalis about the period of
the birth of Leopold Bloom and of other stars of (presumably) similar
origin which had (effectively or presumably) appeared in and disappeared
from the constellation of Andromeda about the period of the birth of
Stephen Dedalus, and in and from the constellation of Auriga some years
after the birth and death of Rudolph Bloom, junior, and in and from other
constellations some years before or after the birth or death of other
persons: the attendant phenomena of eclipses, solar and lunar, from
immersion to emersion, abatement of wind, transit of shadow, taciturnity
of winged creatures, emergence of nocturnal or crepuscular animals,
persistence of infernal light, obscurity of terrestrial waters, pallor of
human beings.

His (Bloom's) logical conclusion, having weighed the matter and allowing
for possible error?

That it was not a heaventree, not a heavengrot, not a heavenbeast, not a
heavenman. That it was a Utopia, there being no known method from the
known to the unknown: an infinity renderable equally finite by the
suppositious apposition of one or more bodies equally of the same and of
different magnitudes: a mobility of illusory forms immobilised in space,
remobilised in air: a past which possibly had ceased to exist as a
present before its probable spectators had entered actual present
existence.

Was he more convinced of the esthetic value of the spectacle?

Indubitably in consequence of the reiterated examples of poets in the
delirium of the frenzy of attachment or in the abasement of rejection
invoking ardent sympathetic constellations or the frigidity of the
satellite of their planet.

Did he then accept as an article of belief the theory of astrological
influences upon sublunary disasters?

It seemed to him as possible of proof as of confutation and the
nomenclature employed in its selenographical charts as attributable to
verifiable intuition as to fallacious analogy: the lake of dreams, the
sea of rains, the gulf of dews, the ocean of fecundity.

What special affinities appeared to him to exist between the moon and
woman?

Her antiquity in preceding and surviving successive tellurian
generations: her nocturnal predominance: her satellitic dependence: her
luminary reflection: her constancy under all her phases, rising and
setting by her appointed times, waxing and waning: the forced
invariability of her aspect: her indeterminate response to inaffirmative
interrogation: her potency over effluent and refluent waters: her power
to enamour, to mortify, to invest with beauty, to render insane, to
incite to and aid delinquency: the tranquil inscrutability of her visage:
the terribility of her isolated dominant implacable resplendent
propinquity: her omens of tempest and of calm: the stimulation of her
light, her motion and her presence: the admonition of her craters, her
arid seas, her silence: her splendour, when visible: her attraction, when
invisible.

What visible luminous sign attracted Bloom's, who attracted Stephen's,
gaze?

In the second storey (rere) of his (Bloom's) house the light of a
paraffin oil lamp with oblique shade projected on a screen of roller
blind supplied by Frank O'Hara, window blind, curtain pole and revolving
shutter manufacturer, 16 Aungier street.

How did he elucidate the mystery of an invisible attractive person, his
wife Marion (Molly) Bloom, denoted by a visible splendid sign, a lamp?

With indirect and direct verbal allusions or affirmations: with subdued
affection and admiration: with description: with impediment: with
suggestion.

Both then were silent?

Silent, each contemplating the other in both mirrors of the reciprocal
flesh of theirhisnothis fellowfaces.

Were they indefinitely inactive?

At Stephen's suggestion, at Bloom's instigation both, first Stephen, then
Bloom, in penumbra urinated, their sides contiguous, their organs of
micturition reciprocally rendered invisible by manual circumposition,
their gazes, first Bloom's, then Stephen's, elevated to the projected
luminous and semiluminous shadow.

Similarly?

The trajectories of their, first sequent, then simultaneous, urinations
were dissimilar: Bloom's longer, less irruent, in the incomplete form of
the bifurcated penultimate alphabetical letter, who in his ultimate year
at High School (1880) had been capable of attaining the point of greatest
altitude against the whole concurrent strength of the institution, 210
scholars: Stephen's higher, more sibilant, who in the ultimate hours of
the previous day had augmented by diuretic consumption an insistent
vesical pressure.

What different problems presented themselves to each concerning the
invisible audible collateral organ of the other?

To Bloom: the problems of irritability, tumescence, rigidity, reactivity,
dimension, sanitariness, pilosity.

To Stephen: the problem of the sacerdotal integrity of Jesus circumcised
(I January, holiday of obligation to hear mass and abstain from
unnecessary servile work) and the problem as to whether the divine
prepuce, the carnal bridal ring of the holy Roman catholic apostolic
church, conserved in Calcata, were deserving of simple hyperduly or of
the fourth degree of latria accorded to the abscission of such divine
excrescences as hair and toenails.

What celestial sign was by both simultaneously observed?

A star precipitated with great apparent velocity across the firmament
from Vega in the Lyre above the zenith beyond the stargroup of the Tress
of Berenice towards the zodiacal sign of Leo.

How did the centripetal remainer afford egress to the centrifugal
departer?

By inserting the barrel of an arruginated male key in the hole of an
unstable female lock, obtaining a purchase on the bow of the key and
turning its wards from right to left, withdrawing a bolt from its staple,
pulling inward spasmodically an obsolescent unhinged door and revealing
an aperture for free egress and free ingress.

How did they take leave, one of the other, in separation?

Standing perpendicular at the same door and on different sides of its
base, the lines of their valedictory arms, meeting at any point and
forming any angle less than the sum of two right angles.

What sound accompanied the union of their tangent, the disunion of their
(respectively) centrifugal and centripetal hands?

The sound of the peal of the hour of the night by the chime of the bells
in the church of Saint George.

What echoes of that sound were by both and each heard?

By Stephen:


    LILIATA RUTILANTIUM. TURMA CIRCUMDET.
    IUBILANTIUM TE VIRGINUM. CHORUS EXCIPIAT.


By Bloom:


    HEIGHO, HEIGHO,
    HEIGHO, HEIGHO.


Where were the several members of the company which with Bloom that day
at the bidding of that peal had travelled from Sandymount in the south to
Glasnevin in the north?

Martin Cunningham (in bed), Jack Power (in bed), Simon Dedalus (in bed),
Ned Lambert (in bed), Tom Kernan (in bed), Joe Hynes (in bed), John Henry
Menton (in bed), Bernard Corrigan (in bed), Patsy Dignam (in bed), Paddy
Dignam (in the grave).

Alone, what did Bloom hear?

The double reverberation of retreating feet on the heavenborn earth, the
double vibration of a jew's harp in the resonant lane.

Alone, what did Bloom feel?

The cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing point
or the absolute zero of Fahrenheit, Centigrade or Reaumur: the incipient
intimations of proximate dawn.

Of what did bellchime and handtouch and footstep and lonechill remind
him?

Of companions now in various manners in different places defunct: Percy
Apjohn (killed in action, Modder River), Philip Gilligan (phthisis,
Jervis Street hospital), Matthew F. Kane (accidental drowning, Dublin
Bay), Philip Moisel (pyemia, Heytesbury street), Michael Hart (phthisis,
Mater Misericordiae hospital), Patrick Dignam (apoplexy, Sandymount).

What prospect of what phenomena inclined him to remain?

The disparition of three final stars, the diffusion of daybreak, the
apparition of a new solar disk.

Had he ever been a spectator of those phenomena?

Once, in 1887, after a protracted performance of charades in the house of
Luke Doyle, Kimmage, he had awaited with patience the apparition of the
diurnal phenomenon, seated on a wall, his gaze turned in the direction of
Mizrach, the east.

He remembered the initial paraphenomena?

More active air, a matutinal distant cock, ecclesiastical clocks at
various points, avine music, the isolated tread of an early wayfarer, the
visible diffusion of the light of an invisible luminous body, the first
golden limb of the resurgent sun perceptible low on the horizon.

Did he remain?

With deep inspiration he returned, retraversing the garden, reentering
the passage, reclosing the door. With brief suspiration he reassumed the
candle, reascended the stairs, reapproached the door of the front room,
hallfloor, and reentered.

What suddenly arrested his ingress?

The right temporal lobe of the hollow sphere of his cranium came into
contact with a solid timber angle where, an infinitesimal but sensible
fraction of a second later, a painful sensation was located in
consequence of antecedent sensations transmitted and registered.

Describe the alterations effected in the disposition of the articles of
furniture.

A sofa upholstered in prune plush had been translocated from opposite the
door to the ingleside near the compactly furled Union Jack (an alteration
which he had frequently intended to execute): the blue and white checker
inlaid majolicatopped table had been placed opposite the door in the
place vacated by the prune plush sofa: the walnut sideboard (a projecting
angle of which had momentarily arrested his ingress) had been moved from
its position beside the door to a more advantageous but more perilous
position in front of the door: two chairs had been moved from right and
left of the ingleside to the position originally occupied by the blue and
white checker inlaid majolicatopped table.

Describe them.

One: a squat stuffed easychair, with stout arms extended and back slanted
to the rere, which, repelled in recoil, had then upturned an irregular
fringe of a rectangular rug and now displayed on its amply upholstered
seat a centralised diffusing and diminishing discolouration. The other: a
slender splayfoot chair of glossy cane curves, placed directly opposite
the former, its frame from top to seat and from seat to base being
varnished dark brown, its seat being a bright circle of white plaited
rush.

What significances attached to these two chairs?

Significances of similitude, of posture, of symbolism, of circumstantial
evidence, of testimonial supermanence.

What occupied the position originally occupied by the sideboard?

A vertical piano (Cadby) with exposed keyboard, its closed coffin
supporting a pair of long yellow ladies' gloves and an emerald ashtray
containing four consumed matches, a partly consumed cigarette and two
discoloured ends of cigarettes, its musicrest supporting the music in the
key of G natural for voice and piano of LOVE'S OLD SWEET SONG (words by
G. Clifton Bingham, composed by J. L. Molloy, sung by Madam Antoinette
Sterling) open at the last page with the final indications AD LIBITUM,
FORTE, pedal, ANIMATO, sustained pedal, RITIRANDO, close.

With what sensations did Bloom contemplate in rotation these objects?

With strain, elevating a candlestick: with pain, feeling on his right
temple a contused tumescence: with attention, focussing his gaze on a
large dull passive and a slender bright active: with solicitation,
bending and downturning the upturned rugfringe: with amusement,
remembering Dr Malachi Mulligan's scheme of colour containing the
gradation of green: with pleasure, repeating the words and antecedent act
and perceiving through various channels of internal sensibility the
consequent and concomitant tepid pleasant diffusion of gradual
discolouration.

His next proceeding?

From an open box on the majolicatopped table he extracted a black
diminutive cone, one inch in height, placed it on its circular base on a
small tin plate, placed his candlestick on the right corner of the
mantelpiece, produced from his waistcoat a folded page of prospectus
(illustrated) entitled Agendath Netaim, unfolded the same, examined it
superficially, rolled it into a thin cylinder, ignited it in the
candleflame, applied it when ignited to the apex of the cone till the
latter reached the stage of rutilance, placed the cylinder in the basin
of the candlestick disposing its unconsumed part in such a manner as to
facilitate total combustion.

What followed this operation?

The truncated conical crater summit of the diminutive volcano emitted a
vertical and serpentine fume redolent of aromatic oriental incense.

What homothetic objects, other than the candlestick, stood on the
mantelpiece?

A timepiece of striated Connemara marble, stopped at the hour of 4.46
a.m. on the 21 March 1896, matrimonial gift of Matthew Dillon: a dwarf
tree of glacial arborescence under a transparent bellshade, matrimonial
gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle: an embalmed owl, matrimonial gift of
Alderman John Hooper.

What interchanges of looks took place between these three objects and
Bloom?

In the mirror of the giltbordered pierglass the undecorated back of the
dwarf tree regarded the upright back of the embalmed owl. Before the
mirror the matrimonial gift of Alderman John Hooper with a clear
melancholy wise bright motionless compassionate gaze regarded Bloom while
Bloom with obscure tranquil profound motionless compassionated gaze
regarded the matrimonial gift of Luke and Caroline Doyle.

What composite asymmetrical image in the mirror then attracted his
attention?

The image of a solitary (ipsorelative) mutable (aliorelative) man.

Why solitary (ipsorelative)?


    BROTHERS AND SISTERS HAD HE NONE.
    YET THAT MAN'S FATHER WAS HIS GRANDFATHER'S SON.


Why mutable (aliorelative)?

From infancy to maturity he had resembled his maternal procreatrix. From
maturity to senility he would increasingly resemble his paternal
procreator.

What final visual impression was communicated to him by the mirror?

The optical reflection of several inverted volumes improperly arranged
and not in the order of their common letters with scintillating titles on
the two bookshelves opposite.


Catalogue these books.

THOM'S DUBLIN POST OFFICE DIRECTORY, 1886.
Denis Florence M'Carthy's POETICAL WORKS (copper beechleaf bookmark
  at p. 5).
Shakespeare's WORKS (dark crimson morocco, goldtooled).
THE USEFUL READY RECKONER (brown cloth).
THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE COURT OF CHARLES II (red cloth, tooled
  binding).
THE CHILD'S GUIDE (blue cloth).
The Beauties of Killarney (wrappers).
WHEN WE WERE BOYS by William O'Brien M. P. (green cloth, slightly faded,
  envelope bookmark at p. 217).
THOUGHTS FROM SPINOZA (maroon leather).
THE STORY OF THE HEAVENS by Sir Robert Ball (blue cloth).
Ellis's THREE TRIPS TO MADAGASCAR (brown cloth, title obliterated).
THE STARK-MUNRO LETTERS by A. Conan Doyle, property of the City of
  Dublin Public Library, 106 Capel street, lent 21 May (Whitsun Eve)
  1904, due 4 June 1904, 13 days overdue (black cloth binding, bearing
  white letternumber ticket).
VOYAGES IN CHINA by "Viator" (recovered with brown paper, red ink title).
PHILOSOPHY OF THE TALMUD (sewn pamphlet).
Lockhart's LIFE OF NAPOLEON (cover wanting, marginal annotations,
  minimising victories, aggrandising defeats of the protagonist).
SOLL UND HABEN by Gustav Freytag (black boards, Gothic characters,
  cigarette coupon bookmark at p. 24).
Hozier's HISTORY OF THE RUSSO-TURKISH WAR (brown cloth, a volumes, with
  gummed label, Garrison Library, Governor's Parade, Gibraltar, on verso
  of cover).
LAURENCE BLOOMFIELD IN IRELAND by William Allingham (second edition,
  green cloth, gilt trefoil design, previous owner's name on recto of
  flyleaf erased).
A HANDBOOK OF ASTRONOMY (cover, brown leather, detached, S plates,
  antique letterpress long primer, author's footnotes nonpareil, marginal
  clues brevier, captions small pica).
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF CHRIST (black boards).
IN THE TRACK OF THE SUN (yellow cloth, titlepage missing, recurrent title
  intestation).
PHYSICAL STRENGTH AND HOW TO OBTAIN IT by Eugen Sandow (red cloth).
SHORT BUT YET PLAIN ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY written in French by F. Ignat.
  Pardies and rendered into English by John Harris D. D. London,
  printed for R. Knaplock at the Bifhop's Head, MDCCXI, with dedicatory
  epiftle to his worthy friend Charles Cox, efquire, Member of
  Parliament for the burgh of Southwark and having ink calligraphed
  statement on the flyleaf certifying that the book was the property of
  Michael Gallagher, dated this 10th day of May 1822 and requefting the
  perfon who should find it, if the book should be loft or go aftray,
  to reftore it to Michael Gallagher, carpenter, Dufery Gate,
  Ennifcorthy, county Wicklow, the fineft place in the world.


What reflections occupied his mind during the process of reversion of the
inverted volumes?

The necessity of order, a place for everything and everything in its
place: the deficient appreciation of literature possessed by females: the
incongruity of an apple incuneated in a tumbler and of an umbrella
inclined in a closestool: the insecurity of hiding any secret document
behind, beneath or between the pages of a book.

Which volume was the largest in bulk?

Hozier's HISTORY OF THE RUSSO-TURKISH WAR.

What among other data did the second volume of the work in question
contain?

The name of a decisive battle (forgotten), frequently remembered by a
decisive officer, major Brian Cooper Tweedy (remembered).

Why, firstly and secondly, did he not consult the work in question?

Firstly, in order to exercise mnemotechnic: secondly, because after an
interval of amnesia, when, seated at the central table, about to consult
the work in question, he remembered by mnemotechnic the name of the
military engagement, Plevna.

What caused him consolation in his sitting posture?

The candour, nudity, pose, tranquility, youth, grace, sex, counsel of a
statue erect in the centre of the table, an image of Narcissus purchased
by auction from P. A. Wren, 9 Bachelor's Walk.

What caused him irritation in his sitting posture? Inhibitory pressure of
collar (size 17) and waistcoat (5 buttons), two articles of clothing
superfluous in the costume of mature males and inelastic to alterations
of mass by expansion.

How was the irritation allayed?

He removed his collar, with contained black necktie and collapsible stud,
from his neck to a position on the left of the table. He unbuttoned
successively in reversed direction waistcoat, trousers, shirt and vest
along the medial line of irregular incrispated black hairs extending in
triangular convergence from the pelvic basin over the circumference of
the abdomen and umbilicular fossicle along the medial line of nodes to
the intersection of the sixth pectoral vertebrae, thence produced both
ways at right angles and terminating in circles described about two
equidistant points, right and left, on the summits of the mammary
prominences. He unbraced successively each of six minus one braced
trouser buttons, arranged in pairs, of which one incomplete.

What involuntary actions followed?

He compressed between 2 fingers the flesh circumjacent to a cicatrice in
the left infracostal region below the diaphragm resulting from a sting
inflicted 2 weeks and 3 days previously (23 May 1904) by a bee. He
scratched imprecisely with his right hand, though insensible of
prurition, various points and surfaces of his partly exposed, wholly
abluted skin. He inserted his left hand into the left lower pocket of his
waistcoat and extracted and replaced a silver coin (I shilling), placed
there (presumably) on the occasion (17 October 1903) of the interment of
Mrs Emily Sinico, Sydney Parade.

Compile the budget for 16 June 1904.

DEBIT                                           CREDIT
                         L--s--d                                   L--s--d
1 Pork kidney            0--0--3 Cash in Hand                      0--4--9
1 Copy FREEMAN'S JOURNAL 0--0--1 Commission recd FREEMAN'S JOURNAL 1--7--6
1 Bath And Gratification 0--1--6 Loan (Stephen Dedalus)            1--7--0
Tramfare                 0--0--1
1 In Memoriam
Patrick Dignam           0--5--0
2 Banbury cakes          0--0--1
1 Lunch                  0--0--7
1 Renewal fee for book   0--1--0
1 Packet Notepaper
and Envelopes            0--0--2
1 Dinner
and Gratification        0--2--0
I Postal Order
and Stamp                0--2--8
Tramfare                 0--0--1
1 Pig's Foot             0--0--4
1 Sheep's Trotter        0--0--3
1 Cake Fry's
Plain Chocolate          0--0--1
1 Square Soda Bread      0--0--4
1 Coffee and Bun         0--0--4
Loan (Stephen Dedalus)
refunded                 1--7--0

BALANCE                 0--17--5
                        2--19--3                                  2--19--3


Did the process of divestiture continue?

Sensible of a benignant persistent ache in his footsoles he extended his
foot to one side and observed the creases, protuberances and salient
points caused by foot pressure in the course of walking repeatedly in
several different directions, then, inclined, he disnoded the laceknots,
unhooked and loosened the laces, took off each of his two boots for the
second time, detached the partially moistened right sock through the fore
part of which the nail of his great toe had again effracted, raised his
right foot and, having unhooked a purple elastic sock suspender, took off
his right sock, placed his unclothed right foot on the margin of the seat
of his chair, picked at and gently lacerated the protruding part of the
great toenail, raised the part lacerated to his nostrils and inhaled the
odour of the quick, then, with satisfaction, threw away the lacerated
ungual fragment.

Why with satisfaction?

Because the odour inhaled corresponded to other odours inhaled of other
ungual fragments, picked and lacerated by Master Bloom, pupil of Mrs
Ellis's juvenile school, patiently each night in the act of brief
genuflection and nocturnal prayer and ambitious meditation.

In what ultimate ambition had all concurrent and consecutive ambitions
now coalesced?

Not to inherit by right of primogeniture, gavelkind or borough English,
or possess in perpetuity an extensive demesne of a sufficient number of
acres, roods and perches, statute land measure (valuation 42 pounds), of
grazing turbary surrounding a baronial hall with gatelodge and carriage
drive nor, on the other hand, a terracehouse or semidetached villa,
described as RUS IN URBE or QUI SI SANA, but to purchase by private
treaty in fee simple a thatched bungalowshaped 2 storey dwellinghouse of
southerly aspect, surmounted by vane and lightning conductor, connected
with the earth, with porch covered by parasitic plants (ivy or Virginia
creeper), halldoor, olive green, with smart carriage finish and neat
doorbrasses, stucco front with gilt tracery at eaves and gable, rising,
if possible, upon a gentle eminence with agreeable prospect from balcony
with stone pillar parapet over unoccupied and unoccupyable interjacent
pastures and standing in 5 or 6 acres of its own ground, at such a
distance from the nearest public thoroughfare as to render its
houselights visible at night above and through a quickset hornbeam hedge
of topiary cutting, situate at a given point not less than 1 statute mile
from the periphery of the metropolis, within a time limit of not more
than 15 minutes from tram or train line (e.g., Dundrum, south, or Sutton,
north, both localities equally reported by trial to resemble the
terrestrial poles in being favourable climates for phthisical subjects),
the premises to be held under feefarm grant, lease 999 years, the
messuage to consist of 1 drawingroom with baywindow (2 lancets),
thermometer affixed, 1 sittingroom, 4 bedrooms, 2 servants' rooms, tiled
kitchen with close range and scullery, lounge hall fitted with linen
wallpresses, fumed oak sectional bookcase containing the Encyclopaedia
Britannica and New Century Dictionary, transverse obsolete medieval and
oriental weapons, dinner gong, alabaster lamp, bowl pendant, vulcanite
automatic telephone receiver with adjacent directory, handtufted
Axminster carpet with cream ground and trellis border, loo table with
pillar and claw legs, hearth with massive firebrasses and ormolu mantel
chronometer clock, guaranteed timekeeper with cathedral chime, barometer
with hygrographic chart, comfortable lounge settees and corner fitments,
upholstered in ruby plush with good springing and sunk centre, three
banner Japanese screen and cuspidors (club style, rich winecoloured
leather, gloss renewable with a minimum of labour by use of linseed oil
and vinegar) and pyramidically prismatic central chandelier lustre,
bentwood perch with fingertame parrot (expurgated language), embossed
mural paper at 10/- per dozen with transverse swags of carmine floral
design and top crown frieze, staircase, three continuous flights at
successive right angles, of varnished cleargrained oak, treads and
risers, newel, balusters and handrail, with steppedup panel dado, dressed
with camphorated wax: bathroom, hot and cold supply, reclining and
shower: water closet on mezzanine provided with opaque singlepane oblong
window, tipup seat, bracket lamp, brass tierod and brace, armrests,
footstool and artistic oleograph on inner face of door: ditto, plain:
servants' apartments with separate sanitary and hygienic necessaries for
cook, general and betweenmaid (salary, rising by biennial unearned
increments of 2 pounds, with comprehensive fidelity insurance, annual
bonus (1 pound) and retiring allowance (based on the 65 system) after 30
years' service), pantry, buttery, larder, refrigerator, outoffices, coal
and wood cellarage with winebin (still and sparkling vintages) for
distinguished guests, if entertained to dinner (evening dress), carbon
monoxide gas supply throughout.

What additional attractions might the grounds contain?

As addenda, a tennis and fives court, a shrubbery, a glass summerhouse
with tropical palms, equipped in the best botanical manner, a rockery
with waterspray, a beehive arranged on humane principles, oval flowerbeds
in rectangular grassplots set with eccentric ellipses of scarlet and
chrome tulips, blue scillas, crocuses, polyanthus, sweet William, sweet
pea, lily of the valley (bulbs obtainable from sir James W. Mackey
(Limited) wholesale and retail seed and bulb merchants and nurserymen,
agents for chemical manures, 23 Sackville street, upper), an orchard,
kitchen garden and vinery protected against illegal trespassers by
glasstopped mural enclosures, a lumbershed with padlock for various
inventoried implements.

As?

Eeltraps, lobsterpots, fishingrods, hatchet, steelyard, grindstone,
clodcrusher, swatheturner, carriagesack, telescope ladder, 10 tooth rake,
washing clogs, haytedder, tumbling rake, billhook, paintpot, brush, hoe
and so on.

What improvements might be subsequently introduced?

A rabbitry and fowlrun, a dovecote, a botanical conservatory, 2 hammocks
(lady's and gentleman's), a sundial shaded and sheltered by laburnum or
lilac trees, an exotically harmonically accorded Japanese tinkle gatebell
affixed to left lateral gatepost, a capacious waterbutt, a lawnmower with
side delivery and grassbox, a lawnsprinkler with hydraulic hose.

What facilities of transit were desirable?

When citybound frequent connection by train or tram from their respective
intermediate station or terminal. When countrybound velocipedes, a
chainless freewheel roadster cycle with side basketcar attached, or
draught conveyance, a donkey with wicker trap or smart phaeton with good
working solidungular cob (roan gelding, 14 h).

What might be the name of this erigible or erected residence?

Bloom Cottage. Saint Leopold's. Flowerville.

Could Bloom of 7 Eccles street foresee Bloom of Flowerville?

In loose allwool garments with Harris tweed cap, price 8/6, and useful
garden boots with elastic gussets and wateringcan, planting aligned young
firtrees, syringing, pruning, staking, sowing hayseed, trundling a
weedladen wheelbarrow without excessive fatigue at sunset amid the scent
of newmown hay, ameliorating the soil, multiplying wisdom, achieving
longevity.

What syllabus of intellectual pursuits was simultaneously possible?

Snapshot photography, comparative study of religions, folklore relative
to various amatory and superstitious practices, contemplation of the
celestial constellations.

What lighter recreations?

Outdoor: garden and fieldwork, cycling on level macadamised causeways
ascents of moderately high hills, natation in secluded fresh water and
unmolested river boating in secure wherry or light curricle with kedge
anchor on reaches free from weirs and rapids (period of estivation),
vespertinal perambulation or equestrian circumprocession with inspection
of sterile landscape and contrastingly agreeable cottagers' fires of
smoking peat turves (period of hibernation). Indoor: discussion in tepid
security of unsolved historical and criminal problems: lecture of
unexpurgated exotic erotic masterpieces: house carpentry with toolbox
containing hammer, awl nails, screws, tintacks, gimlet, tweezers,
bullnose plane and turnscrew. Might he become a gentleman farmer of field
produce and live stock?

Not impossibly, with 1 or 2 stripper cows, 1 pike of upland hay and
requisite farming implements, e.g., an end-to-end churn, a turnip pulper
etc.

What would be his civic functions and social status among the county
families and landed gentry?

Arranged successively in ascending powers of hierarchical order, that of
gardener, groundsman, cultivator, breeder, and at the zenith of his
career, resident magistrate or justice of the peace with a family crest
and coat of arms and appropriate classical motto (SEMPER PARATUS), duly
recorded in the court directory (Bloom, Leopold P., M. P., P. C., K. P.,
L. L. D. (HONORIS CAUSA), Bloomville, Dundrum) and mentioned in court and
fashionable intelligence (Mr and Mrs Leopold Bloom have left Kingstown
for England).

What course of action did he outline for himself in such capacity?

A course that lay between undue clemency and excessive rigour: the
dispensation in a heterogeneous society of arbitrary classes, incessantly
rearranged in terms of greater and lesser social inequality, of unbiassed
homogeneous indisputable justice, tempered with mitigants of the widest
possible latitude but exactable to the uttermost farthing with
confiscation of estate, real and personal, to the crown. Loyal to the
highest constituted power in the land, actuated by an innate love of
rectitude his aims would be the strict maintenance of public order, the
repression of many abuses though not of all simultaneously (every measure
of reform or retrenchment being a preliminary solution to be contained by
fluxion in the final solution), the upholding of the letter of the law
(common, statute and law merchant) against all traversers in covin and
trespassers acting in contravention of bylaws and regulations, all
resuscitators (by trespass and petty larceny of kindlings) of venville
rights, obsolete by desuetude, all orotund instigators of international
persecution, all perpetuators of international animosities, all menial
molestors of domestic conviviality, all recalcitrant violators of
domestic connubiality.

Prove that he had loved rectitude from his earliest youth.

To Master Percy Apjohn at High School in 1880 he had divulged his
disbelief in the tenets of the Irish (protestant) church (to which his
father Rudolf Virag (later Rudolph Bloom) had been converted from the
Israelitic faith and communion in 1865 by the Society for promoting
Christianity among the jews) subsequently abjured by him in favour of
Roman catholicism at the epoch of and with a view to his matrimony in
1888. To Daniel Magrane and Francis Wade in 1882 during a juvenile
friendship (terminated by the premature emigration of the former) he had
advocated during nocturnal perambulations the political theory of
colonial (e.g. Canadian) expansion and the evolutionary theories of
Charles Darwin, expounded in THE DESCENT OF MAN and THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES. In 1885 he had publicly expressed his adherence to the
collective and national economic programme advocated by James Fintan
Lalor, John Fisher Murray, John Mitchel, J. F. X. O'Brien and others, the
agrarian policy of Michael Davitt, the constitutional agitation of
Charles Stewart Parnell (M. P. for Cork City), the programme of peace,
retrenchment and reform of William Ewart Gladstone (M. P. for Midlothian,
N. B.) and, in support of his political convictions, had climbed up into
a secure position amid the ramifications of a tree on Northumberland road
to see the entrance (2 February 1888) into the capital of a demonstrative
torchlight procession of 20,000 torchbearers, divided into 120 trade
corporations, bearing 2000 torches in escort of the marquess of Ripon and
(honest) John Morley.

How much and how did he propose to pay for this country residence?

As per prospectus of the Industrious Foreign Acclimatised Nationalised
Friendly Stateaided Building Society (incorporated 1874), a maximum of 60
pounds per annum, being 1/6 of an assured income, derived from giltedged
securities, representing at 5 percent simple interest on capital of 1200
pounds (estimate of price at 20 years' purchase), of which   to be paid
on acquisition and the balance in the form of annual rent, viz. 800
pounds plus 2 1/2 percent interest on the same, repayable quarterly in
equal annual instalments until extinction by amortisation of loan
advanced for purchase within a period of 20 years, amounting to an annual
rental of 64 pounds, headrent included, the titledeeds to remain in
possession of the lender or lenders with a saving clause envisaging
forced sale, foreclosure and mutual compensation in the event of
protracted failure to pay the terms assigned, otherwise the messuage to
become the absolute property of the tenant occupier upon expiry of the
period of years stipulated.

What rapid but insecure means to opulence might facilitate immediate
purchase?

A private wireless telegraph which would transmit by dot and dash system
the result of a national equine handicap (flat or steeplechase) of I or
more miles and furlongs won by an outsider at odds of 50 to 1 at 3 hr 8 m
p.m. at Ascot (Greenwich time), the message being received and available
for betting purposes in Dublin at 2.59 p.m. (Dunsink time). The
unexpected discovery of an object of great monetary value (precious
stone, valuable adhesive or impressed postage stamps (7 schilling, mauve,
imperforate, Hamburg, 1866: 4 pence, rose, blue paper, perforate, Great
Britain, 1855: 1 franc, stone, official, rouletted, diagonal surcharge,
Luxemburg, 1878), antique dynastical ring, unique relic) in unusual
repositories or by unusual means: from the air (dropped by an eagle in
flight), by fire (amid the carbonised remains of an incendiated edifice),
in the sea (amid flotsam, jetsam, lagan and derelict), on earth (in the
gizzard of a comestible fowl). A Spanish prisoner's donation of a distant
treasure of valuables or specie or bullion lodged with a solvent banking
corporation loo years previously at 5 percent compound interest of the
collective worth of 5,000,000 pounds stg (five million pounds sterling).
A contract with an inconsiderate contractee for the delivery of 32
consignments of some given commodity in consideration of cash payment on
delivery per delivery at the initial rate of 1/4d to be increased
constantly in the geometrical progression of 2 (1/4d, 1/2d, 1d, 2d, 4d,
8d, 1s 4d, 2s 8d to 32 terms). A prepared scheme based on a study of the
laws of probability to break the bank at Monte Carlo. A solution of the
secular problem of the quadrature of the circle, government premium
1,000,000 pounds sterling.

Was vast wealth acquirable through industrial channels?

The reclamation of dunams of waste arenary soil, proposed in the
prospectus of Agendath Netaim, Bleibtreustrasse, Berlin, W. 15, by the
cultivation of orange plantations and melonfields and reafforestation.
The utilisation of waste paper, fells of sewer rodents, human excrement
possessing chemical properties, in view of the vast production of the
first, vast number of the second and immense quantity of the third, every
normal human being of average vitality and appetite producing annually,
cancelling byproducts of water, a sum total of 80 lbs. (mixed animal and
vegetable diet), to be multiplied by 4,386,035, the total population of
Ireland according to census returns of 1901.

Were there schemes of wider scope?

A scheme to be formulated and submitted for approval to the harbour
commissioners for the exploitation of white coal (hydraulic power),
obtained by hydroelectric plant at peak of tide at Dublin bar or at head
of water at Poulaphouca or Powerscourt or catchment basins of main
streams for the economic production of 500,000 W. H. P. of electricity. A
scheme to enclose the peninsular delta of the North Bull at Dollymount
and erect on the space of the foreland, used for golf links and rifle
ranges, an asphalted esplanade with casinos, booths, shooting galleries,
hotels, boardinghouses, readingrooms, establishments for mixed bathing. A
scheme for the use of dogvans and goatvans for the delivery of early
morning milk. A scheme for the development of Irish tourist traffic in
and around Dublin by means of petrolpropelled riverboats, plying in the
fluvial fairway between Island bridge and Ringsend, charabancs, narrow
gauge local railways, and pleasure steamers for coastwise navigation
(10/- per person per day, guide (trilingual) included). A scheme for the
repristination of passenger and goods traffics over Irish waterways, when
freed from weedbeds. A scheme to connect by tramline the Cattle Market
(North Circular road and Prussia street) with the quays (Sheriff street,
lower, and East Wall), parallel with the Link line railway laid (in
conjunction with the Great Southern and Western railway line) between the
cattle park, Liffey junction, and terminus of Midland Great Western
Railway 43 to 45 North Wall, in proximity to the terminal stations or
Dublin branches of Great Central Railway, Midland Railway of England,
City of Dublin Steam Packet Company, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway
Company, Dublin and Glasgow Steam Packet Company, Glasgow, Dublin and
Londonderry Steam Packet Company (Laird line), British and Irish Steam
Packet Company, Dublin and Morecambe Steamers, London and North Western
Railway Company, Dublin Port and Docks Board Landing Sheds and transit
sheds of Palgrave, Murphy and Company, steamship owners, agents for
steamers from Mediterranean, Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium and Holland
and for Liverpool Underwriters' Association, the cost of acquired rolling
stock for animal transport and of additional mileage operated by the
Dublin United Tramways Company, limited, to be covered by graziers' fees.

Positing what protasis would the contraction for such several schemes
become a natural and necessary apodosis?

Given a guarantee equal to the sum sought, the support, by deed of gift
and transfer vouchers during donor's lifetime or by bequest after donor's
painless extinction, of eminent financiers (Blum Pasha, Rothschild
Guggenheim, Hirsch, Montefiore, Morgan, Rockefeller) possessing fortunes
in 6 figures, amassed during a successful life, and joining capital with
opportunity the thing required was done.

What eventuality would render him independent of such wealth?

The independent discovery of a goldseam of inexhaustible ore.

For what reason did he meditate on schemes so difficult of realisation?

It was one of his axioms that similar meditations or the automatic
relation to himself of a narrative concerning himself or tranquil
recollection of the past when practised habitually before retiring for
the night alleviated fatigue and produced as a result sound repose and
renovated vitality.

His justifications?

As a physicist he had learned that of the 70 years of complete human life
at least 2/7, viz. 20 years are passed in sleep. As a philosopher he knew
that at the termination of any allotted life only an infinitesimal part
of any person's desires has been realised. As a physiologist he believed
in the artificial placation of malignant agencies chiefly operative
during somnolence.

What did he fear?

The committal of homicide or suicide during sleep by an aberration of the
light of reason, the incommensurable categorical intelligence situated in
the cerebral convolutions.

What were habitually his final meditations?

Of some one sole unique advertisement to cause passers to stop in wonder,
a poster novelty, with all extraneous accretions excluded, reduced to its
simplest and most efficient terms not exceeding the span of casual vision
and congruous with the velocity of modern life.

What did the first drawer unlocked contain?

A Vere Foster's handwriting copybook, property of Milly (Millicent)
Bloom, certain pages of which bore diagram drawings, marked PAPLI, which
showed a large globular head with 5 hairs erect, 2 eyes in profile, the
trunk full front with 3 large buttons, 1 triangular foot: 2 fading
photographs of queen Alexandra of England and of Maud Branscombe, actress
and professional beauty: a Yuletide card, bearing on it a pictorial
representation of a parasitic plant, the legend MIZPAH, the date Xmas
1892, the name of the senders: from Mr + Mrs M. Comerford, the versicle:
MAY THIS YULETIDE BRING TO THEE, JOY AND PEACE AND WELCOME GLEE: a butt
of red partly liquefied sealing wax, obtained from the stores department
of Messrs Hely's, Ltd., 89, 90, and 91 Dame street: a box containing the
remainder of a gross of gilt "J" pennibs, obtained from same department
of same firm: an old sandglass which rolled containing sand which rolled:
a sealed prophecy (never unsealed) written by Leopold Bloom in 1886
concerning the consequences of the passing into law of William Ewart
Gladstone's Home Rule bill of 1886 (never passed into law): a bazaar
ticket, no 2004, of S. Kevin's Charity Fair, price 6d, 100 prizes: an
infantile epistle, dated, small em monday, reading: capital pee Papli
comma capital aitch How are you note of interrogation capital eye I am
very well full stop new paragraph signature with flourishes capital em
Milly no stop: a cameo brooch, property of Ellen Bloom (born Higgins),
deceased: a cameo scarfpin, property of Rudolph Bloom (born Virag),
deceased: 3 typewritten letters, addressee, Henry Flower, c/o. P. O.
Westland Row, addresser, Martha Clifford, c/o. P. O. Dolphin's Barn: the
transliterated name and address of the addresser of the 3 letters in
reversed alphabetic boustrophedonic punctated quadrilinear cryptogram
(vowels suppressed) N. IGS./WI. UU. OX/W. OKS. MH/Y. IM: a press cutting
from an English weekly periodical MODERN SOCIETY, subject corporal
chastisement in girls' schools: a pink ribbon which had festooned an
Easter egg in the year 1899: two partly uncoiled rubber preservatives
with reserve pockets, purchased by post from Box 32, P. O., Charing
Cross, London, W. C.: 1 pack of 1 dozen creamlaid envelopes and
feintruled notepaper, watermarked, now reduced by 3: some assorted
Austrian-Hungarian coins: 2 coupons of the Royal and Privileged Hungarian
Lottery: a lowpower magnifying glass: 2 erotic photocards showing a)
buccal coition between nude senorita (rere presentation, superior
position) and nude torero (fore presentation, inferior position) b) anal
violation by male religious (fully clothed, eyes abject) of female
religious (partly clothed, eyes direct), purchased by post from Box 32,
P. O., Charing Cross, London, W. C.: a press cutting of recipe for
renovation of old tan boots: a Id adhesive stamp, lavender, of the reign
of Queen Victoria: a chart of the measurements of Leopold Bloom compiled
before, during and after 2 months' consecutive use of Sandow-Whiteley's
pulley exerciser (men's 15/-, athlete's 20/-) viz. chest 28 in and 29 1/2
in, biceps 9 in and 10 in, forearm 8 1/2 in and 9 in, thigh 10 in and 12
in, calf 11 in and 12 in: 1 prospectus of The Wonderworker, the world's
greatest remedy for rectal complaints, direct from Wonderworker, Coventry
House, South Place, London E C, addressed (erroneously) to Mrs L. Bloom
with brief accompanying note commencing (erroneously): Dear Madam.

Quote the textual terms in which the prospectus claimed advantages for
this thaumaturgic remedy.

It heals and soothes while you sleep, in case of trouble in breaking
wind, assists nature in the most formidable way, insuring instant relief
in discharge of gases, keeping parts clean and free natural action, an
initial outlay of 7/6 making a new man of you and life worth living.
Ladies find Wonderworker especially useful, a pleasant surprise when they
note delightful result like a cool drink of fresh spring water on a
sultry summer's day. Recommend it to your lady and gentlemen friends,
lasts a lifetime. Insert long round end. Wonderworker.

Were there testimonials?

Numerous. From clergyman, British naval officer, wellknown author, city
man, hospital nurse, lady, mother of five, absentminded beggar.

How did absentminded beggar's concluding testimonial conclude?

What a pity the government did not supply our men with wonderworkers
during the South African campaign! What a relief it would have been!

What object did Bloom add to this collection of objects?

A 4th typewritten letter received by Henry Flower (let H. F. be L. B.)
from Martha Clifford (find M. C.).

What pleasant reflection accompanied this action?

The reflection that, apart from the letter in question, his magnetic
face, form and address had been favourably received during the course of
the preceding day by a wife (Mrs Josephine Breen, born Josie Powell), a
nurse, Miss Callan (Christian name unknown), a maid, Gertrude (Gerty,
family name unknown).

What possibility suggested itself?

The possibility of exercising virile power of fascination in the not
immediate future after an expensive repast in a private apartment in the
company of an elegant courtesan, of corporal beauty, moderately
mercenary, variously instructed, a lady by origin.

What did the 2nd drawer contain?

Documents: the birth certificate of Leopold Paula Bloom: an endowment
assurance policy of 500 pounds in the Scottish Widows' Assurance Society,
intestated Millicent (Milly) Bloom, coming into force at 25 years as with
profit policy of 430 pounds, 462/10/0 and 500 pounds at 60 years or
death, 65 years or death and death, respectively, or with profit policy
(paidup) of 299/10/0 together with cash payment of 133/10/0, at option: a
bank passbook issued by the Ulster Bank, College Green branch showing
statement of a/c for halfyear ending 31 December 1903, balance in
depositor's favour: 18/14/6 (eighteen pounds, fourteen shillings and
sixpence, sterling), net personalty: certificate of possession of 900
pounds, Canadian 4 percent (inscribed) government stock (free of stamp
duty): dockets of the Catholic Cemeteries' (Glasnevin) Committee,
relative to a graveplot purchased: a local press cutting concerning
change of name by deedpoll.

Quote the textual terms of this notice.

I, Rudolph Virag, now resident at no 52 Clanbrassil street, Dublin,
formerly of Szombathely in the kingdom of Hungary, hereby give notice
that I have assumed and intend henceforth upon all occasions and at all
times to be known by the name of Rudolph Bloom.

What other objects relative to Rudolph Bloom (born Virag) were in the 2nd
drawer?

An indistinct daguerreotype of Rudolf Virag and his father Leopold Virag
executed in the year 1852 in the portrait atelier of their (respectively)
1st and 2nd cousin, Stefan Virag of Szesfehervar, Hungary. An ancient
haggadah book in which a pair of hornrimmed convex spectacles inserted
marked the passage of thanksgiving in the ritual prayers for Pessach
(Passover): a photocard of the Queen's Hotel, Ennis, proprietor, Rudolph
Bloom: an envelope addressed: TO MY DEAR SON LEOPOLD.

What fractions of phrases did the lecture of those five whole words
evoke?

Tomorrow will be a week that I received... it is no use Leopold to be ...
with your dear mother ... that is not more to stand ... to her ... all
for me is out ... be kind to Athos, Leopold ... my dear son ... always
... of me ... DAS HERZ ... GOTT ... DEIN ...

What reminiscences of a human subject suffering from progressive
melancholia did these objects evoke in Bloom?

An old man, widower, unkempt of hair, in bed, with head covered, sighing:
an infirm dog, Athos: aconite, resorted to by increasing doses of grains
and scruples as a palliative of recrudescent neuralgia: the face in death
of a septuagenarian, suicide by poison.

Why did Bloom experience a sentiment of remorse?

Because in immature impatience he had treated with disrespect certain
beliefs and practices.

As?

The prohibition of the use of fleshmeat and milk at one meal: the
hebdomadary symposium of incoordinately abstract, perfervidly concrete
mercantile coexreligionist excompatriots: the circumcision of male
infants: the supernatural character of Judaic scripture: the ineffability
of the tetragrammaton: the sanctity of the sabbath.

How did these beliefs and practices now appear to him?

Not more rational than they had then appeared, not less rational than
other beliefs and practices now appeared.

What first reminiscence had he of Rudolph Bloom (deceased)?

Rudolph Bloom (deceased) narrated to his son Leopold Bloom (aged 6) a
retrospective arrangement of migrations and settlements in and between
Dublin, London, Florence, Milan, Vienna, Budapest, Szombathely with
statements of satisfaction (his grandfather having seen Maria Theresia,
empress of Austria, queen of Hungary), with commercial advice (having
taken care of pence, the pounds having taken care of themselves). Leopold
Bloom (aged 6) had accompanied these narrations by constant consultation
of a geographical map of Europe (political) and by suggestions for the
establishment of affiliated business premises in the various centres
mentioned.

Had time equally but differently obliterated the memory of these
migrations in narrator and listener?

In narrator by the access of years and in consequence of the use of
narcotic toxin: in listener by the access of years and in consequence of
the action of distraction upon vicarious experiences.

What idiosyncracies of the narrator were concomitant products of amnesia?

Occasionally he ate without having previously removed his hat.
Occasionally he drank voraciously the juice of gooseberry fool from an
inclined plate. Occasionally he removed from his lips the traces of food
by means of a lacerated envelope or other accessible fragment of paper.

What two phenomena of senescence were more frequent?

The myopic digital calculation of coins, eructation consequent upon
repletion.

What object offered partial consolation for these reminiscences?

The endowment policy, the bank passbook, the certificate of the
possession of scrip.

Reduce Bloom by cross multiplication of reverses of fortune, from which
these supports protected him, and by elimination of all positive values
to a negligible negative irrational unreal quantity.

Successively, in descending helotic order: Poverty: that of the outdoor
hawker of imitation jewellery, the dun for the recovery of bad and
doubtful debts, the poor rate and deputy cess collector. Mendicancy: that
of the fraudulent bankrupt with negligible assets paying 1s. 4d. in the
pound, sandwichman, distributor of throwaways, nocturnal vagrant,
insinuating sycophant, maimed sailor, blind stripling, superannuated
bailiffs man, marfeast, lickplate, spoilsport, pickthank, eccentric
public laughingstock seated on bench of public park under discarded
perforated umbrella. Destitution: the inmate of Old Man's House (Royal
Hospital) Kilmainham, the inmate of Simpson's Hospital for reduced but
respectable men permanently disabled by gout or want of sight. Nadir of
misery: the aged impotent disfranchised ratesupported moribund lunatic
pauper.

With which attendant indignities?

The unsympathetic indifference of previously amiable females, the
contempt of muscular males, the acceptance of fragments of bread, the
simulated ignorance of casual acquaintances, the latration of
illegitimate unlicensed vagabond dogs, the infantile discharge of
decomposed vegetable missiles, worth little or nothing, nothing or less
than nothing.

By what could such a situation be precluded?

By decease (change of state): by departure (change of place).

Which preferably?

The latter, by the line of least resistance.

What considerations rendered departure not entirely undesirable?

Constant cohabitation impeding mutual toleration of personal defects. The
habit of independent purchase increasingly cultivated. The necessity to
counteract by impermanent sojourn the permanence of arrest.

What considerations rendered departure not irrational?

The parties concerned, uniting, had increased and multiplied, which being
done, offspring produced and educed to maturity, the parties, if not
disunited were obliged to reunite for increase and multiplication, which
was absurd, to form by reunion the original couple of uniting parties,
which was impossible.

What considerations rendered departure desirable?

The attractive character of certain localities in Ireland and abroad, as
represented in general geographical maps of polychrome design or in
special ordnance survey charts by employment of scale numerals and
hachures.

In Ireland?

The cliffs of Moher, the windy wilds of Connemara, lough Neagh with
submerged petrified city, the Giant's Causeway, Fort Camden and Fort
Carlisle, the Golden Vale of Tipperary, the islands of Aran, the pastures
of royal Meath, Brigid's elm in Kildare, the Queen's Island shipyard in
Belfast, the Salmon Leap, the lakes of Killarney.

Abroad?

Ceylon (with spicegardens supplying tea to Thomas Kernan, agent for
Pulbrook, Robertson and Co, 2 Mincing Lane, London, E. C., 5 Dame street,
Dublin), Jerusalem, the holy city (with mosque of Omar and gate of
Damascus, goal of aspiration), the straits of Gibraltar (the unique
birthplace of Marion Tweedy), the Parthenon (containing statues of nude
Grecian divinities), the Wall street money market (which controlled
international finance), the Plaza de Toros at La Linea, Spain (where
O'Hara of the Camerons had slain the bull), Niagara (over which no human
being had passed with impunity), the land of the Eskimos (eaters of
soap), the forbidden country of Thibet (from which no traveller returns),
the bay of Naples (to see which was to die), the Dead Sea.

Under what guidance, following what signs?

At sea, septentrional, by night the polestar, located at the point of
intersection of the right line from beta to alpha in Ursa Maior produced
and divided externally at omega and the hypotenuse of the rightangled
triangle formed by the line alpha omega so produced and the line alpha
delta of Ursa Maior. On land, meridional, a bispherical moon, revealed in
imperfect varying phases of lunation through the posterior interstice of
the imperfectly occluded skirt of a carnose negligent perambulating
female, a pillar of the cloud by day.

What public advertisement would divulge the occultation of the departed?

5 pounds reward, lost, stolen or strayed from his residence 7 Eccles
street, missing gent about 40, answering to the name of Bloom, Leopold
(Poldy), height 5 ft 9 1/2 inches, full build, olive complexion, may have
since grown a beard, when last seen was wearing a black suit. Above sum
will be paid for information leading to his discovery.

What universal binomial denominations would be his as entity and
nonentity?

Assumed by any or known to none. Everyman or Noman.

What tributes his?

Honour and gifts of strangers, the friends of Everyman. A nymph immortal,
beauty, the bride of Noman.

Would the departed never nowhere nohow reappear?

Ever he would wander, selfcompelled, to the extreme limit of his cometary
orbit, beyond the fixed stars and variable suns and telescopic planets,
astronomical waifs and strays, to the extreme boundary of space, passing
from land to land, among peoples, amid events. Somewhere imperceptibly he
would hear and somehow reluctantly, suncompelled, obey the summons of
recall. Whence, disappearing from the constellation of the Northern Crown
he would somehow reappear reborn above delta in the constellation of
Cassiopeia and after incalculable eons of peregrination return an
estranged avenger, a wreaker of justice on malefactors, a dark crusader,
a sleeper awakened, with financial resources (by supposition) surpassing
those of Rothschild or the silver king.

What would render such return irrational?

An unsatisfactory equation between an exodus and return in time through
reversible space and an exodus and return in space through irreversible
time.

What play of forces, inducing inertia, rendered departure undesirable?

The lateness of the hour, rendering procrastinatory: the obscurity of the
night, rendering invisible: the uncertainty of thoroughfares, rendering
perilous: the necessity for repose, obviating movement: the proximity of
an occupied bed, obviating research: the anticipation of warmth (human)
tempered with coolness (linen), obviating desire and rendering desirable:
the statue of Narcissus, sound without echo, desired desire.

What advantages were possessed by an occupied, as distinct from an
unoccupied bed?

The removal of nocturnal solitude, the superior quality of human (mature
female) to inhuman (hotwaterjar) calefaction, the stimulation of
matutinal contact, the economy of mangling done on the premises in the
case of trousers accurately folded and placed lengthwise between the
spring mattress (striped) and the woollen mattress (biscuit section).

What past consecutive causes, before rising preapprehended, of
accumulated fatigue did Bloom, before rising, silently recapitulate?

The preparation of breakfast (burnt offering): intestinal congestion and
premeditative defecation (holy of holies): the bath (rite of John): the
funeral (rite of Samuel): the advertisement of Alexander Keyes (Urim and
Thummim): the unsubstantial lunch (rite of Melchisedek): the visit to
museum and national library (holy place): the bookhunt along Bedford row,
Merchants' Arch, Wellington Quay (Simchath Torah): the music in the
Ormond Hotel (Shira Shirim): the altercation with a truculent troglodyte
in Bernard Kiernan's premises (holocaust): a blank period of time
including a cardrive, a visit to a house of mourning, a leavetaking
(wilderness): the eroticism produced by feminine exhibitionism (rite of
Onan): the prolonged delivery of Mrs Mina Purefoy (heave offering): the
visit to the disorderly house of Mrs Bella Cohen, 82 Tyrone street, lower
and subsequent brawl and chance medley in Beaver street (Armageddon)-
nocturnal perambulation to and from the cabman's shelter, Butt Bridge
(atonement).

What selfimposed enigma did Bloom about to rise in order to go so as to
conclude lest he should not conclude involuntarily apprehend?

The cause of a brief sharp unforeseen heard loud lone crack emitted by
the insentient material of a strainveined timber table.

What selfinvolved enigma did Bloom risen, going, gathering multicoloured
multiform multitudinous garments, voluntarily apprehending, not
comprehend?

Who was M'Intosh?

What selfevident enigma pondered with desultory constancy during 30 years
did Bloom now, having effected natural obscurity by the extinction of
artificial light, silently suddenly comprehend?

Where was Moses when the candle went out?

What imperfections in a perfect day did Bloom, walking, charged with
collected articles of recently disvested male wearing apparel, silently,
successively, enumerate?

A provisional failure to obtain renewal of an advertisement: to obtain a
certain quantity of tea from Thomas Kernan (agent for Pulbrook, Robertson
and Co, 5 Dame Street, Dublin, and 2 Mincing Lane, London E. C.): to
certify the presence or absence of posterior rectal orifice in the case
of Hellenic female divinities: to obtain admission (gratuitous or paid)
to the performance of Leah by Mrs Bandmann Palmer at the Gaiety Theatre,
46, 47, 48, 49 South King street.

What impression of an absent face did Bloom, arrested, silently recall?

The face of her father, the late Major Brian Cooper Tweedy, Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, of Gibraltar and Rehoboth, Dolphin's Barn.

What recurrent impressions of the same were possible by hypothesis?

Retreating, at the terminus of the Great Northern Railway, Amiens street,
with constant uniform acceleration, along parallel lines meeting at
infinity, if produced: along parallel lines, reproduced from infinity,
with constant uniform retardation, at the terminus of the Great Northern
Railway, Amiens street, returning.

What miscellaneous effects of female personal wearing apparel were
perceived by him?

A pair of new inodorous halfsilk black ladies' hose, a pair of new violet
garters, a pair of outsize ladies' drawers of India mull, cut on generous
lines, redolent of opoponax, jessamine and Muratti's Turkish cigarettes
and containing a long bright steel safety pin, folded curvilinear, a
camisole of batiste with thin lace border, an accordion underskirt of
blue silk moirette, all these objects being disposed irregularly on the
top of a rectangular trunk, quadruple battened, having capped corners,
with multicoloured labels, initialled on its fore side in white lettering
B. C. T. (Brian Cooper Tweedy).

What impersonal objects were perceived?

A commode, one leg fractured, totally covered by square cretonne cutting,
apple design, on which rested a lady's black straw hat. Orangekeyed ware,
bought of Henry Price, basket, fancy goods, chinaware and ironmongery
manufacturer, 21, 22, 23 Moore street, disposed irregularly on the
washstand and floor and consisting of basin, soapdish and brushtray (on
the washstand, together), pitcher and night article (on the floor,
separate).

Bloom's acts?

He deposited the articles of clothing on a chair, removed his remaining
articles of clothing, took from beneath the bolster at the head of the
bed a folded long white nightshirt, inserted his head and arms into the
proper apertures of the nightshirt, removed a pillow from the head to the
foot of the bed, prepared the bedlinen accordingly and entered the bed.

How?

With circumspection, as invariably when entering an abode (his own or not
his own): with solicitude, the snakespiral springs of the mattress being
old, the brass quoits and pendent viper radii loose and tremulous under
stress and strain: prudently, as entering a lair or ambush of lust or
adders: lightly, the less to disturb: reverently, the bed of conception
and of birth, of consummation of marriage and of breach of marriage, of
sleep and of death.

What did his limbs, when gradually extended, encounter?

New clean bedlinen, additional odours, the presence of a human form,
female, hers, the imprint of a human form, male, not his, some crumbs,
some flakes of potted meat, recooked, which he removed.

If he had smiled why would he have smiled?

To reflect that each one who enters imagines himself to be the first to
enter whereas he is always the last term of a preceding series even if
the first term of a succeeding one, each imagining himself to be first,
last, only and alone whereas he is neither first nor last nor only nor
alone in a series originating in and repeated to infinity.

What preceding series?

Assuming Mulvey to be the first term of his series, Penrose, Bartell
d'Arcy, professor Goodwin, Julius Mastiansky, John Henry Menton, Father
Bernard Corrigan, a farmer at the Royal Dublin Society's Horse Show,
Maggot O'Reilly, Matthew Dillon, Valentine Blake Dillon (Lord Mayor of
Dublin), Christopher Callinan, Lenehan, an Italian organgrinder, an
unknown gentleman in the Gaiety Theatre, Benjamin Dollard, Simon Dedalus,
Andrew (Pisser) Burke, Joseph Cuffe, Wisdom Hely, Alderman John Hooper,
Dr Francis Brady, Father Sebastian of Mount Argus, a bootblack at the
General Post Office, Hugh E. (Blazes) Boylan and so each and so on to no
last term.

What were his reflections concerning the last member of this series and
late occupant of the bed?

Reflections on his vigour (a bounder), corporal proportion (a
billsticker), commercial ability (a bester), impressionability (a
boaster).

Why for the observer impressionability in addition to vigour, corporal
proportion and commercial ability?

Because he had observed with augmenting frequency in the preceding
members of the same series the same concupiscence, inflammably
transmitted, first with alarm, then with understanding, then with desire,
finally with fatigue, with alternating symptoms of epicene comprehension
and apprehension.

With what antagonistic sentiments were his subsequent reflections
affected?

Envy, jealousy, abnegation, equanimity.

Envy?

Of a bodily and mental male organism specially adapted for the
superincumbent posture of energetic human copulation and energetic piston
and cylinder movement necessary for the complete satisfaction of a
constant but not acute concupiscence resident in a bodily and mental
female organism, passive but not obtuse.

Jealousy?

Because a nature full and volatile in its free state, was alternately the
agent and reagent of attraction. Because attraction between agent(s) and
reagent(s) at all instants varied, with inverse proportion of increase
and decrease, with incessant circular extension and radial reentrance.
Because the controlled contemplation of the fluctuation of attraction
produced, if desired, a fluctuation of pleasure.

Abnegation?

In virtue of a) acquaintance initiated in September 1903 in the
establishment of George Mesias, merchant tailor and outfitter, 5 Eden
Quay, b) hospitality extended and received in kind, reciprocated and
reappropriated in person, c) comparative youth subject to impulses of
ambition and magnanimity, colleagual altruism and amorous egoism, d)
extraracial attraction, intraracial inhibition, supraracial prerogative,
e) an imminent provincial musical tour, common current expenses, net
proceeds divided.

Equanimity?

As as natural as any and every natural act of a nature expressed or
understood executed in natured nature by natural creatures in accordance
with his, her and their natured natures, of dissimilar similarity. As not
so calamitous as a cataclysmic annihilation of the planet in consequence
of a collision with a dark sun. As less reprehensible than theft, highway
robbery, cruelty to children and animals, obtaining money under false
pretences, forgery, embezzlement, misappropriation of public money,
betrayal of public trust, malingering, mayhem, corruption of minors,
criminal libel, blackmail, contempt of court, arson, treason, felony,
mutiny on the high seas, trespass, burglary, jailbreaking, practice of
unnatural vice, desertion from armed forces in the field, perjury,
poaching, usury, intelligence with the king's enemies, impersonation,
criminal assault, manslaughter, wilful and premeditated murder. As not
more abnormal than all other parallel processes of adaptation to altered
conditions of existence, resulting in a reciprocal equilibrium between
the bodily organism and its attendant circumstances, foods, beverages,
acquired habits, indulged inclinations, significant disease. As more than
inevitable, irreparable.

Why more abnegation than jealousy, less envy than equanimity?

From outrage (matrimony) to outrage (adultery) there arose nought but
outrage (copulation) yet the matrimonial violator of the matrimonially
violated had not been outraged by the adulterous violator of the
adulterously violated.

What retribution, if any?

Assassination, never, as two wrongs did not make one right. Duel by
combat, no. Divorce, not now. Exposure by mechanical artifice (automatic
bed) or individual testimony (concealed ocular witnesses), not yet. Suit
for damages by legal influence or simulation of assault with evidence of
injuries sustained (selfinflicted), not impossibly. Hushmoney by moral
influence possibly. If any, positively, connivance, introduction of
emulation (material, a prosperous rival agency of publicity: moral, a
successful rival agent of intimacy), depreciation, alienation,
humiliation, separation protecting the one separated from the other,
protecting the separator from both.

By what reflections did he, a conscious reactor against the void of
incertitude, justify to himself his sentiments?

The preordained frangibility of the hymen: the presupposed intangibility
of the thing in itself: the incongruity and disproportion between the
selfprolonging tension of the thing proposed to be done and the
selfabbreviating relaxation of the thing done; the fallaciously inferred
debility of the female: the muscularity of the male: the variations of
ethical codes: the natural grammatical transition by inversion involving
no alteration of sense of an aorist preterite proposition (parsed as
masculine subject, monosyllabic onomatopoeic transitive verb with direct
feminine object) from the active voice into its correlative aorist
preterite proposition (parsed as feminine subject, auxiliary verb and
quasimonosyllabic onomatopoeic past participle with complementary
masculine agent) in the passive voice: the continued product of
seminators by generation: the continual production of semen by
distillation: the futility of triumph or protest or vindication: the
inanity of extolled virtue: the lethargy of nescient matter: the apathy
of the stars.

In what final satisfaction did these antagonistic sentiments and
reflections, reduced to their simplest forms, converge?

Satisfaction at the ubiquity in eastern and western terrestrial
hemispheres, in all habitable lands and islands explored or unexplored
(the land of the midnight sun, the islands of the blessed, the isles of
Greece, the land of promise), of adipose anterior and posterior female
hemispheres, redolent of milk and honey and of excretory sanguine and
seminal warmth, reminiscent of secular families of curves of amplitude,
insusceptible of moods of impression or of contrarieties of expression,
expressive of mute immutable mature animality.

The visible signs of antesatisfaction?

An approximate erection: a solicitous adversion: a gradual elevation: a
tentative revelation: a silent contemplation.

Then?

He kissed the plump mellow yellow smellow melons of her rump, on each
plump melonous hemisphere, in their mellow yellow furrow, with obscure
prolonged provocative melonsmellonous osculation.

The visible signs of postsatisfaction?

A silent contemplation: a tentative velation: a gradual abasement: a
solicitous aversion: a proximate erection.

What followed this silent action?

Somnolent invocation, less somnolent recognition, incipient excitation,
catechetical interrogation.

With what modifications did the narrator reply to this interrogation?

Negative: he omitted to mention the clandestine correspondence between
Martha Clifford and Henry Flower, the public altercation at, in and in
the vicinity of the licensed premises of Bernard Kiernan and Co, Limited,
8, 9 and 10 Little Britain street, the erotic provocation and response
thereto caused by the exhibitionism of Gertrude (Gerty), surname unknown.
Positive: he included mention of a performance by Mrs Bandmann Palmer of
LEAH at the Gaiety Theatre, 46, 47, 48, 49 South King street, an
invitation to supper at Wynn's (Murphy's) Hotel, 35, 36 and 37 Lower
Abbey street, a volume of peccaminous pornographical tendency entituled
SWEETS OF SIN, anonymous author a gentleman of fashion, a temporary
concussion caused by a falsely calculated movement in the course of a
postcenal gymnastic display, the victim (since completely recovered)
being Stephen Dedalus, professor and author, eldest surviving son of
Simon Dedalus, of no fixed occupation, an aeronautical feat executed by
him (narrator) in the presence of a witness, the professor and author
aforesaid, with promptitude of decision and gymnastic flexibility.

Was the narration otherwise unaltered by modifications?

Absolutely.

Which event or person emerged as the salient point of his narration?

Stephen Dedalus, professor and author.

What limitations of activity and inhibitions of conjugal rights were
perceived by listener and narrator concerning themselves during the
course of this intermittent and increasingly more laconic narration?

By the listener a limitation of fertility inasmuch as marriage had been
celebrated 1 calendar month after the 18th anniversary of her birth (8
September 1870), viz. 8 October, and consummated on the same date with
female issue born 15 June 1889, having been anticipatorily consummated on
the lo September of the same year and complete carnal intercourse, with
ejaculation of semen within the natural female organ, having last taken
place 5 weeks previous, viz. 27 November 1893, to the birth on 29
December 1893 of second (and only male) issue, deceased 9 January 1894,
aged 11 days, there remained a period of 10 years, 5 months and 18 days
during which carnal intercourse had been incomplete, without ejaculation
of semen within the natural female organ. By the narrator a limitation of
activity, mental and corporal, inasmuch as complete mental intercourse
between himself and the listener had not taken place since the
consummation of puberty, indicated by catamenic hemorrhage, of the female
issue of narrator and listener, 15 September 1903, there remained a
period of 9 months and 1 day during which, in consequence of a
preestablished natural comprehension in incomprehension between the
consummated females (listener and issue), complete corporal liberty of
action had been circumscribed.

How?

By various reiterated feminine interrogation concerning the masculine
destination whither, the place where, the time at which, the duration for
which, the object with which in the case of temporary absences, projected
or effected.

What moved visibly above the listener's and the narrator's invisible
thoughts?

The upcast reflection of a lamp and shade, an inconstant series of
concentric circles of varying gradations of light and shadow.

In what directions did listener and narrator lie?

Listener, S. E. by E.: Narrator, N. W. by W.: on the 53rd parallel of
latitude, N., and 6th meridian of longitude, W.: at an angle of 45
degrees to the terrestrial equator.

In what state of rest or motion?

At rest relatively to themselves and to each other. In motion being each
and both carried westward, forward and rereward respectively, by the
proper perpetual motion of the earth through everchanging tracks of
neverchanging space.

In what posture?

Listener: reclined semilaterally, left, left hand under head, right leg
extended in a straight line and resting on left leg, flexed, in the
attitude of Gea-Tellus, fulfilled, recumbent, big with seed. Narrator:
reclined laterally, left, with right and left legs flexed, the index
finger and thumb of the right hand resting on the bridge of the nose, in
the attitude depicted in a snapshot photograph made by Percy Apjohn, the
childman weary, the manchild in the womb.

Womb? Weary?

He rests. He has travelled.

With?

Sinbad the Sailor and Tinbad the Tailor and Jinbad the Jailer and Whinbad
the Whaler and Ninbad the Nailer and Finbad the Failer and Binbad the
Bailer and Pinbad the Pailer and Minbad the Mailer and Hinbad the Hailer
and Rinbad the Railer and Dinbad the Kailer and Vinbad the Quailer and
Linbad the Yailer and Xinbad the Phthailer.

When?

Going to dark bed there was a square round Sinbad the Sailor roc's auk's
egg in the night of the bed of all the auks of the rocs of Darkinbad the
Brightdayler.

Where?


    * * * * * * *


Yes because he never did a thing like that before as ask to get his
breakfast in bed with a couple of eggs since the CITY ARMS hotel when he
used to be pretending to be laid up with a sick voice doing his highness
to make himself interesting for that old faggot Mrs Riordan that he
thought he had a great leg of and she never left us a farthing all for
masses for herself and her soul greatest miser ever was actually afraid
to lay out 4d for her methylated spirit telling me all her ailments she
had too much old chat in her about politics and earthquakes and the end
of the world let us have a bit of fun first God help the world if all the
women were her sort down on bathingsuits and lownecks of course nobody
wanted her to wear them I suppose she was pious because no man would look
at her twice I hope Ill never be like her a wonder she didnt want us to
cover our faces but she was a welleducated woman certainly and her gabby
talk about Mr Riordan here and Mr Riordan there I suppose he was glad to
get shut of her and her dog smelling my fur and always edging to get up
under my petticoats especially then still I like that in him polite to
old women like that and waiters and beggars too hes not proud out of
nothing but not always if ever he got anything really serious the matter
with him its much better for them to go into a hospital where everything
is clean but I suppose Id have to dring it into him for a month yes and
then wed have a hospital nurse next thing on the carpet have him staying
there till they throw him out or a nun maybe like the smutty photo he has
shes as much a nun as Im not yes because theyre so weak and puling when
theyre sick they want a woman to get well if his nose bleeds youd think
it was O tragic and that dyinglooking one off the south circular when he
sprained his foot at the choir party at the sugarloaf Mountain the day I
wore that dress Miss Stack bringing him flowers the worst old ones she
could find at the bottom of the basket anything at all to get into a mans
bedroom with her old maids voice trying to imagine he was dying on
account of her to never see thy face again though he looked more like a
man with his beard a bit grown in the bed father was the same besides I
hate bandaging and dosing when he cut his toe with the razor paring his
corns afraid hed get bloodpoisoning but if it was a thing I was sick then
wed see what attention only of course the woman hides it not to give all
the trouble they do yes he came somewhere Im sure by his appetite anyway
love its not or hed be off his feed thinking of her so either it was one
of those night women if it was down there he was really and the hotel
story he made up a pack of lies to hide it planning it Hynes kept me who
did I meet ah yes I met do you remember Menton and who else who let me
see that big babbyface I saw him and he not long married flirting with a
young girl at Pooles Myriorama and turned my back on him when he slinked
out looking quite conscious what harm but he had the impudence to make up
to me one time well done to him mouth almighty and his boiled eyes of all
the big stupoes I ever met and thats called a solicitor only for I hate
having a long wrangle in bed or else if its not that its some little
bitch or other he got in with somewhere or picked up on the sly if they
only knew him as well as I do yes because the day before yesterday he was
scribbling something a letter when I came into the front room to show him
Dignams death in the paper as if something told me and he covered it up
with the blottingpaper pretending to be thinking about business so very
probably that was it to somebody who thinks she has a softy in him
because all men get a bit like that at his age especially getting on to
forty he is now so as to wheedle any money she can out of him no fool
like an old fool and then the usual kissing my bottom was to hide it not
that I care two straws now who he does it with or knew before that way
though Id like to find out so long as I dont have the two of them under
my nose all the time like that slut that Mary we had in Ontario terrace
padding out her false bottom to excite him bad enough to get the smell of
those painted women off him once or twice I had a suspicion by getting
him to come near me when I found the long hair on his coat without that
one when I went into the kitchen pretending he was drinking water 1 woman
is not enough for them it was all his fault of course ruining servants
then proposing that she could eat at our table on Christmas day if you
please O no thank you not in my house stealing my potatoes and the
oysters 2/6 per doz going out to see her aunt if you please common
robbery so it was but I was sure he had something on with that one it
takes me to find out a thing like that he said you have no proof it was
her proof O yes her aunt was very fond of oysters but I told her what I
thought of her suggesting me to go out to be alone with her I wouldnt
lower myself to spy on them the garters I found in her room the Friday
she was out that was enough for me a little bit too much her face swelled
up on her with temper when I gave her her weeks notice I saw to that
better do without them altogether do out the rooms myself quicker only
for the damn cooking and throwing out the dirt I gave it to him anyhow
either she or me leaves the house I couldnt even touch him if I thought
he was with a dirty barefaced liar and sloven like that one denying it up
to my face and singing about the place in the W C too because she knew
she was too well off yes because he couldnt possibly do without it that
long so he must do it somewhere and the last time he came on my bottom
when was it the night Boylan gave my hand a great squeeze going along by
the Tolka in my hand there steals another I just pressed the back of his
like that with my thumb to squeeze back singing the young May moon shes
beaming love because he has an idea about him and me hes not such a fool
he said Im dining out and going to the Gaiety though Im not going to give
him the satisfaction in any case God knows hes a change in a way not to
be always and ever wearing the same old hat unless I paid some
nicelooking boy to do it since I cant do it myself a young boy would like
me Id confuse him a little alone with him if we were Id let him see my
garters the new ones and make him turn red looking at him seduce him I
know what boys feel with that down on their cheek doing that frigging
drawing out the thing by the hour question and answer would you do this
that and the other with the coalman yes with a bishop yes I would because
I told him about some dean or bishop was sitting beside me in the jews
temples gardens when I was knitting that woollen thing a stranger to
Dublin what place was it and so on about the monuments and he tired me
out with statues encouraging him making him worse than he is who is in
your mind now tell me who are you thinking of who is it tell me his name
who tell me who the german Emperor is it yes imagine Im him think of him
can you feel him trying to make a whore of me what he never will he ought
to give it up now at this age of his life simply ruination for any woman
and no satisfaction in it pretending to like it till he comes and then
finish it off myself anyway and it makes your lips pale anyhow its done
now once and for all with all the talk of the world about it people make
its only the first time after that its just the ordinary do it and think
no more about it why cant you kiss a man without going and marrying him
first you sometimes love to wildly when you feel that way so nice all
over you you cant help yourself I wish some man or other would take me
sometime when hes there and kiss me in his arms theres nothing like a
kiss long and hot down to your soul almost paralyses you then I hate that
confession when I used to go to Father Corrigan he touched me father and
what harm if he did where and I said on the canal bank like a fool but
whereabouts on your person my child on the leg behind high up was it yes
rather high up was it where you sit down yes O Lord couldnt he say bottom
right out and have done with it what has that got to do with it and did
you whatever way he put it I forget no father and I always think of the
real father what did he want to know for when I already confessed it to
God he had a nice fat hand the palm moist always I wouldnt mind feeling
it neither would he Id say by the bullneck in his horsecollar I wonder
did he know me in the box I could see his face he couldnt see mine of
course hed never turn or let on still his eyes were red when his father
died theyre lost for a woman of course must be terrible when a man cries
let alone them Id like to be embraced by one in his vestments and the
smell of incense off him like the pope besides theres no danger with a
priest if youre married hes too careful about himself then give something
to H H the pope for a penance I wonder was he satisfied with me one thing
I didnt like his slapping me behind going away so familiarly in the hall
though I laughed Im not a horse or an ass am I I suppose he was thinking
of his fathers I wonder is he awake thinking of me or dreaming am I in it
who gave him that flower he said he bought he smelt of some kind of drink
not whisky or stout or perhaps the sweety kind of paste they stick their
bills up with some liqueur Id like to sip those richlooking green and
yellow expensive drinks those stagedoor johnnies drink with the opera
hats I tasted once with my finger dipped out of that American that had
the squirrel talking stamps with father he had all he could do to keep
himself from falling asleep after the last time after we took the port
and potted meat it had a fine salty taste yes because I felt lovely and
tired myself and fell asleep as sound as a top the moment I popped
straight into bed till that thunder woke me up God be merciful to us I
thought the heavens were coming down about us to punish us when I blessed
myself and said a Hail Mary like those awful thunderbolts in Gibraltar as
if the world was coming to an end and then they come and tell you theres
no God what could you do if it was running and rushing about nothing only
make an act of contrition the candle I lit that evening in Whitefriars
street chapel for the month of May see it brought its luck though hed
scoff if he heard because he never goes to church mass or meeting he says
your soul you have no soul inside only grey matter because he doesnt know
what it is to have one yes when I lit the lamp because he must have come
3 or 4 times with that tremendous big red brute of a thing he has I
thought the vein or whatever the dickens they call it was going to burst
though his nose is not so big after I took off all my things with the
blinds down after my hours dressing and perfuming and combing it like
iron or some kind of a thick crowbar standing all the time he must have
eaten oysters I think a few dozen he was in great singing voice no I
never in all my life felt anyone had one the size of that to make you
feel full up he must have eaten a whole sheep after whats the idea making
us like that with a big hole in the middle of us or like a Stallion
driving it up into you because thats all they want out of you with that
determined vicious look in his eye I had to halfshut my eyes still he
hasnt such a tremendous amount of spunk in him when I made him pull out
and do it on me considering how big it is so much the better in case any
of it wasnt washed out properly the last time I let him finish it in me
nice invention they made for women for him to get all the pleasure but if
someone gave them a touch of it themselves theyd know what I went through
with Milly nobody would believe cutting her teeth too and Mina Purefoys
husband give us a swing out of your whiskers filling her up with a child
or twins once a year as regular as the clock always with a smell of
children off her the one they called budgers or something like a nigger
with a shock of hair on it Jesusjack the child is a black the last time I
was there a squad of them falling over one another and bawling you
couldnt hear your ears supposed to be healthy not satisfied till they
have us swollen out like elephants or I dont know what supposing I risked
having another not off him though still if he was married Im sure hed
have a fine strong child but I dont know Poldy has more spunk in him yes
thatd be awfully jolly I suppose it was meeting Josie Powell and the
funeral and thinking about me and Boylan set him off well he can think
what he likes now if thatll do him any good I know they were spooning a
bit when I came on the scene he was dancing and sitting out with her the
night of Georgina Simpsons housewarming and then he wanted to ram it down
my neck it was on account of not liking to see her a wallflower that was
why we had the standup row over politics he began it not me when he said
about Our Lord being a carpenter at last he made me cry of course a woman
is so sensitive about everything I was fuming with myself after for
giving in only for I knew he was gone on me and the first socialist he
said He was he annoyed me so much I couldnt put him into a temper still
he knows a lot of mixedup things especially about the body and the inside
I often wanted to study up that myself what we have inside us in that
family physician I could always hear his voice talking when the room was
crowded and watch him after that I pretended I had a coolness on with her
over him because he used to be a bit on the jealous side whenever he
asked who are you going to and I said over to Floey and he made me the
present of Byron's poems and the three pairs of gloves so that finished
that I could quite easily get him to make it up any time I know how Id
even supposing he got in with her again and was going out to see her
somewhere Id know if he refused to eat the onions I know plenty of ways
ask him to tuck down the collar of my blouse or touch him with my veil
and gloves on going out I kiss then would send them all spinning however
alright well see then let him go to her she of course would only be too
delighted to pretend shes mad in love with him that I wouldnt so much
mind Id just go to her and ask her do you love him and look her square in
the eyes she couldnt fool me but he might imagine he was and make a
declaration to her with his plabbery kind of a manner like he did to me
though I had the devils own job to get it out of him though I liked him
for that it showed he could hold in and wasnt to be got for the asking he
was on the pop of asking me too the night in the kitchen I was rolling
the potato cake theres something I want to say to you only for I put him
off letting on I was in a temper with my hands and arms full of pasty
flour in any case I let out too much the night before talking of dreams
so I didnt want to let him know more than was good for him she used to be
always embracing me Josie whenever he was there meaning him of course
glauming me over and when I said I washed up and down as far as possible
asking me and did you wash possible the women are always egging on to
that putting it on thick when hes there they know by his sly eye blinking
a bit putting on the indifferent when they come out with something the
kind he is what spoils him I dont wonder in the least because he was very
handsome at that time trying to look like Lord Byron I said I liked
though he was too beautiful for a man and he was a little before we got
engaged afterwards though she didnt like it so much the day I was in fits
of laughing with the giggles I couldnt stop about all my hairpins falling
out one after another with the mass of hair I had youre always in great
humour she said yes because it grigged her because she knew what it meant
because I used to tell her a good bit of what went on between us not all
but just enough to make her mouth water but that wasnt my fault she didnt
darken the door much after we were married I wonder what shes got like
now after living with that dotty husband of hers she had her face
beginning to look drawn and run down the last time I saw her she must
have been just after a row with him because I saw on the moment she was
edging to draw down a conversation about husbands and talk about him to
run him down what was it she told me O yes that sometimes he used to go
to bed with his muddy boots on when the maggot takes him just imagine
having to get into bed with a thing like that that might murder you any
moment what a man well its not the one way everyone goes mad Poldy anyhow
whatever he does always wipes his feet on the mat when he comes in wet or
shine and always blacks his own boots too and he always takes off his hat
when he comes up in the street like then and now hes going about in his
slippers to look for 10000 pounds for a postcard U p up O sweetheart May
wouldnt a thing like that simply bore you stiff to extinction actually
too stupid even to take his boots off now what could you make of a man
like that Id rather die 20 times over than marry another of their sex of
course hed never find another woman like me to put up with him the way I
do know me come sleep with me yes and he knows that too at the bottom of
his heart take that Mrs Maybrick that poisoned her husband for what I
wonder in love with some other man yes it was found out on her wasnt she
the downright villain to go and do a thing like that of course some men
can be dreadfully aggravating drive you mad and always the worst word in
the world what do they ask us to marry them for if were so bad as all
that comes to yes because they cant get on without us white Arsenic she
put in his tea off flypaper wasnt it I wonder why they call it that if I
asked him hed say its from the Greek leave us as wise as we were before
she must have been madly in love with the other fellow to run the chance
of being hanged O she didnt care if that was her nature what could she do
besides theyre not brutes enough to go and hang a woman surely are they

theyre all so different Boylan talking about the shape of my foot he
noticed at once even before he was introduced when I was in the D B C
with Poldy laughing and trying to listen I was waggling my foot we both
ordered 2 teas and plain bread and butter I saw him looking with his two
old maids of sisters when I stood up and asked the girl where it was what
do I care with it dropping out of me and that black closed breeches he
made me buy takes you half an hour to let them down wetting all myself
always with some brandnew fad every other week such a long one I did I
forgot my suede gloves on the seat behind that I never got after some
robber of a woman and he wanted me to put it in the Irish times lost in
the ladies lavatory D B C Dame street finder return to Mrs Marion Bloom
and I saw his eyes on my feet going out through the turning door he was
looking when I looked back and I went there for tea 2 days after in the
hope but he wasnt now how did that excite him because I was crossing them
when we were in the other room first he meant the shoes that are too
tight to walk in my hand is nice like that if I only had a ring with the
stone for my month a nice aquamarine Ill stick him for one and a gold
bracelet I dont like my foot so much still I made him spend once with my
foot the night after Goodwins botchup of a concert so cold and windy it
was well we had that rum in the house to mull and the fire wasnt black
out when he asked to take off my stockings lying on the hearthrug in
Lombard street west and another time it was my muddy boots hed like me to
walk in all the horses dung I could find but of course hes not natural
like the rest of the world that I what did he say I could give 9 points
in 10 to Katty Lanner and beat her what does that mean I asked him I
forget what he said because the stoppress edition just passed and the man
with the curly hair in the Lucan dairy thats so polite I think I saw his
face before somewhere I noticed him when I was tasting the butter so I
took my time Bartell dArcy too that he used to make fun of when he
commenced kissing me on the choir stairs after I sang Gounods AVE MARIA
what are we waiting for O my heart kiss me straight on the brow and part
which is my brown part he was pretty hot for all his tinny voice too my
low notes he was always raving about if you can believe him I liked the
way he used his mouth singing then he said wasnt it terrible to do that
there in a place like that I dont see anything so terrible about it Ill
tell him about that some day not now and surprise him ay and Ill take him
there and show him the very place too we did it so now there you are like
it or lump it he thinks nothing can happen without him knowing he hadnt
an idea about my mother till we were engaged otherwise hed never have got
me so cheap as he did he was 10 times worse himself anyhow begging me to
give him a tiny bit cut off my drawers that was the evening coming along
Kenilworth square he kissed me in the eye of my glove and I had to take
it off asking me questions is it permitted to enquire the shape of my
bedroom so I let him keep it as if I forgot it to think of me when I saw
him slip it into his pocket of course hes mad on the subject of drawers
thats plain to be seen always skeezing at those brazenfaced things on the
bicycles with their skirts blowing up to their navels even when Milly and
I were out with him at the open air fete that one in the cream muslin
standing right against the sun so he could see every atom she had on when
he saw me from behind following in the rain I saw him before he saw me
however standing at the corner of the Harolds cross road with a new
raincoat on him with the muffler in the Zingari colours to show off his
complexion and the brown hat looking slyboots as usual what was he doing
there where hed no business they can go and get whatever they like from
anything at all with a skirt on it and were not to ask any questions but
they want to know where were you where are you going I could feel him
coming along skulking after me his eyes on my neck he had been keeping
away from the house he felt it was getting too warm for him so I
halfturned and stopped then he pestered me to say yes till I took off my
glove slowly watching him he said my openwork sleeves were too cold for
the rain anything for an excuse to put his hand anear me drawers drawers
the whole blessed time till I promised to give him the pair off my doll
to carry about in his waistcoat pocket O MARIA SANTISIMA he did look a
big fool dreeping in the rain splendid set of teeth he had made me hungry
to look at them and beseeched of me to lift the orange petticoat I had on
with the sunray pleats that there was nobody he said hed kneel down in
the wet if I didnt so persevering he would too and ruin his new raincoat
you never know what freak theyd take alone with you theyre so savage for
it if anyone was passing so I lifted them a bit and touched his trousers
outside the way I used to Gardner after with my ring hand to keep him
from doing worse where it was too public I was dying to find out was he
circumcised he was shaking like a jelly all over they want to do
everything too quick take all the pleasure out of it and father waiting
all the time for his dinner he told me to say I left my purse in the
butchers and had to go back for it what a Deceiver then he wrote me that
letter with all those words in it how could he have the face to any woman
after his company manners making it so awkward after when we met asking
me have I offended you with my eyelids down of course he saw I wasnt he
had a few brains not like that other fool Henny Doyle he was always
breaking or tearing something in the charades I hate an unlucky man and
if I knew what it meant of course I had to say no for form sake dont
understand you I said and wasnt it natural so it is of course it used to
be written up with a picture of a womans on that wall in Gibraltar with
that word I couldnt find anywhere only for children seeing it too young
then writing every morning a letter sometimes twice a day I liked the way
he made love then he knew the way to take a woman when he sent me the 8
big poppies because mine was the 8th then I wrote the night he kissed my
heart at Dolphins barn I couldnt describe it simply it makes you feel
like nothing on earth but he never knew how to embrace well like Gardner
I hope hell come on Monday as he said at the same time four I hate people
who come at all hours answer the door you think its the vegetables then
its somebody and you all undressed or the door of the filthy sloppy
kitchen blows open the day old frostyface Goodwin called about the
concert in Lombard street and I just after dinner all flushed and tossed
with boiling old stew dont look at me professor I had to say Im a fright
yes but he was a real old gent in his way it was impossible to be more
respectful nobody to say youre out you have to peep out through the blind
like the messengerboy today I thought it was a putoff first him sending
the port and the peaches first and I was just beginning to yawn with
nerves thinking he was trying to make a fool of me when I knew his
tattarrattat at the door he must have been a bit late because it was l/4
after 3 when I saw the 2 Dedalus girls coming from school I never know
the time even that watch he gave me never seems to go properly Id want to
get it looked after when I threw the penny to that lame sailor for
England home and beauty when I was whistling there is a charming girl I
love and I hadnt even put on my clean shift or powdered myself or a thing
then this day week were to go to Belfast just as well he has to go to
Ennis his fathers anniversary the 27th it wouldnt be pleasant if he did
suppose our rooms at the hotel were beside each other and any fooling
went on in the new bed I couldnt tell him to stop and not bother me with
him in the next room or perhaps some protestant clergyman with a cough
knocking on the wall then hed never believe the next day we didnt do
something its all very well a husband but you cant fool a lover after me
telling him we never did anything of course he didnt believe me no its
better hes going where he is besides something always happens with him
the time going to the Mallow concert at Maryborough ordering boiling soup
for the two of us then the bell rang out he walks down the platform with
the soup splashing about taking spoonfuls of it hadnt he the nerve and
the waiter after him making a holy show of us screeching and confusion
for the engine to start but he wouldnt pay till he finished it the two
gentlemen in the 3rd class carriage said he was quite right so he was too
hes so pigheaded sometimes when he gets a thing into his head a good job
he was able to open the carriage door with his knife or theyd have taken
us on to Cork I suppose that was done out of revenge on him O I love
jaunting in a train or a car with lovely soft cushions I wonder will he
take a 1st class for me he might want to do it in the train by tipping
the guard well O I suppose therell be the usual idiots of men gaping at
us with their eyes as stupid as ever they can possibly be that was an
exceptional man that common workman that left us alone in the carriage
that day going to Howth Id like to find out something about him l or 2
tunnels perhaps then you have to look out of the window all the nicer
then coming back suppose I never came back what would they say eloped
with him that gets you on on the stage the last concert I sang at where
its over a year ago when was it St Teresas hall Clarendon St little chits
of missies they have now singing Kathleen Kearney and her like on account
of father being in the army and my singing the absentminded beggar and
wearing a brooch for Lord Roberts when I had the map of it all and Poldy
not Irish enough was it him managed it this time I wouldnt put it past
him like he got me on to sing in the STABAT MATER by going around saying
he was putting Lead Kindly Light to music I put him up to that till the
jesuits found out he was a freemason thumping the piano lead Thou me on
copied from some old opera yes and he was going about with some of them
Sinner Fein lately or whatever they call themselves talking his usual
trash and nonsense he says that little man he showed me without the neck
is very intelligent the coming man Griffiths is he well he doesnt look it
thats all I can say still it must have been him he knew there was a
boycott I hate the mention of their politics after the war that Pretoria
and Ladysmith and Bloemfontein where Gardner lieut Stanley G 8th Bn 2nd
East Lancs Rgt of enteric fever he was a lovely fellow in khaki and just
the right height over me Im sure he was brave too he said I was lovely
the evening we kissed goodbye at the canal lock my Irish beauty he was
pale with excitement about going away or wed be seen from the road he
couldnt stand properly and I so hot as I never felt they could have made
their peace in the beginning or old oom Paul and the rest of the other
old Krugers go and fight it out between them instead of dragging on for
years killing any finelooking men there were with their fever if he was
even decently shot it wouldnt have been so bad I love to see a regiment
pass in review the first time I saw the Spanish cavalry at La Roque it
was lovely after looking across the bay from Algeciras all the lights of
the rock like fireflies or those sham battles on the 15 acres the Black
Watch with their kilts in time at the march past the 10th hussars the
prince of Wales own or the lancers O the lancers theyre grand or the
Dublins that won Tugela his father made his money over selling the horses
for the cavalry well he could buy me a nice present up in Belfast after
what I gave him theyve lovely linen up there or one of those nice kimono
things I must buy a mothball like I had before to keep in the drawer with
them it would be exciting going round with him shopping buying those
things in a new city better leave this ring behind want to keep turning
and turning to get it over the knuckle there or they might bell it round
the town in their papers or tell the police on me but theyd think were
married O let them all go and smother themselves for the fat lot I care
he has plenty of money and hes not a marrying man so somebody better get
it out of him if I could find out whether he likes me I looked a bit
washy of course when I looked close in the handglass powdering a mirror
never gives you the expression besides scrooching down on me like that
all the time with his big hipbones hes heavy too with his hairy chest for
this heat always having to lie down for them better for him put it into
me from behind the way Mrs Mastiansky told me her husband made her like
the dogs do it and stick out her tongue as far as ever she could and he
so quiet and mild with his tingating cither can you ever be up to men the
way it takes them lovely stuff in that blue suit he had on and stylish
tie and socks with the skyblue silk things on them hes certainly well off
I know by the cut his clothes have and his heavy watch but he was like a
perfect devil for a few minutes after he came back with the stoppress
tearing up the tickets and swearing blazes because he lost 20 quid he
said he lost over that outsider that won and half he put on for me on
account of Lenehans tip cursing him to the lowest pits that sponger he
was making free with me after the Glencree dinner coming back that long
joult over the featherbed mountain after the lord Mayor looking at me
with his dirty eyes Val Dillon that big heathen I first noticed him at
dessert when I was cracking the nuts with my teeth I wished I could have
picked every morsel of that chicken out of my fingers it was so tasty and
browned and as tender as anything only for I didnt want to eat everything
on my plate those forks and fishslicers were hallmarked silver too I wish
I had some I could easily have slipped a couple into my muff when I was
playing with them then always hanging out of them for money in a
restaurant for the bit you put down your throat we have to be thankful
for our mangy cup of tea itself as a great compliment to be noticed the
way the world is divided in any case if its going to go on I want at
least two other good chemises for one thing and but I dont know what kind
of drawers he likes none at all I think didnt he say yes and half the
girls in Gibraltar never wore them either naked as God made them that
Andalusian singing her Manola she didnt make much secret of what she
hadnt yes and the second pair of silkette stockings is laddered after one
days wear I could have brought them back to Lewers this morning and
kicked up a row and made that one change them only not to upset myself
and run the risk of walking into him and ruining the whole thing and one
of those kidfitting corsets Id want advertised cheap in the Gentlewoman
with elastic gores on the hips he saved the one I have but thats no good
what did they say they give a delightful figure line 11/6 obviating that
unsightly broad appearance across the lower back to reduce flesh my belly
is a bit too big Ill have to knock off the stout at dinner or am I
getting too fond of it the last they sent from ORourkes was as flat as a
pancake he makes his money easy Larry they call him the old mangy parcel
he sent at Xmas a cottage cake and a bottle of hogwash he tried to palm
off as claret that he couldnt get anyone to drink God spare his spit for
fear hed die of the drouth or I must do a few breathing exercises I
wonder is that antifat any good might overdo it the thin ones are not so
much the fashion now garters that much I have the violet pair I wore
today thats all he bought me out of the cheque he got on the first O no
there was the face lotion I finished the last of yesterday that made my
skin like new I told him over and over again get that made up in the same
place and dont forget it God only knows whether he did after all I said
to him Ill know by the bottle anyway if not I suppose Ill only have to
wash in my piss like beeftea or chickensoup with some of that opoponax
and violet I thought it was beginning to look coarse or old a bit the
skin underneath is much finer where it peeled off there on my finger
after the burn its a pity it isnt all like that and the four paltry
handkerchiefs about 6/- in all sure you cant get on in this world without
style all going in food and rent when I get it Ill lash it around I tell
you in fine style I always want to throw a handful of tea into the pot
measuring and mincing if I buy a pair of old brogues itself do you like
those new shoes yes how much were they Ive no clothes at all the brown
costume and the skirt and jacket and the one at the cleaners 3 whats that
for any woman cutting up this old hat and patching up the other the men
wont look at you and women try to walk on you because they know youve no
man then with all the things getting dearer every day for the 4 years
more I have of life up to 35 no Im what am I at all Ill be 33 in
September will I what O well look at that Mrs Galbraith shes much older
than me I saw her when I was out last week her beautys on the wane she
was a lovely woman magnificent head of hair on her down to her waist
tossing it back like that like Kitty OShea in Grantham street 1st thing I
did every morning to look across see her combing it as if she loved it
and was full of it pity I only got to know her the day before we left and
that Mrs Langtry the jersey lily the prince of Wales was in love with I
suppose hes like the first man going the roads only for the name of a
king theyre all made the one way only a black mans Id like to try a
beauty up to what was she 45 there was some funny story about the jealous
old husband what was it at all and an oyster knife he went no he made her
wear a kind of a tin thing round her and the prince of Wales yes he had
the oyster knife cant be true a thing like that like some of those books
he brings me the works of Master Francois Somebody supposed to be a
priest about a child born out of her ear because her bumgut fell out a
nice word for any priest to write and her a--e as if any fool wouldnt
know what that meant I hate that pretending of all things with that old
blackguards face on him anybody can see its not true and that Ruby and
Fair Tyrants he brought me that twice I remember when I came to page 50
the part about where she hangs him up out of a hook with a cord
flagellate sure theres nothing for a woman in that all invention made up
about he drinking the champagne out of her slipper after the ball was
over like the infant Jesus in the crib at Inchicore in the Blessed
Virgins arms sure no woman could have a child that big taken out of her
and I thought first it came out of her side because how could she go to
the chamber when she wanted to and she a rich lady of course she felt
honoured H R H he was in Gibraltar the year I was born I bet he found
lilies there too where he planted the tree he planted more than that in
his time he might have planted me too if hed come a bit sooner then I
wouldnt be here as I am he ought to chuck that Freeman with the paltry
few shillings he knocks out of it and go into an office or something
where hed get regular pay or a bank where they could put him up on a
throne to count the money all the day of course he prefers plottering
about the house so you cant stir with him any side whats your programme
today I wish hed even smoke a pipe like father to get the smell of a man
or pretending to be mooching about for advertisements when he could have
been in Mr Cuffes still only for what he did then sending me to try and
patch it up I could have got him promoted there to be the manager he gave
me a great mirada once or twice first he was as stiff as the mischief
really and truly Mrs Bloom only I felt rotten simply with the old
rubbishy dress that I lost the leads out of the tails with no cut in it
but theyre coming into fashion again I bought it simply to please him I
knew it was no good by the finish pity I changed my mind of going to Todd
and Bums as I said and not Lees it was just like the shop itself rummage
sale a lot of trash I hate those rich shops get on your nerves nothing
kills me altogether only he thinks he knows a great lot about a womans
dress and cooking mathering everything he can scour off the shelves into
it if I went by his advices every blessed hat I put on does that suit me
yes take that thats alright the one like a weddingcake standing up miles
off my head he said suited me or the dishcover one coming down on my
backside on pins and needles about the shopgirl in that place in Grafton
street I had the misfortune to bring him into and she as insolent as ever
she could be with her smirk saying Im afraid were giving you too much
trouble what shes there for but I stared it out of her yes he was awfully
stiff and no wonder but he changed the second time he looked Poldy
pigheaded as usual like the soup but I could see him looking very hard at
my chest when he stood up to open the door for me it was nice of him to
show me out in any case Im extremely sorry Mrs Bloom believe me without
making it too marked the first time after him being insulted and me being
supposed to be his wife I just half smiled I know my chest was out that
way at the door when he said Im extremely sorry and Im sure you were

yes I think he made them a bit firmer sucking them like that so long he
made me thirsty titties he calls them I had to laugh yes this one anyhow
stiff the nipple gets for the least thing Ill get him to keep that up and
Ill take those eggs beaten up with marsala fatten them out for him what
are all those veins and things curious the way its made 2 the same in
case of twins theyre supposed to represent beauty placed up there like
those statues in the museum one of them pretending to hide it with her
hand are they so beautiful of course compared with what a man looks like
with his two bags full and his other thing hanging down out of him or
sticking up at you like a hatrack no wonder they hide it with a
cabbageleaf that disgusting Cameron highlander behind the meat market or
that other wretch with the red head behind the tree where the statue of
the fish used to be when I was passing pretending he was pissing standing
out for me to see it with his babyclothes up to one side the Queens own
they were a nice lot its well the Surreys relieved them theyre always
trying to show it to you every time nearly I passed outside the mens
greenhouse near the Harcourt street station just to try some fellow or
other trying to catch my eye as if it was I of the 7 wonders of the world
O and the stink of those rotten places the night coming home with Poldy
after the Comerfords party oranges and lemonade to make you feel nice and
watery I went into r of them it was so biting cold I couldnt keep it when
was that 93 the canal was frozen yes it was a few months after a pity a
couple of the Camerons werent there to see me squatting in the mens place
meadero I tried to draw a picture of it before I tore it up like a
sausage or something I wonder theyre not afraid going about of getting a
kick or a bang of something there the woman is beauty of course thats
admitted when he said I could pose for a picture naked to some rich
fellow in Holles street when he lost the job in Helys and I was selling
the clothes and strumming in the coffee palace would I be like that bath
of the nymph with my hair down yes only shes younger or Im a little like
that dirty bitch in that Spanish photo he has nymphs used they go about
like that I asked him about her and that word met something with hoses in
it and he came out with some jawbreakers about the incarnation he never
can explain a thing simply the way a body can understand then he goes and
burns the bottom out of the pan all for his Kidney this one not so much
theres the mark of his teeth still where he tried to bite the nipple I
had to scream out arent they fearful trying to hurt you I had a great
breast of milk with Milly enough for two what was the reason of that he
said I could have got a pound a week as a wet nurse all swelled out the
morning that delicate looking student that stopped in no 28 with the
Citrons Penrose nearly caught me washing through the window only for I
snapped up the towel to my face that was his studenting hurt me they used
to weaning her till he got doctor Brady to give me the belladonna
prescription I had to get him to suck them they were so hard he said it
was sweeter and thicker than cows then he wanted to milk me into the tea
well hes beyond everything I declare somebody ought to put him in the
budget if I only could remember the I half of the things and write a book
out of it the works of Master Poldy yes and its so much smoother the skin
much an hour he was at them Im sure by the clock like some kind of a big
infant I had at me they want everything in their mouth all the pleasure
those men get out of a woman I can feel his mouth O Lord I must stretch
myself I wished he was here or somebody to let myself go with and come
again like that I feel all fire inside me or if I could dream it when he
made me spend the 2nd time tickling me behind with his finger I was
coming for about 5 minutes with my legs round him I had to hug him after
O Lord I wanted to shout out all sorts of things fuck or shit or anything
at all only not to look ugly or those lines from the strain who knows the
way hed take it you want to feel your way with a man theyre not all like
him thank God some of them want you to be so nice about it I noticed the
contrast he does it and doesnt talk I gave my eyes that look with my hair
a bit loose from the tumbling and my tongue between my lips up to him the
savage brute Thursday Friday one Saturday two Sunday three O Lord I cant
wait till Monday

frseeeeeeeefronnnng train somewhere whistling the strength those engines
have in them like big giants and the water rolling all over and out of
them all sides like the end of Loves old sweeeetsonnnng the poor men that
have to be out all the night from their wives and families in those
roasting engines stifling it was today Im glad I burned the half of those
old Freemans and Photo Bits leaving things like that lying about hes
getting very careless and threw the rest of them up in the W C Ill get
him to cut them tomorrow for me instead of having them there for the next
year to get a few pence for them have him asking wheres last Januarys
paper and all those old overcoats I bundled out of the hall making the
place hotter than it is that rain was lovely and refreshing just after my
beauty sleep I thought it was going to get like Gibraltar my goodness the
heat there before the levanter came on black as night and the glare of
the rock standing up in it like a big giant compared with their 3 Rock
mountain they think is so great with the red sentries here and there the
poplars and they all whitehot and the smell of the rainwater in those
tanks watching the sun all the time weltering down on you faded all that
lovely frock fathers friend Mrs Stanhope sent me from the B Marche paris
what a shame my dearest Doggerina she wrote on it she was very nice whats
this her other name was just a p c to tell you I sent the little present
have just had a jolly warm bath and feel a very clean dog now enjoyed it
wogger she called him wogger wd give anything to be back in Gib and hear
you sing Waiting and in old Madrid Concone is the name of those exercises
he bought me one of those new some word I couldnt make out shawls amusing
things but tear for the least thing still there lovely I think dont you
will always think of the lovely teas we had together scrumptious currant
scones and raspberry wafers I adore well now dearest Doggerina be sure
and write soon kind she left out regards to your father also captain
Grove with love yrs affly Hester x x x x x she didnt look a bit married
just like a girl he was years older than her wogger he was awfully fond
of me when he held down the wire with his foot for me to step over at the
bullfight at La Linea when that matador Gomez was given the bulls ear
these clothes we have to wear whoever invented them expecting you to walk
up Killiney hill then for example at that picnic all staysed up you cant
do a blessed thing in them in a crowd run or jump out of the way thats
why I was afraid when that other ferocious old Bull began to charge the
banderilleros with the sashes and the 2 things in their hats and the
brutes of men shouting bravo toro sure the women were as bad in their
nice white mantillas ripping all the whole insides out of those poor
horses I never heard of such a thing in all my life yes he used to break
his heart at me taking off the dog barking in bell lane poor brute and it
sick what became of them ever I suppose theyre dead long ago the 2 of
them its like all through a mist makes you feel so old I made the scones
of course I had everything all to myself then a girl Hester we used to
compare our hair mine was thicker than hers she showed me how to settle
it at the back when I put it up and whats this else how to make a knot on
a thread with the one hand we were like cousins what age was I then the
night of the storm I slept in her bed she had her arms round me then we
were fighting in the morning with the pillow what fun he was watching me
whenever he got an opportunity at the band on the Alameda esplanade when
I was with father and captain Grove I looked up at the church first and
then at the windows then down and our eyes met I felt something go
through me like all needles my eyes were dancing I remember after when I
looked at myself in the glass hardly recognised myself the change he was
attractive to a girl in spite of his being a little bald intelligent
looking disappointed and gay at the same time he was like Thomas in the
shadow of Ashlydyat I had a splendid skin from the sun and the excitement
like a rose I didnt get a wink of sleep it wouldnt have been nice on
account of her but I could have stopped it in time she gave me the
Moonstone to read that was the first I read of Wilkie Collins East Lynne
I read and the shadow of Ashlydyat Mrs Henry Wood Henry Dunbar by that
other woman I lent him afterwards with Mulveys photo in it so as he see I
wasnt without and Lord Lytton Eugene Aram Molly bawn she gave me by Mrs
Hungerford on account of the name I dont like books with a Molly in them
like that one he brought me about the one from Flanders a whore always
shoplifting anything she could cloth and stuff and yards of it O this
blanket is too heavy on me thats better I havent even one decent
nightdress this thing gets all rolled under me besides him and his
fooling thats better I used to be weltering then in the heat my shift
drenched with the sweat stuck in the cheeks of my bottom on the chair
when I stood up they were so fattish and firm when I got up on the sofa
cushions to see with my clothes up and the bugs tons of them at night and
the mosquito nets I couldnt read a line Lord how long ago it seems
centuries of course they never came back and she didnt put her address
right on it either she may have noticed her wogger people were always
going away and we never I remember that day with the waves and the boats
with their high heads rocking and the smell of ship those Officers
uniforms on shore leave made me seasick he didnt say anything he was very
serious I had the high buttoned boots on and my skirt was blowing she
kissed me six or seven times didnt I cry yes I believe I did or near it
my lips were taittering when I said goodbye she had a Gorgeous wrap of
some special kind of blue colour on her for the voyage made very
peculiarly to one side like and it was extremely pretty it got as dull as
the devil after they went I was almost planning to run away mad out of it
somewhere were never easy where we are father or aunt or marriage waiting
always waiting to guiiiide him toooo me waiting nor speeeed his flying
feet their damn guns bursting and booming all over the shop especially
the Queens birthday and throwing everything down in all directions if you
didnt open the windows when general Ulysses Grant whoever he was or did
supposed to be some great fellow landed off the ship and old Sprague the
consul that was there from before the flood dressed up poor man and he in
mourning for the son then the same old bugles for reveille in the morning
and drums rolling and the unfortunate poor devils of soldiers walking
about with messtins smelling the place more than the old longbearded jews
in their jellibees and levites assembly and sound clear and gunfire for
the men to cross the lines and the warden marching with his keys to lock
the gates and the bagpipes and only captain Groves and father talking
about Rorkes drift and Plevna and sir Garnet Wolseley and Gordon at
Khartoum lighting their pipes for them everytime they went out drunken
old devil with his grog on the windowsill catch him leaving any of it
picking his nose trying to think of some other dirty story to tell up in
a corner but he never forgot himself when I was there sending me out of
the room on some blind excuse paying his compliments the Bushmills whisky
talking of course but hed do the same to the next woman that came along I
suppose he died of galloping drink ages ago the days like years not a
letter from a living soul except the odd few I posted to myself with bits
of paper in them so bored sometimes I could fight with my nails listening
to that old Arab with the one eye and his heass of an instrument singing
his heah heah aheah all my compriments on your hotchapotch of your heass
as bad as now with the hands hanging off me looking out of the window if
there was a nice fellow even in the opposite house that medical in Holles
street the nurse was after when I put on my gloves and hat at the window
to show I was going out not a notion what I meant arent they thick never
understand what you say even youd want to print it up on a big poster for
them not even if you shake hands twice with the left he didnt recognise
me either when I half frowned at him outside Westland row chapel where
does their great intelligence come in Id like to know grey matter they
have it all in their tail if you ask me those country gougers up in the
City Arms intelligence they had a damn sight less than the bulls and cows
they were selling the meat and the coalmans bell that noisy bugger trying
to swindle me with the wrong bill he took out of his hat what a pair of
paws and pots and pans and kettles to mend any broken bottles for a poor
man today and no visitors or post ever except his cheques or some
advertisement like that wonderworker they sent him addressed dear Madam
only his letter and the card from Milly this morning see she wrote a
letter to him who did I get the last letter from O Mrs Dwenn now what
possessed her to write from Canada after so many years to know the recipe
I had for pisto madrileno Floey Dillon since she wrote to say she was
married to a very rich architect if Im to believe all I hear with a villa
and eight rooms her father was an awfully nice man he was near seventy
always goodhumoured well now Miss Tweedy or Miss Gillespie theres the
piannyer that was a solid silver coffee service he had too on the
mahogany sideboard then dying so far away I hate people that have always
their poor story to tell everybody has their own troubles that poor Nancy
Blake died a month ago of acute neumonia well I didnt know her so well as
all that she was Floeys friend more than mine poor Nancy its a bother
having to answer he always tells me the wrong things and no stops to say
like making a speech your sad bereavement symphathy I always make that
mistake and newphew with 2 double yous in I hope hell write me a longer
letter the next time if its a thing he really likes me O thanks be to the
great God I got somebody to give me what I badly wanted to put some heart
up into me youve no chances at all in this place like you used long ago I
wish somebody would write me a loveletter his wasnt much and I told him
he could write what he liked yours ever Hugh Boylan in old Madrid stuff
silly women believe love is sighing I am dying still if he wrote it I
suppose thered be some truth in it true or no it fills up your whole day
and life always something to think about every moment and see it all
round you like a new world I could write the answer in bed to let him
imagine me short just a few words not those long crossed letters Atty
Dillon used to write to the fellow that was something in the four courts
that jilted her after out of the ladies letterwriter when I told her to
say a few simple words he could twist how he liked not acting with
precipat precip itancy with equal candour the greatest earthly happiness
answer to a gentlemans proposal affirmatively my goodness theres nothing
else its all very fine for them but as for being a woman as soon as youre
old they might as well throw you out in the bottom of the ashpit.

Mulveys was the first when I was in bed that morning and Mrs Rubio
brought it in with the coffee she stood there standing when I asked her
to hand me and I pointing at them I couldnt think of the word a hairpin
to open it with ah horquilla disobliging old thing and it staring her in
the face with her switch of false hair on her and vain about her
appearance ugly as she was near 80 or a 100 her face a mass of wrinkles
with all her religion domineering because she never could get over the
Atlantic fleet coming in half the ships of the world and the Union Jack
flying with all her carabineros because 4 drunken English sailors took
all the rock from them and because I didnt run into mass often enough in
Santa Maria to please her with her shawl up on her except when there was
a marriage on with all her miracles of the saints and her black blessed
virgin with the silver dress and the sun dancing 3 times on Easter Sunday
morning and when the priest was going by with the bell bringing the
vatican to the dying blessing herself for his Majestad an admirer he
signed it I near jumped out of my skin I wanted to pick him up when I saw
him following me along the Calle Real in the shop window then he tipped
me just in passing but I never thought hed write making an appointment I
had it inside my petticoat bodice all day reading it up in every hole and
corner while father was up at the drill instructing to find out by the
handwriting or the language of stamps singing I remember shall I wear a
white rose and I wanted to put on the old stupid clock to near the time
he was the first man kissed me under the Moorish wall my sweetheart when
a boy it never entered my head what kissing meant till he put his tongue
in my mouth his mouth was sweetlike young I put my knee up to him a few
times to learn the way what did I tell him I was engaged for for fun to
the son of a Spanish nobleman named Don Miguel de la Flora and he
believed me that I was to be married to him in 3 years time theres many a
true word spoken in jest there is a flower that bloometh a few things I
told him true about myself just for him to be imagining the Spanish girls
he didnt like I suppose one of them wouldnt have him I got him excited he
crushed all the flowers on my bosom he brought me he couldnt count the
pesetas and the perragordas till I taught him Cappoquin he came from he
said on the black water but it was too short then the day before he left
May yes it was May when the infant king of Spain was born Im always like
that in the spring Id like a new fellow every year up on the tiptop under
the rockgun near OHaras tower I told him it was struck by lightning and
all about the old Barbary apes they sent to Clapham without a tail
careering all over the show on each others back Mrs Rubio said she was a
regular old rock scorpion robbing the chickens out of Inces farm and
throw stones at you if you went anear he was looking at me I had that
white blouse on open in the front to encourage him as much as I could
without too openly they were just beginning to be plump I said I was
tired we lay over the firtree cove a wild place I suppose it must be the
highest rock in existence the galleries and casemates and those frightful
rocks and Saint Michaels cave with the icicles or whatever they call them
hanging down and ladders all the mud plotching my boots Im sure thats the
way down the monkeys go under the sea to Africa when they die the ships
out far like chips that was the Malta boat passing yes the sea and the
sky you could do what you liked lie there for ever he caressed them
outside they love doing that its the roundness there I was leaning over
him with my white ricestraw hat to take the newness out of it the left
side of my face the best my blouse open for his last day transparent kind
of shirt he had I could see his chest pink he wanted to touch mine with
his for a moment but I wouldnt lee him he was awfully put out first for
fear you never know consumption or leave me with a child embarazada that
old servant Ines told me that one drop even if it got into you at all
after I tried with the Banana but I was afraid it might break and get
lost up in me somewhere because they once took something down out of a
woman that was up there for years covered with limesalts theyre all mad
to get in there where they come out of youd think they could never go far
enough up and then theyre done with you in a way till the next time yes
because theres a wonderful feeling there so tender all the time how did
we finish it off yes O yes I pulled him off into my handkerchief
pretending not to be excited but I opened my legs I wouldnt let him touch
me inside my petticoat because I had a skirt opening up the side I
tormented the life out of him first tickling him I loved rousing that dog
in the hotel rrrsssstt awokwokawok his eyes shut and a bird flying below
us he was shy all the same I liked him like that moaning I made him blush
a little when I got over him that way when I unbuttoned him and took his
out and drew back the skin it had a kind of eye in it theyre all Buttons
men down the middle on the wrong side of them Molly darling he called me
what was his name Jack Joe Harry Mulvey was it yes I think a lieutenant
he was rather fair he had a laughing kind of a voice so I went round to
the whatyoucallit everything was whatyoucallit moustache had he he said
hed come back Lord its just like yesterday to me and if I was married hed
do it to me and I promised him yes faithfully Id let him block me now
flying perhaps hes dead or killed or a captain or admiral its nearly 20
years if I said firtree cove he would if he came up behind me and put his
hands over my eyes to guess who I might recognise him hes young still
about 40 perhaps hes married some girl on the black water and is quite
changed they all do they havent half the character a woman has she little
knows what I did with her beloved husband before he ever dreamt of her in
broad daylight too in the sight of the whole world you might say they
could have put an article about it in the Chronicle I was a bit wild
after when I blew out the old bag the biscuits were in from Benady Bros
and exploded it Lord what a bang all the woodcocks and pigeons screaming
coming back the same way that we went over middle hill round by the old
guardhouse and the jews burialplace pretending to read out the Hebrew on
them I wanted to fire his pistol he said he hadnt one he didnt know what
to make of me with his peak cap on that he always wore crooked as often
as I settled it straight H M S Calypso swinging my hat that old Bishop
that spoke off the altar his long preach about womans higher functions
about girls now riding the bicycle and wearing peak caps and the new
woman bloomers God send him sense and me more money I suppose theyre
called after him I never thought that would be my name Bloom when I used
to write it in print to see how it looked on a visiting card or
practising for the butcher and oblige M Bloom youre looking blooming
Josie used to say after I married him well its better than Breen or
Briggs does brig or those awful names with bottom in them Mrs Ramsbottom
or some other kind of a bottom Mulvey I wouldnt go mad about either or
suppose I divorced him Mrs Boylan my mother whoever she was might have
given me a nicer name the Lord knows after the lovely one she had Lunita
Laredo the fun we had running along Williss road to Europa point twisting
in and out all round the other side of Jersey they were shaking and
dancing about in my blouse like Millys little ones now when she runs up
the stairs I loved looking down at them I was jumping up at the pepper
trees and the white poplars pulling the leaves off and throwing them at
him he went to India he was to write the voyages those men have to make
to the ends of the world and back its the least they might get a squeeze
or two at a woman while they can going out to be drowned or blown up
somewhere I went up Windmill hill to the flats that Sunday morning with
captain Rubios that was dead spyglass like the sentry had he said hed
have one or two from on board I wore that frock from the B Marche paris
and the coral necklace the straits shining I could see over to Morocco
almost the bay of Tangier white and the Atlas mountain with snow on it
and the straits like a river so clear Harry Molly darling I was thinking
of him on the sea all the time after at mass when my petticoat began to
slip down at the elevation weeks and weeks I kept the handkerchief under
my pillow for the smell of him there was no decent perfume to be got in
that Gibraltar only that cheap peau despagne that faded and left a stink
on you more than anything else I wanted to give him a memento he gave me
that clumsy Claddagh ring for luck that I gave Gardner going to south
Africa where those Boers killed him with their war and fever but they
were well beaten all the same as if it brought its bad luck with it like
an opal or pearl still it must have been pure 18 carrot gold because it
was very heavy but what could you get in a place like that the sandfrog
shower from Africa and that derelict ship that came up to the harbour
Marie the Marie whatyoucallit no he hadnt a moustache that was Gardner
yes I can see his face cleanshaven Frseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeefrong that
train again weeping tone once in the dear deaead days beyondre call close
my eyes breath my lips forward kiss sad look eyes open piano ere oer the
world the mists began I hate that istsbeg comes loves sweet
sooooooooooong Ill let that out full when I get in front of the
footlights again Kathleen Kearney and her lot of squealers Miss This Miss
That Miss Theother lot of sparrowfarts skitting around talking about
politics they know as much about as my backside anything in the world to
make themselves someway interesting Irish homemade beauties soldiers
daughter am I ay and whose are you bootmakers and publicans I beg your
pardon coach I thought you were a wheelbarrow theyd die down dead off
their feet if ever they got a chance of walking down the Alameda on an
officers arm like me on the bandnight my eyes flash my bust that they
havent passion God help their poor head I knew more about men and life
when I was I S than theyll all know at 50 they dont know how to sing a
song like that Gardner said no man could look at my mouth and teeth
smiling like that and not think of it I was afraid he mightnt like my
accent first he so English all father left me in spite of his stamps Ive
my mothers eyes and figure anyhow he always said theyre so snotty about
themselves some of those cads he wasnt a bit like that he was dead gone
on my lips let them get a husband first thats fit to be looked at and a
daughter like mine or see if they can excite a swell with money that can
pick and choose whoever he wants like Boylan to do it 4 or 5 times locked
in each others arms or the voice either I could have been a prima donna
only I married him comes looooves old deep down chin back not too much
make it double My Ladys Bower is too long for an encore about the moated
grange at twilight and vaunted rooms yes Ill sing Winds that blow from
the south that he gave after the choirstairs performance Ill change that
lace on my black dress to show off my bubs and Ill yes by God Ill get
that big fan mended make them burst with envy my hole is itching me
always when I think of him I feel I want to I feel some wind in me better
go easy not wake him have him at it again slobbering after washing every
bit of myself back belly and sides if we had even a bath itself or my own
room anyway I wish hed sleep in some bed by himself with his cold feet on
me give us room even to let a fart God or do the least thing better yes
hold them like that a bit on my side piano quietly sweeeee theres that
train far away pianissimo eeeee one more song

that was a relief wherever you be let your wind go free who knows if that
pork chop I took with my cup of tea after was quite good with the heat I
couldnt smell anything off it Im sure that queerlooking man in the
porkbutchers is a great rogue I hope that lamp is not smoking fill my
nose up with smuts better than having him leaving the gas on all night I
couldnt rest easy in my bed in Gibraltar even getting up to see why am I
so damned nervous about that though I like it in the winter its more
company O Lord it was rotten cold too that winter when I was only about
ten was I yes I had the big doll with all the funny clothes dressing her
up and undressing that icy wind skeeting across from those mountains the
something Nevada sierra nevada standing at the fire with the little bit
of a short shift I had up to heat myself I loved dancing about in it then
make a race back into bed Im sure that fellow opposite used to be there
the whole time watching with the lights out in the summer and I in my
skin hopping around I used to love myself then stripped at the washstand
dabbing and creaming only when it came to the chamber performance I put
out the light too so then there were 2 of us goodbye to my sleep for this
night anyhow I hope hes not going to get in with those medicals leading
him astray to imagine hes young again coming in at 4 in the morning it
must be if not more still he had the manners not to wake me what do they
find to gabber about all night squandering money and getting drunker and
drunker couldnt they drink water then he starts giving us his orders for
eggs and tea and Findon haddy and hot buttered toast I suppose well have
him sitting up like the king of the country pumping the wrong end of the
spoon up and down in his egg wherever he learned that from and I love to
hear him falling up the stairs of a morning with the cups rattling on the
tray and then play with the cat she rubs up against you for her own sake
I wonder has she fleas shes as bad as a woman always licking and lecking
but I hate their claws I wonder do they see anything that we cant staring
like that when she sits at the top of the stairs so long and listening as
I wait always what a robber too that lovely fresh place I bought I think
Ill get a bit of fish tomorrow or today is it Friday yes I will with some
blancmange with black currant jam like long ago not those 2 lb pots of
mixed plum and apple from the London and Newcastle Williams and Woods
goes twice as far only for the bones I hate those eels cod yes Ill get a
nice piece of cod Im always getting enough for 3 forgetting anyway Im
sick of that everlasting butchers meat from Buckleys loin chops and leg
beef and rib steak and scrag of mutton and calfs pluck the very name is
enough or a picnic suppose we all gave 5/- each and or let him pay it and
invite some other woman for him who Mrs Fleming and drove out to the
furry glen or the strawberry beds wed have him examining all the horses
toenails first like he does with the letters no not with Boylan there yes
with some cold veal and ham mixed sandwiches there are little houses down
at the bottom of the banks there on purpose but its as hot as blazes he
says not a bank holiday anyhow I hate those ruck of Mary Ann coalboxes
out for the day Whit Monday is a cursed day too no wonder that bee bit
him better the seaside but Id never again in this life get into a boat
with him after him at Bray telling the boatman he knew how to row if
anyone asked could he ride the steeplechase for the gold cup hed say yes
then it came on to get rough the old thing crookeding about and the
weight all down my side telling me pull the right reins now pull the left
and the tide all swamping in floods in through the bottom and his oar
slipping out of the stirrup its a mercy we werent all drowned he can swim
of course me no theres no danger whatsoever keep yourself calm in his
flannel trousers Id like to have tattered them down off him before all
the people and give him what that one calls flagellate till he was black
and blue do him all the good in the world only for that longnosed chap I
dont know who he is with that other beauty Burke out of the City Arms
hotel was there spying around as usual on the slip always where he wasnt
wanted if there was a row on youd vomit a better face there was no love
lost between us thats 1 consolation I wonder what kind is that book he
brought me Sweets of Sin by a gentleman of fashion some other Mr de Kock
I suppose the people gave him that nickname going about with his tube
from one woman to another I couldnt even change my new white shoes all
ruined with the saltwater and the hat I had with that feather all blowy
and tossed on me how annoying and provoking because the smell of the sea
excited me of course the sardines and the bream in Catalan bay round the
back of the rock they were fine all silver in the fishermens baskets old
Luigi near a hundred they said came from Genoa and the tall old chap with
the earrings I dont like a man you have to climb up to to get at I
suppose theyre all dead and rotten long ago besides I dont like being
alone in this big barracks of a place at night I suppose Ill have to put
up with it I never brought a bit of salt in even when we moved in the
confusion musical academy he was going to make on the first floor
drawingroom with a brassplate or Blooms private hotel he suggested go and
ruin himself altogether the way his father did down in Ennis like all the
things he told father he was going to do and me but I saw through him
telling me all the lovely places we could go for the honeymoon Venice by
moonlight with the gondolas and the lake of Como he had a picture cut out
of some paper of and mandolines and lanterns O how nice I said whatever I
liked he was going to do immediately if not sooner will you be my man
will you carry my can he ought to get a leather medal with a putty rim
for all the plans he invents then leaving us here all day youd never know
what old beggar at the door for a crust with his long story might be a
tramp and put his foot in the way to prevent me shutting it like that
picture of that hardened criminal he was called in Lloyds Weekly news 20
years in jail then he comes out and murders an old woman for her money
imagine his poor wife or mother or whoever she is such a face youd run
miles away from I couldnt rest easy till I bolted all the doors and
windows to make sure but its worse again being locked up like in a prison
or a madhouse they ought to be all shot or the cat of nine tails a big
brute like that that would attack a poor old woman to murder her in her
bed Id cut them off him so I would not that hed be much use still better
than nothing the night I was sure I heard burglars in the kitchen and he
went down in his shirt with a candle and a poker as if he was looking for
a mouse as white as a sheet frightened out of his wits making as much
noise as he possibly could for the burglars benefit there isnt much to
steal indeed the Lord knows still its the feeling especially now with
Milly away such an idea for him to send the girl down there to learn to
take photographs on account of his grandfather instead of sending her to
Skerrys academy where shed have to learn not like me getting all IS at
school only hed do a thing like that all the same on account of me and
Boylan thats why he did it Im certain the way he plots and plans
everything out I couldnt turn round with her in the place lately unless I
bolted the door first gave me the fidgets coming in without knocking
first when I put the chair against the door just as I was washing myself
there below with the glove get on your nerves then doing the loglady all
day put her in a glasscase with two at a time to look at her if he knew
she broke off the hand off that little gimcrack statue with her roughness
and carelessness before she left that I got that little Italian boy to
mend so that you cant see the join for 2 shillings wouldnt even teem the
potatoes for you of course shes right not to ruin her hands I noticed he
was always talking to her lately at the table explaining things in the
paper and she pretending to understand sly of course that comes from his
side of the house he cant say I pretend things can he Im too honest as a
matter of fact and helping her into her coat but if there was anything
wrong with her its me shed tell not him I suppose he thinks Im finished
out and laid on the shelf well Im not no nor anything like it well see
well see now shes well on for flirting too with Tom Devans two sons
imitating me whistling with those romps of Murray girls calling for her
can Milly come out please shes in great demand to pick what they can out
of her round in Nelson street riding Harry Devans bicycle at night its as
well he sent her where she is she was just getting out of bounds wanting
to go on the skatingrink and smoking their cigarettes through their nose
I smelt it off her dress when I was biting off the thread of the button I
sewed on to the bottom of her jacket she couldnt hide much from me I tell
you only I oughtnt to have stitched it and it on her it brings a parting
and the last plumpudding too split in 2 halves see it comes out no matter
what they say her tongue is a bit too long for my taste your blouse is
open too low she says to me the pan calling the kettle blackbottom and I
had to tell her not to cock her legs up like that on show on the
windowsill before all the people passing they all look at her like me
when I was her age of course any old rag looks well on you then a great
touchmenot too in her own way at the Only Way in the Theatre royal take
your foot away out of that I hate people touching me afraid of her life
Id crush her skirt with the pleats a lot of that touching must go on in
theatres in the crush in the dark theyre always trying to wiggle up to
you that fellow in the pit at the Gaiety for Beerbohm Tree in Trilby the
last time Ill ever go there to be squashed like that for any Trilby or
her barebum every two minutes tipping me there and looking away hes a bit
daft I think I saw him after trying to get near two stylishdressed ladies
outside Switzers window at the same little game I recognised him on the
moment the face and everything but he didnt remember me yes and she didnt
even want me to kiss her at the Broadstone going away well I hope shell
get someone to dance attendance on her the way I did when she was down
with the mumps and her glands swollen wheres this and wheres that of
course she cant feel anything deep yet I never came properly till I was
what 22 or so it went into the wrong place always only the usual girls
nonsense and giggling that Conny Connolly writing to her in white ink on
black paper sealed with sealingwax though she clapped when the curtain
came down because he looked so handsome then we had Martin Harvey for
breakfast dinner and supper I thought to myself afterwards it must be
real love if a man gives up his life for her that way for nothing I
suppose there are a few men like that left its hard to believe in it
though unless it really happened to me the majority of them with not a
particle of love in their natures to find two people like that nowadays
full up of each other that would feel the same way as you do theyre
usually a bit foolish in the head his father must have been a bit queer
to go and poison himself after her still poor old man I suppose he felt
lost shes always making love to my things too the few old rags I have
wanting to put her hair up at I S my powder too only ruin her skin on her
shes time enough for that all her life after of course shes restless
knowing shes pretty with her lips so red a pity they wont stay that way I
was too but theres no use going to the fair with the thing answering me
like a fishwoman when I asked to go for a half a stone of potatoes the
day we met Mrs Joe Gallaher at the trottingmatches and she pretended not
to see us in her trap with Friery the solicitor we werent grand enough
till I gave her 2 damn fine cracks across the ear for herself take that
now for answering me like that and that for your impudence she had me
that exasperated of course contradicting I was badtempered too because
how was it there was a weed in the tea or I didnt sleep the night before
cheese I ate was it and I told her over and over again not to leave
knives crossed like that because she has nobody to command her as she
said herself well if he doesnt correct her faith I will that was the last
time she turned on the teartap I was just like that myself they darent
order me about the place its his fault of course having the two of us
slaving here instead of getting in a woman long ago am I ever going to
have a proper servant again of course then shed see him coming Id have to
let her know or shed revenge it arent they a nuisance that old Mrs
Fleming you have to be walking round after her putting the things into
her hands sneezing and farting into the pots well of course shes old she
cant help it a good job I found that rotten old smelly dishcloth that got
lost behind the dresser I knew there was something and opened the area
window to let out the smell bringing in his friends to entertain them
like the night he walked home with a dog if you please that might have
been mad especially Simon Dedalus son his father such a criticiser with
his glasses up with his tall hat on him at the cricket match and a great
big hole in his sock one thing laughing at the other and his son that got
all those prizes for whatever he won them in the intermediate imagine
climbing over the railings if anybody saw him that knew us I wonder he
didnt tear a big hole in his grand funeral trousers as if the one nature
gave wasnt enough for anybody hawking him down into the dirty old kitchen
now is he right in his head I ask pity it wasnt washing day my old pair
of drawers might have been hanging up too on the line on exhibition for
all hed ever care with the ironmould mark the stupid old bundle burned on
them he might think was something else and she never even rendered down
the fat I told her and now shes going such as she was on account of her
paralysed husband getting worse theres always something wrong with them
disease or they have to go under an operation or if its not that its
drink and he beats her Ill have to hunt around again for someone every
day I get up theres some new thing on sweet God sweet God well when Im
stretched out dead in my grave I suppose Ill have some peace I want to
get up a minute if Im let wait O Jesus wait yes that thing has come on me
yes now wouldnt that afflict you of course all the poking and rooting and
ploughing he had up in me now what am I to do Friday Saturday Sunday
wouldnt that pester the soul out of a body unless he likes it some men do
God knows theres always something wrong with us 5 days every 3 or 4 weeks
usual monthly auction isnt it simply sickening that night it came on me
like that the one and only time we were in a box that Michael Gunn gave
him to see Mrs Kendal and her husband at the Gaiety something he did
about insurance for him in Drimmies I was fit to be tied though I wouldnt
give in with that gentleman of fashion staring down at me with his
glasses and him the other side of me talking about Spinoza and his soul
thats dead I suppose millions of years ago I smiled the best I could all
in a swamp leaning forward as if I was interested having to sit it out
then to the last tag I wont forget that wife of Scarli in a hurry
supposed to be a fast play about adultery that idiot in the gallery
hissing the woman adulteress he shouted I suppose he went and had a woman
in the next lane running round all the back ways after to make up for it
I wish he had what I had then hed boo I bet the cat itself is better off
than us have we too much blood up in us or what O patience above its
pouring out of me like the sea anyhow he didnt make me pregnant as big as
he is I dont want to ruin the clean sheets I just put on I suppose the
clean linen I wore brought it on too damn it damn it and they always want
to see a stain on the bed to know youre a virgin for them all thats
troubling them theyre such fools too you could be a widow or divorced 40
times over a daub of red ink would do or blackberry juice no thats too
purply O Jamesy let me up out of this pooh sweets of sin whoever
suggested that business for women what between clothes and cooking and
children this damned old bed too jingling like the dickens I suppose they
could hear us away over the other side of the park till I suggested to
put the quilt on the floor with the pillow under my bottom I wonder is it
nicer in the day I think it is easy I think Ill cut all this hair off me
there scalding me I might look like a young girl wouldnt he get the great
suckin the next time he turned up my clothes on me Id give anything to
see his face wheres the chamber gone easy Ive a holy horror of its
breaking under me after that old commode I wonder was I too heavy sitting
on his knee I made him sit on the easychair purposely when I took off
only my blouse and skirt first in the other room he was so busy where he
oughtnt to be he never felt me I hope my breath was sweet after those
kissing comfits easy God I remember one time I could scout it out
straight whistling like a man almost easy O Lord how noisy I hope theyre
bubbles on it for a wad of money from some fellow Ill have to perfume it
in the morning dont forget I bet he never saw a better pair of thighs
than that look how white they are the smoothest place is right there
between this bit here how soft like a peach easy God I wouldnt mind being
a man and get up on a lovely woman O Lord what a row youre making like
the jersey lily easy easy O how the waters come down at Lahore

who knows is there anything the matter with my insides or have I
something growing in me getting that thing like that every week when was
it last I Whit Monday yes its only about 3 weeks I ought to go to the
doctor only it would be like before I married him when I had that white
thing coming from me and Floey made me go to that dry old stick Dr
Collins for womens diseases on Pembroke road your vagina he called it I
suppose thats how he got all the gilt mirrors and carpets getting round
those rich ones off Stephens green running up to him for every little
fiddlefaddle her vagina and her cochinchina theyve money of course so
theyre all right I wouldnt marry him not if he was the last man in the
world besides theres something queer about their children always smelling
around those filthy bitches all sides asking me if what I did had an
offensive odour what did he want me to do but the one thing gold maybe
what a question if I smathered it all over his wrinkly old face for him
with all my compriments I suppose hed know then and could you pass it
easily pass what I thought he was talking about the rock of Gibraltar the
way he put it thats a very nice invention too by the way only I like
letting myself down after in the hole as far as I can squeeze and pull
the chain then to flush it nice cool pins and needles still theres
something in it I suppose I always used to know by Millys when she was a
child whether she had worms or not still all the same paying him for that
how much is that doctor one guinea please and asking me had I frequent
omissions where do those old fellows get all the words they have
omissions with his shortsighted eyes on me cocked sideways I wouldnt
trust him too far to give me chloroform or God knows what else still I
liked him when he sat down to write the thing out frowning so severe his
nose intelligent like that you be damned you lying strap O anything no
matter who except an idiot he was clever enough to spot that of course
that was all thinking of him and his mad crazy letters my Precious one
everything connected with your glorious Body everything underlined that
comes from it is a thing of beauty and of joy for ever something he got
out of some nonsensical book that he had me always at myself 4 and 5
times a day sometimes and I said I hadnt are you sure O yes I said I am
quite sure in a way that shut him up I knew what was coming next only
natural weakness it was he excited me I dont know how the first night
ever we met when I was living in Rehoboth terrace we stood staring at one
another for about 10 minutes as if we met somewhere I suppose on account
of my being jewess looking after my mother he used to amuse me the things
he said with the half sloothering smile on him and all the Doyles said he
was going to stand for a member of Parliament O wasnt I the born fool to
believe all his blather about home rule and the land league sending me
that long strool of a song out of the Huguenots to sing in French to be
more classy O beau pays de la Touraine that I never even sang once
explaining and rigmaroling about religion and persecution he wont let you
enjoy anything naturally then might he as a great favour the very 1st
opportunity he got a chance in Brighton square running into my bedroom
pretending the ink got on his hands to wash it off with the Albion milk
and sulphur soap I used to use and the gelatine still round it O I
laughed myself sick at him that day I better not make an alnight sitting
on this affair they ought to make chambers a natural size so that a woman
could sit on it properly he kneels down to do it I suppose there isnt in
all creation another man with the habits he has look at the way hes
sleeping at the foot of the bed how can he without a hard bolster its
well he doesnt kick or he might knock out all my teeth breathing with his
hand on his nose like that Indian god he took me to show one wet Sunday
in the museum in Kildare street all yellow in a pinafore lying on his
side on his hand with his ten toes sticking out that he said was a bigger
religion than the jews and Our Lords both put together all over Asia
imitating him as hes always imitating everybody I suppose he used to
sleep at the foot of the bed too with his big square feet up in his wifes
mouth damn this stinking thing anyway wheres this those napkins are ah
yes I know I hope the old press doesnt creak ah I knew it would hes
sleeping hard had a good time somewhere still she must have given him
great value for his money of course he has to pay for it from her O this
nuisance of a thing I hope theyll have something better for us in the
other world tying ourselves up God help us thats all right for tonight
now the lumpy old jingly bed always reminds me of old Cohen I suppose he
scratched himself in it often enough and he thinks father bought it from
Lord Napier that I used to admire when I was a little girl because I told
him easy piano O I like my bed God here we are as bad as ever after 16
years how many houses were we in at all Raymond terrace and Ontario
terrace and Lombard street and Holles street and he goes about whistling
every time were on the run again his huguenots or the frogs march
pretending to help the men with our 4 sticks of furniture and then the
City Arms hotel worse and worse says Warden Daly that charming place on
the landing always somebody inside praying then leaving all their stinks
after them always know who was in there last every time were just getting
on right something happens or he puts his big foot in it Thoms and Helys
and Mr Cuffes and Drimmies either hes going to be run into prison over
his old lottery tickets that was to be all our salvations or he goes and
gives impudence well have him coming home with the sack soon out of the
Freeman too like the rest on account of those Sinner Fein or the
freemasons then well see if the little man he showed me dribbling along
in the wet all by himself round by Coadys lane will give him much
consolation that he says is so capable and sincerely Irish he is indeed
judging by the sincerity of the trousers I saw on him wait theres Georges
church bells wait 3 quarters the hour l wait 2 oclock well thats a nice
hour of the night for him to be coming home at to anybody climbing down
into the area if anybody saw him Ill knock him off that little habit
tomorrow first Ill look at his shirt to see or Ill see if he has that
French letter still in his pocketbook I suppose he thinks I dont know
deceitful men all their 20 pockets arent enough for their lies then why
should we tell them even if its the truth they dont believe you then
tucked up in bed like those babies in the Aristocrats Masterpiece he
brought me another time as if we hadnt enough of that in real life
without some old Aristocrat or whatever his name is disgusting you more
with those rotten pictures children with two heads and no legs thats the
kind of villainy theyre always dreaming about with not another thing in
their empty heads they ought to get slow poison the half of them then tea
and toast for him buttered on both sides and newlaid eggs I suppose Im
nothing any more when I wouldnt let him lick me in Holles street one
night man man tyrant as ever for the one thing he slept on the floor half
the night naked the way the jews used when somebody dies belonged to them
and wouldnt eat any breakfast or speak a word wanting to be petted so I
thought I stood out enough for one time and let him he does it all wrong
too thinking only of his own pleasure his tongue is too flat or I dont
know what he forgets that wethen I dont Ill make him do it again if he
doesnt mind himself and lock him down to sleep in the coalcellar with the
blackbeetles I wonder was it her Josie off her head with my castoffs hes
such a born liar too no hed never have the courage with a married woman
thats why he wants me and Boylan though as for her Denis as she calls him
that forlornlooking spectacle you couldnt call him a husband yes its some
little bitch hes got in with even when I was with him with Milly at the
College races that Hornblower with the childs bonnet on the top of his
nob let us into by the back way he was throwing his sheeps eyes at those
two doing skirt duty up and down I tried to wink at him first no use of
course and thats the way his money goes this is the fruits of Mr Paddy
Dignam yes they were all in great style at the grand funeral in the paper
Boylan brought in if they saw a real officers funeral thatd be something
reversed arms muffled drums the poor horse walking behind in black L Boom
and Tom Kernan that drunken little barrelly man that bit his tongue off
falling down the mens W C drunk in some place or other and Martin
Cunningham and the two Dedaluses and Fanny MCoys husband white head of
cabbage skinny thing with a turn in her eye trying to sing my songs shed
want to be born all over again and her old green dress with the lowneck
as she cant attract them any other way like dabbling on a rainy day I see
it all now plainly and they call that friendship killing and then burying
one another and they all with their wives and families at home more
especially Jack Power keeping that barmaid he does of course his wife is
always sick or going to be sick or just getting better of it and hes a
goodlooking man still though hes getting a bit grey over the ears theyre
a nice lot all of them well theyre not going to get my husband again into
their clutches if I can help it making fun of him then behind his back I
know well when he goes on with his idiotics because he has sense enough
not to squander every penny piece he earns down their gullets and looks
after his wife and family goodfornothings poor Paddy Dignam all the same
Im sorry in a way for him what are his wife and 5 children going to do
unless he was insured comical little teetotum always stuck up in some pub
corner and her or her son waiting Bill Bailey wont you please come home
her widows weeds wont improve her appearance theyre awfully becoming
though if youre goodlooking what men wasnt he yes he was at the Glencree
dinner and Ben Dollard base barreltone the night he borrowed the
swallowtail to sing out of in Holles street squeezed and squashed into
them and grinning all over his big Dolly face like a wellwhipped childs
botty didnt he look a balmy ballocks sure enough that must have been a
spectacle on the stage imagine paying 5/- in the preserved seats for that
to see him trotting off in his trowlers and Simon Dedalus too he was
always turning up half screwed singing the second verse first the old
love is the new was one of his so sweetly sang the maiden on the hawthorn
bough he was always on for flirtyfying too when I sang Maritana with him
at Freddy Mayers private opera he had a delicious glorious voice Phoebe
dearest goodbye sweetheart SWEETheart he always sang it not like Bartell
Darcy sweet tart goodbye of course he had the gift of the voice so there
was no art in it all over you like a warm showerbath O Maritana wildwood
flower we sang splendidly though it was a bit too high for my register
even transposed and he was married at the time to May Goulding but then
hed say or do something to knock the good out of it hes a widower now I
wonder what sort is his son he says hes an author and going to be a
university professor of Italian and Im to take lessons what is he driving
at now showing him my photo its not good of me I ought to have got it
taken in drapery that never looks out of fashion still I look young in it
I wonder he didnt make him a present of it altogether and me too after
all why not I saw him driving down to the Kingsbridge station with his
father and mother I was in mourning thats 11 years ago now yes hed be 11
though what was the good in going into mourning for what was neither one
thing nor the other the first cry was enough for me I heard the
deathwatch too ticking in the wall of course he insisted hed go into
mourning for the cat I suppose hes a man now by this time he was an
innocent boy then and a darling little fellow in his lord Fauntleroy suit
and curly hair like a prince on the stage when I saw him at Mat Dillons
he liked me too I remember they all do wait by God yes wait yes hold on
he was on the cards this morning when I laid out the deck union with a
young stranger neither dark nor fair you met before I thought it meant
him but hes no chicken nor a stranger either besides my face was turned
the other way what was the 7th card after that the 10 of spades for a
journey by land then there was a letter on its way and scandals too the 3
queens and the 8 of diamonds for a rise in society yes wait it all came
out and 2 red 8s for new garments look at that and didnt I dream
something too yes there was something about poetry in it I hope he hasnt
long greasy hair hanging into his eyes or standing up like a red Indian
what do they go about like that for only getting themselves and their
poetry laughed at I always liked poetry when I was a girl first I thought
he was a poet like lord Byron and not an ounce of it in his composition I
thought he was quite different I wonder is he too young hes about wait 88
I was married 88 Milly is 15 yesterday 89 what age was he then at Dillons
5 or 6 about 88 I suppose hes 20 or more Im not too old for him if hes 23
or 24 I hope hes not that stuckup university student sort no otherwise he
wouldnt go sitting down in the old kitchen with him taking Eppss cocoa
and talking of course he pretended to understand it all probably he told
him he was out of Trinity college hes very young to be a professor I hope
hes not a professor like Goodwin was he was a potent professor of John
Jameson they all write about some woman in their poetry well I suppose he
wont find many like me where softly sighs of love the light guitar where
poetry is in the air the blue sea and the moon shining so beautifully
coming back on the nightboat from Tarifa the lighthouse at Europa point
the guitar that fellow played was so expressive will I ever go back there
again all new faces two glancing eyes a lattice hid Ill sing that for him
theyre my eyes if hes anything of a poet two eyes as darkly bright as
loves own star arent those beautiful words as loves young star itll be a
change the Lord knows to have an intelligent person to talk to about
yourself not always listening to him and Billy Prescotts ad and Keyess ad
and Tom the Devils ad then if anything goes wrong in their business we
have to suffer Im sure hes very distinguished Id like to meet a man like
that God not those other ruck besides hes young those fine young men I
could see down in Margate strand bathingplace from the side of the rock
standing up in the sun naked like a God or something and then plunging
into the sea with them why arent all men like that thered be some
consolation for a woman like that lovely little statue he bought I could
look at him all day long curly head and his shoulders his finger up for
you to listen theres real beauty and poetry for you I often felt I wanted
to kiss him all over also his lovely young cock there so simple I wouldnt
mind taking him in my mouth if nobody was looking as if it was asking you
to suck it so clean and white he looks with his boyish face I would too
in 1/2 a minute even if some of it went down what its only like gruel or
the dew theres no danger besides hed be so clean compared with those pigs
of men I suppose never dream of washing it from I years end to the other
the most of them only thats what gives the women the moustaches Im sure
itll be grand if I can only get in with a handsome young poet at my age
Ill throw them the 1st thing in the morning till I see if the wishcard
comes out or Ill try pairing the lady herself and see if he comes out Ill
read and study all I can find or learn a bit off by heart if I knew who
he likes so he wont think me stupid if he thinks all women are the same
and I can teach him the other part Ill make him feel all over him till he
half faints under me then hell write about me lover and mistress publicly
too with our 2 photographs in all the papers when he becomes famous O but
then what am I going to do about him though

no thats no way for him has he no manners nor no refinement nor no
nothing in his nature slapping us behind like that on my bottom because I
didnt call him Hugh the ignoramus that doesnt know poetry from a cabbage
thats what you get for not keeping them in their proper place pulling off
his shoes and trousers there on the chair before me so barefaced without
even asking permission and standing out that vulgar way in the half of a
shirt they wear to be admired like a priest or a butcher or those old
hypocrites in the time of Julius Caesar of course hes right enough in his
way to pass the time as a joke sure you might as well be in bed with what
with a lion God Im sure hed have something better to say for himself an
old Lion would O well I suppose its because they were so plump and
tempting in my short petticoat he couldnt resist they excite myself
sometimes its well for men all the amount of pleasure they get off a
womans body were so round and white for them always I wished I was one
myself for a change just to try with that thing they have swelling up on
you so hard and at the same time so soft when you touch it my uncle John
has a thing long I heard those cornerboys saying passing the comer of
Marrowbone lane my aunt Mary has a thing hairy because it was dark and
they knew a girl was passing it didnt make me blush why should it either
its only nature and he puts his thing long into my aunt Marys hairy
etcetera and turns out to be you put the handle in a sweepingbrush men
again all over they can pick and choose what they please a married woman
or a fast widow or a girl for their different tastes like those houses
round behind Irish street no but were to be always chained up theyre not
going to be chaining me up no damn fear once I start I tell you for their
stupid husbands jealousy why cant we all remain friends over it instead
of quarrelling her husband found it out what they did together well
naturally and if he did can he undo it hes coronado anyway whatever he
does and then he going to the other mad extreme about the wife in Fair
Tyrants of course the man never even casts a 2nd thought on the husband
or wife either its the woman he wants and he gets her what else were we
given all those desires for Id like to know I cant help it if Im young
still can I its a wonder Im not an old shrivelled hag before my time
living with him so cold never embracing me except sometimes when hes
asleep the wrong end of me not knowing I suppose who he has any man thatd
kiss a womans bottom Id throw my hat at him after that hed kiss anything
unnatural where we havent I atom of any kind of expression in us all of
us the same 2 lumps of lard before ever Id do that to a man pfooh the
dirty brutes the mere thought is enough I kiss the feet of you senorita
theres some sense in that didnt he kiss our halldoor yes he did what a
madman nobody understands his cracked ideas but me still of course a
woman wants to be embraced 20 times a day almost to make her look young
no matter by who so long as to be in love or loved by somebody if the
fellow you want isnt there sometimes by the Lord God I was thinking would
I go around by the quays there some dark evening where nobodyd know me
and pick up a sailor off the sea thatd be hot on for it and not care a
pin whose I was only do it off up in a gate somewhere or one of those
wildlooking gipsies in Rathfarnham had their camp pitched near the
Bloomfield laundry to try and steal our things if they could I only sent
mine there a few times for the name model laundry sending me back over
and over some old ones odd stockings that blackguardlooking fellow with
the fine eyes peeling a switch attack me in the dark and ride me up
against the wall without a word or a murderer anybody what they do
themselves the fine gentlemen in their silk hats that K C lives up
somewhere this way coming out of Hardwicke lane the night he gave us the
fish supper on account of winning over the boxing match of course it was
for me he gave it I knew him by his gaiters and the walk and when I
turned round a minute after just to see there was a woman after coming
out of it too some filthy prostitute then he goes home to his wife after
that only I suppose the half of those sailors are rotten again with
disease O move over your big carcass out of that for the love of Mike
listen to him the winds that waft my sighs to thee so well he may sleep
and sigh the great Suggester Don Poldo de la Flora if he knew how he came
out on the cards this morning hed have something to sigh for a dark man
in some perplexity between 2 7s too in prison for Lord knows what he does
that I dont know and Im to be slooching around down in the kitchen to get
his lordship his breakfast while hes rolled up like a mummy will I indeed
did you ever see me running Id just like to see myself at it show them
attention and they treat you like dirt I dont care what anybody says itd
be much better for the world to be governed by the women in it you
wouldnt see women going and killing one another and slaughtering when do
you ever see women rolling around drunk like they do or gambling every
penny they have and losing it on horses yes because a woman whatever she
does she knows where to stop sure they wouldnt be in the world at all
only for us they dont know what it is to be a woman and a mother how
could they where would they all of them be if they hadnt all a mother to
look after them what I never had thats why I suppose hes running wild now
out at night away from his books and studies and not living at home on
account of the usual rowy house I suppose well its a poor case that those
that have a fine son like that theyre not satisfied and I none was he not
able to make one it wasnt my fault we came together when I was watching
the two dogs up in her behind in the middle of the naked street that
disheartened me altogether I suppose I oughtnt to have buried him in that
little woolly jacket I knitted crying as I was but give it to some poor
child but I knew well Id never have another our 1st death too it was we
were never the same since O Im not going to think myself into the glooms
about that any more I wonder why he wouldnt stay the night I felt all the
time it was somebody strange he brought in instead of roving around the
city meeting God knows who nightwalkers and pickpockets his poor mother
wouldnt like that if she was alive ruining himself for life perhaps still
its a lovely hour so silent I used to love coming home after dances the
air of the night they have friends they can talk to weve none either he
wants what he wont get or its some woman ready to stick her knife in you
I hate that in women no wonder they treat us the way they do we are a
dreadful lot of bitches I suppose its all the troubles we have makes us
so snappy Im not like that he could easy have slept in there on the sofa
in the other room I suppose he was as shy as a boy he being so young
hardly 20 of me in the next room hed have heard me on the chamber arrah
what harm Dedalus I wonder its like those names in Gibraltar Delapaz
Delagracia they had the devils queer names there father Vilaplana of
Santa Maria that gave me the rosary Rosales y OReilly in the Calle las
Siete Revueltas and Pisimbo and Mrs Opisso in Governor street O what a
name Id go and drown myself in the first river if I had a name like her O
my and all the bits of streets Paradise ramp and Bedlam ramp and Rodgers
ramp and Crutchetts ramp and the devils gap steps well small blame to me
if I am a harumscarum I know I am a bit I declare to God I dont feel a
day older than then I wonder could I get my tongue round any of the
Spanish como esta usted muy bien gracias y usted see I havent forgotten
it all I thought I had only for the grammar a noun is the name of any
person place or thing pity I never tried to read that novel cantankerous
Mrs Rubio lent me by Valera with the questions in it all upside down the
two ways I always knew wed go away in the end I can tell him the Spanish
and he tell me the Italian then hell see Im not so ignorant what a pity
he didnt stay Im sure the poor fellow was dead tired and wanted a good
sleep badly I could have brought him in his breakfast in bed with a bit
of toast so long as I didnt do it on the knife for bad luck or if the
woman was going her rounds with the watercress and something nice and
tasty there are a few olives in the kitchen he might like I never could
bear the look of them in Abrines I could do the criada the room looks all
right since I changed it the other way you see something was telling me
all the time Id have to introduce myself not knowing me from Adam very
funny wouldnt it Im his wife or pretend we were in Spain with him half
awake without a Gods notion where he is dos huevos estrellados senor Lord
the cracked things come into my head sometimes itd be great fun supposing
he stayed with us why not theres the room upstairs empty and Millys bed
in the back room he could do his writing and studies at the table in
there for all the scribbling he does at it and if he wants to read in bed
in the morning like me as hes making the breakfast for I he can make it
for 2 Im sure Im not going to take in lodgers off the street for him if
he takes a gesabo of a house like this Id love to have a long talk with
an intelligent welleducated person Id have to get a nice pair of red
slippers like those Turks with the fez used to sell or yellow and a nice
semitransparent morning gown that I badly want or a peachblossom dressing
jacket like the one long ago in Walpoles only 8/6 or 18/6 Ill just give
him one more chance Ill get up early in the morning Im sick of Cohens old
bed in any case I might go over to the markets to see all the vegetables
and cabbages and tomatoes and carrots and all kinds of splendid fruits
all coming in lovely and fresh who knows whod be the 1st man Id meet
theyre out looking for it in the morning Mamy Dillon used to say they are
and the night too that was her massgoing Id love a big juicy pear now to
melt in your mouth like when I used to be in the longing way then Ill
throw him up his eggs and tea in the moustachecup she gave him to make
his mouth bigger I suppose hed like my nice cream too I know what Ill do
Ill go about rather gay not too much singing a bit now and then mi fa
pieta Masetto then Ill start dressing myself to go out presto non son piu
forte Ill put on my best shift and drawers let him have a good eyeful out
of that to make his micky stand for him Ill let him know if thats what he
wanted that his wife is I s l o fucked yes and damn well fucked too up to
my neck nearly not by him 5 or 6 times handrunning theres the mark of his
spunk on the clean sheet I wouldnt bother to even iron it out that ought
to satisfy him if you dont believe me feel my belly unless I made him
stand there and put him into me Ive a mind to tell him every scrap and
make him do it out in front of me serve him right its all his own fault
if I am an adulteress as the thing in the gallery said O much about it if
thats all the harm ever we did in this vale of tears God knows its not
much doesnt everybody only they hide it I suppose thats what a woman is
supposed to be there for or He wouldnt have made us the way He did so
attractive to men then if he wants to kiss my bottom Ill drag open my
drawers and bulge it right out in his face as large as life he can stick
his tongue 7 miles up my hole as hes there my brown part then Ill tell
him I want LI or perhaps 30/- Ill tell him I want to buy underclothes
then if he gives me that well he wont be too bad I dont want to soak it
all out of him like other women do I could often have written out a fine
cheque for myself and write his name on it for a couple of pounds a few
times he forgot to lock it up besides he wont spend it Ill let him do it
off on me behind provided he doesnt smear all my good drawers O I suppose
that cant be helped Ill do the indifferent l or 2 questions Ill know by
the answers when hes like that he cant keep a thing back I know every
turn in him Ill tighten my bottom well and let out a few smutty words
smellrump or lick my shit or the first mad thing comes into my head then
Ill suggest about yes O wait now sonny my turn is coming Ill be quite gay
and friendly over it O but I was forgetting this bloody pest of a thing
pfooh you wouldnt know which to laugh or cry were such a mixture of plum
and apple no Ill have to wear the old things so much the better itll be
more pointed hell never know whether he did it or not there thats good
enough for you any old thing at all then Ill wipe him off me just like a
business his omission then Ill go out Ill have him eying up at the
ceiling where is she gone now make him want me thats the only way a
quarter after what an unearthly hour I suppose theyre just getting up in
China now combing out their pigtails for the day well soon have the nuns
ringing the angelus theyve nobody coming in to spoil their sleep except
an odd priest or two for his night office or the alarmclock next door at
cockshout clattering the brains out of itself let me see if I can doze
off 1 2 3 4 5 what kind of flowers are those they invented like the stars
the wallpaper in Lombard street was much nicer the apron he gave me was
like that something only I only wore it twice better lower this lamp and
try again so as I can get up early Ill go to Lambes there beside
Findlaters and get them to send us some flowers to put about the place in
case he brings him home tomorrow today I mean no no Fridays an unlucky
day first I want to do the place up someway the dust grows in it I think
while Im asleep then we can have music and cigarettes I can accompany him
first I must clean the keys of the piano with milk whatll I wear shall I
wear a white rose or those fairy cakes in Liptons I love the smell of a
rich big shop at 7 1/2d a lb or the other ones with the cherries in them
and the pinky sugar 11d a couple of lbs of those a nice plant for the
middle of the table Id get that cheaper in wait wheres this I saw them
not long ago I love flowers Id love to have the whole place swimming in
roses God of heaven theres nothing like nature the wild mountains then
the sea and the waves rushing then the beautiful country with the fields
of oats and wheat and all kinds of things and all the fine cattle going
about that would do your heart good to see rivers and lakes and flowers
all sorts of shapes and smells and colours springing up even out of the
ditches primroses and violets nature it is as for them saying theres no
God I wouldnt give a snap of my two fingers for all their learning why
dont they go and create something I often asked him atheists or whatever
they call themselves go and wash the cobbles off themselves first then
they go howling for the priest and they dying and why why because theyre
afraid of hell on account of their bad conscience ah yes I know them well
who was the first person in the universe before there was anybody that
made it all who ah that they dont know neither do I so there you are they
might as well try to stop the sun from rising tomorrow the sun shines for
you he said the day we were lying among the rhododendrons on Howth head
in the grey tweed suit and his straw hat the day I got him to propose to
me yes first I gave him the bit of seedcake out of my mouth and it was
leapyear like now yes 16 years ago my God after that long kiss I near
lost my breath yes he said I was a flower of the mountain yes so we are
flowers all a womans body yes that was one true thing he said in his life
and the sun shines for you today yes that was why I liked him because I
saw he understood or felt what a woman is and I knew I could always get
round him and I gave him all the pleasure I could leading him on till he
asked me to say yes and I wouldnt answer first only looked out over the
sea and the sky I was thinking of so many things he didnt know of Mulvey
and Mr Stanhope and Hester and father and old captain Groves and the
sailors playing all birds fly and I say stoop and washing up dishes they
called it on the pier and the sentry in front of the governors house with
the thing round his white helmet poor devil half roasted and the Spanish
girls laughing in their shawls and their tall combs and the auctions in
the morning the Greeks and the jews and the Arabs and the devil knows who
else from all the ends of Europe and Duke street and the fowl market all
clucking outside Larby Sharons and the poor donkeys slipping half asleep
and the vague fellows in the cloaks asleep in the shade on the steps and
the big wheels of the carts of the bulls and the old castle thousands of
years old yes and those handsome Moors all in white and turbans like
kings asking you to sit down in their little bit of a shop and Ronda with
the old windows of the posadas 2 glancing eyes a lattice hid for her
lover to kiss the iron and the wineshops half open at night and the
castanets and the night we missed the boat at Algeciras the watchman
going about serene with his lamp and O that awful deepdown torrent O and
the sea the sea crimson sometimes like fire and the glorious sunsets and
the figtrees in the Alameda gardens yes and all the queer little streets
and the pink and blue and yellow houses and the rosegardens and the
jessamine and geraniums and cactuses and Gibraltar as a girl where I was
a Flower of the mountain yes when I put the rose in my hair like the
Andalusian girls used or shall I wear a red yes and how he kissed me
under the Moorish wall and I thought well as well him as another and then
I asked him with my eyes to ask again yes and then he asked me would I
yes to say yes my mountain flower and first I put my arms around him yes
and drew him down to me so he could feel my breasts all perfume yes and
his heart was going like mad and yes I said yes I will Yes.



Trieste-Zurich-Paris
1914-1921







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ulysses, by James Joyce






This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1864 Chapman & Hall "Tales of all Countries" edition.





AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE AT THE PYRAMIDS

by Anthony Trollope




In the happy days when we were young, no description conveyed to us so
complete an idea of mysterious reality as that of an Oriental city.  We
knew it was actually there, but had such vague notions of its ways and
looks!  Let any one remember his early impressions as to Bagdad or
Grand Cairo, and then say if this was not so.  It was probably taken
from the "Arabian Nights," and the picture produced was one of strange,
fantastic, luxurious houses; of women who were either very young and
very beautiful, or else very old and very cunning; but in either state
exercising much more influence in life than women in the East do now;
of good-natured, capricious, though sometimes tyrannical monarchs; and
of life full of quaint mysteries, quite unintelligible in every phasis,
and on that account the more picturesque.

And perhaps Grand Cairo has thus filled us with more wonder even than
Bagdad.  We have been in a certain manner at home at Bagdad, but have
only visited Grand Cairo occasionally.  I know no place which was to
me, in early years, so delightfully mysterious as Grand Cairo.

But the route to India and Australia has changed all this.  Men from
all countries going to the East, now pass through Cairo, and its
streets and costumes are no longer strange to us.  It has become also a
resort for invalids, or rather for those who fear that they may become
invalids if they remain in a cold climate during the winter months.
And thus at Cairo there is always to be found a considerable population
of French, Americans, and of English.  Oriental life is brought home to
us, dreadfully diluted by western customs, and the delights of the
"Arabian Nights" are shorn of half their value.  When we have seen a
thing it is never so magnificent to us as when it was half unknown.

It is not much that we deign to learn from these Orientals,--we who
glory in our civilisation.  We do not copy their silence or their
abstemiousness, nor that invariable mindfulness of his own personal
dignity which always adheres to a Turk or to an Arab.  We chatter as
much at Cairo as elsewhere, and eat as much and drink as much, and
dress ourselves generally in the same old ugly costume.  But we do
usually take upon ourselves to wear red caps, and we do ride on
donkeys.

Nor are the visitors from the West to Cairo by any means confined to
the male sex.  Ladies are to be seen in the streets quite regardless of
the Mahommedan custom which presumes a veil to be necessary for an
appearance in public; and, to tell the truth, the Mahommedans in
general do not appear to be much shocked by their effrontery.

A quarter of the town has in this way become inhabited by men wearing
coats and waistcoats, and by women who are without veils; but the
English tongue in Egypt finds its centre at Shepheard's Hotel.  It is
here that people congregate who are looking out for parties to visit
with them the Upper Nile, and who are generally all smiles and
courtesy; and here also are to be found they who have just returned
from this journey, and who are often in a frame of mind towards their
companions that is much less amiable.  From hence, during the winter, a
cortege proceeds almost daily to the pyramids, or to Memphis, or to the
petrified forest, or to the City of the Sun.  And then, again, four or
five times a month the house is filled with young aspirants going out
to India, male and female, full of valour and bloom; or with others
coming home, no longer young, no longer aspiring, but laden with
children and grievances.

The party with whom we are at present concerned is not about to proceed
further than the Pyramids, and we shall be able to go with them and
return in one and the same day.

It consisted chiefly of an English family, Mr. and Mrs. Damer, their
daughter, and two young sons;--of these chiefly, because they were the
nucleus to which the others had attached themselves as adherents; they
had originated the journey, and in the whole management of it Mr. Damer
retarded himself as the master.

The adherents were, firstly, M. Delabordeau, a Frenchman, now resident
in Cairo, who had given out that he was in some way concerned in the
canal about to be made between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.  In
discussion on this subject he had become acquainted with Mr. Damer; and
although the latter gentleman, true to English interests, perpetually
declared that the canal would never be made, and thus irritated M.
Delabordeau not a little--nevertheless, some measure of friendship had
grown up between them.

There was also an American gentleman, Mr. Jefferson Ingram, who was
comprising all countries and all nations in one grand tour, as American
gentlemen so often do.  He was young and good-looking, and had made
himself especially agreeable to Mr. Damer, who had declared, more than
once, that Mr. Ingram was by far the most rational American he had ever
met.  Mr. Ingram would listen to Mr. Damer by the half-hour as to the
virtue of the British Constitution, and had even sat by almost with
patience when Mr. Damer had expressed a doubt as to the good working of
the United States' scheme of policy,--which, in an American, was most
wonderful.  But some of the sojourners at Shepheard's had observed that
Mr. Ingram was in the habit of talking with Miss Damer almost as much
as with her father, and argued from that, that fond as the young man
was of politics, he did sometimes turn his mind to other things also.

And then there was Miss Dawkins.  Now Miss Dawkins was an important
person, both as to herself and as to her line of life, and she must be
described.  She was, in the first place, an unprotected female of about
thirty years of age.  As this is becoming an established profession,
setting itself up as it were in opposition to the old world idea that
women, like green peas, cannot come to perfection without supporting-
sticks, it will be understood at once what were Miss Dawkins's
sentiments.  She considered--or at any rate so expressed herself--that
peas could grow very well without sticks, and could not only grow thus
unsupported, but could also make their way about the world without any
incumbrance of sticks whatsoever.  She did not intend, she said, to
rival Ida Pfeiffer, seeing that she was attached in a moderate way to
bed and board, and was attached to society in a manner almost more than
moderate; but she had no idea of being prevented from seeing anything
she wished to see because she had neither father, nor husband, nor
brother available for the purpose of escort.  She was a human creature,
with arms and legs, she said; and she intended to use them.  And this
was all very well; but nevertheless she had a strong inclination to use
the arms and legs of other people when she could make them serviceable.

In person Miss Dawkins was not without attraction.  I should exaggerate
if I were to say that she was beautiful and elegant; but she was good
looking, and not usually ill mannered.  She was tall, and gifted with
features rather sharp and with eyes very bright.  Her hair was of the
darkest shade of brown, and was always worn in bandeaux, very neatly.
She appeared generally in black, though other circumstances did not
lead one to suppose that she was in mourning; and then, no other
travelling costume is so convenient!  She always wore a dark broad-
brimmed straw hat, as to the ribbons on which she was rather
particular.  She was very neat about her gloves and boots; and though
it cannot be said that her dress was got up without reference to
expense, there can be no doubt that it was not effected without
considerable outlay,--and more considerable thought.

Miss Dawkins--Sabrina Dawkins was her name, but she seldom had friends
about her intimate enough to use the word Sabrina--was certainly a
clever young woman.  She could talk on most subjects, if not well, at
least well enough to amuse.  If she had not read much, she never showed
any lamentable deficiency; she was good-humoured, as a rule, and could
on occasions be very soft and winning.  People who had known her long
would sometimes say that she was selfish; but with new acquaintance she
was forbearing and self-denying.

With what income Miss Dawkins was blessed no one seemed to know.  She
lived like a gentlewoman, as far as outward appearance went, and never
seemed to be in want; but some people would say that she knew very well
how many sides there were to a shilling, and some enemy had once
declared that she was an "old soldier."  Such was Miss Dawkins.

She also, as well as Mr. Ingram and M. Delabordeau, had laid herself
out to find the weak side of Mr. Damer.  Mr. Damer, with all his
family, was going up the Nile, and it was known that he had room for
two in his boat over and above his own family.  Miss Dawkins had told
him that she had not quite made up her mind to undergo so great a
fatigue, but that, nevertheless, she had a longing of the soul to see
something of Nubia.  To this Mr. Damer had answered nothing but "Oh!"
which Miss Dawkins had not found to be encouraging.

But she had not on that account despaired.  To a married man there are
always two sides, and in this instance there was Mrs. Damer as well as
Mr. Damer.  When Mr. Damer said "Oh!" Miss Dawkins sighed, and said,
"Yes, indeed!" then smiled, and betook herself to Mrs. Damer.

Now Mrs. Damer was soft-hearted, and also somewhat old-fashioned.  She
did not conceive any violent affection for Miss Dawkins, but she told
her daughter that "the single lady by herself was a very nice young
woman, and that it was a thousand pities she should have to go about so
much alone like."

Miss Damer had turned up her pretty nose, thinking, perhaps, how small
was the chance that it ever should be her own lot to be an unprotected
female.  But Miss Dawkins carried her point at any rate as regarded the
expedition to the Pyramids.

Miss Damer, I have said, had a pretty nose.  I may also say that she
had pretty eyes, mouth, and chin, with other necessary appendages, all
pretty.  As to the two Master Damers, who were respectively of the ages
of fifteen and sixteen, it may be sufficient to say that they were
conspicuous for red caps and for the constancy with which they raced
their donkeys.

And now the donkeys, and the donkey boys, and the dragomans were all
standing at the steps of Shepheard's Hotel.  To each donkey there was a
donkey-boy, and to each gentleman there was a dragoman, so that a
goodly cortege was assembled, and a goodly noise was made.  It may here
be remarked, perhaps with some little pride, that not half the noise is
given in Egypt to persons speaking any other language that is bestowed
on those whose vocabulary is English.

This lasted for half an hour.  Had the party been French the donkeys
would have arrived only fifteen minutes before the appointed time.  And
then out came Damer pere and Damer mere, Damer fille, and Damer fils.
Damer mere was leaning on her husband, as was her wont.  She was not an
unprotected female, and had no desire to make any attempts in that
line.  Damer fille was attended sedulously by Mr. Ingram, for whose
demolishment, however, Mr. Damer still brought up, in a loud voice, the
fag ends of certain political arguments which he would fain have poured
direct into the ears of his opponent, had not his wife been so
persistent in claiming her privileges.  M. Delabordeau should have
followed with Miss Dawkins, but his French politeness, or else his fear
of the unprotected female, taught him to walk on the other side of the
mistress of the party.

Miss Dawkins left the house with an eager young Damer yelling on each
side of her; but nevertheless, though thus neglected by the gentlemen
of the party, she was all smiles and prettiness, and looked so sweetly
on Mr. Ingram when that gentleman stayed a moment to help her on to her
donkey, that his heart almost misgave him for leaving her as soon as
she was in her seat.

And then they were off.  In going from the hotel to the Pyramids our
party had not to pass through any of the queer old narrow streets of
the true Cairo--Cairo the Oriental.  They all lay behind them as they
went down by the back of the hotel, by the barracks of the Pasha and
the College of the Dervishes, to the village of old Cairo and the banks
of the Nile.

Here they were kept half an hour while their dragomans made a bargain
with the ferryman, a stately reis, or captain of a boat, who declared
with much dignity that he could not carry them over for a sum less than
six times the amount to which he was justly entitled; while the
dragomans, with great energy on behalf of their masters, offered him
only five times that sum.

As far as the reis was concerned, the contest might soon have been at
an end, for the man was not without a conscience; and would have been
content with five times and a half; but then the three dragomans
quarrelled among themselves as to which should have the paying of the
money, and the affair became very tedious.

"What horrid, odious men!" said Miss Dawkins, appealing to Mr. Damer.
"Do you think they will let us go over at all?"

"Well, I suppose they will; people do get over generally, I believe.
Abdallah!  Abdallah! why don't you pay the man?  That fellow is always
striving to save half a piastre for me."

"I wish he wasn't quite so particular," said Mrs. Damer, who was
already becoming rather tired; "but I'm sure he's a very honest man in
trying to protect us from being robbed."

"That he is," said Miss Dawkins.  "What a delightful trait of national
character it is to see these men so faithful to their employers."  And
then at last they got over the ferry, Mr. Ingram having descended among
the combatants, and settled the matter in dispute by threats and
shouts, and an uplifted stick.

They crossed the broad Nile exactly at the spot where the nilometer, or
river guage, measures from day to day, and from year to year, the
increasing or decreasing treasures of the stream, and landed at a
village where thousands of eggs are made into chickens by the process
of artificial incubation.

Mrs. Damer thought that it was very hard upon the maternal hens--the
hens which should have been maternal--that they should be thus robbed
of the delights of motherhood.

"So unnatural, you know," said Miss Dawkins; "so opposed to the
fostering principles of creation.  Don't you think so, Mr. Ingram?"

Mr. Ingram said he didn't know.  He was again seating Miss Damer on her
donkey, and it must be presumed that he performed this feat clumsily;
for Fanny Damer could jump on and off the animal with hardly a finger
to help her, when her brother or her father was her escort; but now,
under the hands of Mr. Ingram, this work of mounting was one which
required considerable time and care.  All which Miss Dawkins observed
with precision.

"It's all very well talking," said Mr. Damer, bringing up his donkey
nearly alongside that of Mr. Ingram, and ignoring his daughter's
presence, just as he would have done that of his dog; "but you must
admit that political power is more equally distributed in England than
it is in America."

"Perhaps it is," said Mr. Ingram; "equally distributed among, we will
say, three dozen families," and he made a feint as though to hold in
his impetuous donkey, using the spur, however, at the same time on the
side that was unseen by Mr. Damer.  As he did so, Fanny's donkey became
equally impetuous, and the two cantered on in advance of the whole
party.  It was quite in vain that Mr. Damer, at the top of his voice,
shouted out something about "three dozen corruptible demagogues."  Mr.
Ingram found it quite impossible to restrain his donkey so as to listen
to the sarcasm.

"I do believe papa would talk politics," said Fanny, "if he were at the
top of Mont Blanc, or under the Falls of Niagara.  I do hate politics,
Mr. Ingram."

"I am sorry for that, very," said Mr. Ingram, almost sadly.

"Sorry, why?  You don't want me to talk politics, do you?"

"In America we are all politicians, more or less; and, therefore, I
suppose you will hate us all."

"Well, I rather think I should," said Fanny; "you would be such bores."
But there was something in her eye, as she spoke, which atoned for the
harshness of her words.

"A very nice young man is Mr. Ingram; don't you think so?" said Miss
Dawkins to Mrs. Damer.  Mrs. Damer was going along upon her donkey, not
altogether comfortably.  She much wished to have her lord and
legitimate protector by her side, but he had left her to the care of a
dragoman whose English was not intelligible to her, and she was rather
cross.

"Indeed, Miss Dawkins, I don't know who are nice and who are not.  This
nasty donkey stumbles at ever step.  There!  I know I shall be down
directly."

"You need not be at all afraid of that; they are perfectly safe, I
believe, always," said Miss Dawkins, rising in her stirrup, and
handling her reins quite triumphantly.  "A very little practice will
make you quite at home."

"I don't know what you mean by a very little practice.  I have been
here six weeks.  Why did you put me on such a bad donkey as this?" and
she turned to Abdallah, the dragoman.

"Him berry good donkey, my lady; berry good,--best of all.  Call him
Jack in Cairo.  Him go to Pyramid and back, and mind noting."

"What does he say, Miss Dawkins?"

"He says that that donkey is one called Jack.  If so I've had him
myself many times, and Jack is a very good donkey."

"I wish you had him now with all my heart," said Mrs. Damer.  Upon
which Miss Dawkins offered to change; but those perils of mounting and
dismounting were to Mrs. Damer a great deal too severe to admit of
this.

"Seven miles of canal to be carried out into the sea, at a minimum
depth of twenty-three feet, and the stone to be fetched from Heaven
knows where!  All the money in France wouldn't do it."  This was
addressed by Mr. Damer to M. Delabordeau, whom he had caught after the
abrupt flight of Mr. Ingram.

"Den we will borrow a leetle from England," said M. Delabordeau.

"Precious little, I can tell you.  Such stock would not hold its price
in our markets for twenty-four hours.  If it were made, the freights
would be too heavy to allow of merchandise passing through.  The heavy
goods would all go round; and as for passengers and mails, you don't
expect to get them, I suppose, while there is a railroad ready made to
their hand?"

"Ye vill carry all your ships through vidout any transportation.  Think
of that, my friend."

"Pshaw!  You are worse than Ingram.  Of all the plans I ever heard of
it is the most monstrous, the most impracticable, the most--"  But here
he was interrupted by the entreaties of his wife, who had, in absolute
deed and fact, slipped from her donkey, and was now calling lustily for
her husband's aid.  Whereupon Miss Dawkins allied herself to the
Frenchman, and listened with an air of strong conviction to those
arguments which were so weak in the ears of Mr. Damer.  M. Delabordeau
was about to ride across the Great Desert to Jerusalem, and it might
perhaps be quite as well to do that with him, as to go up the Nile as
far as the second cataract with the Damers.

"And so, M. Delabordeau, you intend really to start for Mount Sinai?"

"Yes, mees; ve intend to make one start on Monday week."

"And so on to Jerusalem.  You are quite right.  It would be a thousand
pities to be in these countries, and to return without going over such
ground as that.  I shall certainly go to Jerusalem myself by that
route."

"Vot, mees! you?  Would you not find it too much fatigante?"

"I care nothing for fatigue, if I like the party I am with,--nothing at
all, literally.  You will hardly understand me, perhaps, M.
Delabordeau; but I do not see any reason why I, as a young woman,
should not make any journey that is practicable for a young man."

"Ah! dat is great resolution for you, mees."

"I mean as far as fatigue is concerned.  You are a Frenchman, and
belong to the nation that is at the head of all human civilisation--"

M. Delabordeau took off his hat and bowed low, to the peak of his
donkey saddle.  He dearly loved to hear his country praised, as Miss
Dawkins was aware.

"And I am sure you must agree with me," continued Miss Dawkins, "that
the time is gone by for women to consider themselves helpless animals,
or to be so considered by others."

"Mees Dawkins vould never be considered, not in any times at all, to be
one helpless animal," said M. Delabordeau civilly.

"I do not, at any rate, intend to be so regarded," said she.  "It suits
me to travel alone; not that I am averse to society; quite the
contrary; if I meet pleasant people I am always ready to join them.
But it suits me to travel without any permanent party, and I do not see
why false shame should prevent my seeing the world as thoroughly as
though I belonged to the other sex.  Why should it, M. Delabordeau?"

M. Delabordeau declared that he did not see any reason why it should.

"I am passionately anxious to stand upon Mount Sinai," continued Miss
Dawkins; "to press with my feet the earliest spot in sacred history, of
the identity of which we are certain; to feel within me the awe-
inspiring thrill of that thrice sacred hour!"

The Frenchman looked as though he did not quite understand her, but he
said that it would be magnifique.

"You have already made up your party I suppose, M. Delabordeau?"

M. Delabordeau gave the names of two Frenchmen and one Englishman who
were going with him.

"Upon my word it is a great temptation to join you," said Miss Dawkins,
"only for that horrid Englishman."

"Vat, Mr. Stanley?"

"Oh, I don't mean any disrespect to Mr. Stanley.  The horridness I
speak of does not attach to him personally, but to his stiff,
respectable, ungainly, well-behaved, irrational, and uncivilised
country.  You see I am not very patriotic."

"Not quite so much as my friend, Mr. Damer."

"Ha! ha! ha! an excellent creature, isn't he?  And so they all are,
dear creatures.  But then they are so backward.  They are most anxious
that I should join them up the Nile, but--," and then Miss Dawkins
shrugged her shoulders gracefully, and, as she flattered herself, like
a Frenchwoman.  After that they rode on in silence for a few moments.

"Yes, I must see Mount Sinai," said Miss Dawkins, and then sighed
deeply.  M. Delabordeau, notwithstanding that his country does stand at
the head of all human civilisation, was not courteous enough to declare
that if Miss Dawkins would join his party across the desert, nothing
would be wanting to make his beatitude in this world perfect.

Their road from the village of the chicken-batching ovens lay up along
the left bank of the Nile, through an immense grove of lofty palm-
trees, looking out from among which our visitors could ever and anon
see the heads of the two great Pyramids;--that is, such of them could
see it as felt any solicitude in the matter.

It is astonishing how such things lose their great charm as men find
themselves in their close neighbourhood.  To one living in New York or
London, how ecstatic is the interest inspired by these huge structures.
One feels that no price would be too high to pay for seeing them as
long as time and distance, and the world's inexorable task-work, forbid
such a visit.  How intense would be the delight of climbing over the
wondrous handiwork of those wondrous architects so long since dead; how
thrilling the awe with which one would penetrate down into their
interior caves--those caves in which lay buried the bones of ancient
kings, whose very names seem to have come to us almost from another
world!

But all these feelings become strangely dim, their acute edges
wonderfully worn, as the subjects which inspired them are brought near
to us.  "Ah! so those are the Pyramids, are they?" says the traveller,
when the first glimpse of them is shown to him from the window of a
railway carriage.  "Dear me; they don't look so very high, do they?
For Heaven's sake put the blind down, or we shall be destroyed by the
dust."  And then the ecstasy and keen delight of the Pyramids has
vanished for ever.

Our friends, therefore, who for weeks past had seen from a distance,
though they had not yet visited them, did not seem to have any strong
feeling on the subject as they trotted through the grove of palm-trees.
Mr. Damer had not yet escaped from his wife, who was still fretful from
the result of her little accident.

"It was all the chattering of that Miss Dawkins," said Mrs. Damer.
"She would not let me attend to what I was doing."

"Miss Dawkins is an ass," said her husband.

"It is a pity she has no one to look after her," said Mrs. Damer.  M.
Delabordeau was still listening to Miss Dawkins's raptures about Mount
Sinai.  "I wonder whether she has got any money," said M. Delabordeau
to himself.  "It can't be much," he went on thinking, "or she would not
be left in this way by herself."  And the result of his thoughts was
that Miss Dawkins, if undertaken, might probably become more plague
than profit.  As to Miss Dawkins herself, though she was ecstatic about
Mount Sinai--which was not present--she seemed to have forgotten the
poor Pyramids, which were then before her nose.

The two lads were riding races along the dusty path, much to the
disgust of their donkey-boys.  Their time for enjoyment was to come.
There were hampers to be opened; and then the absolute climbing of the
Pyramids would actually be a delight to them.

As for Miss Damer and Mr. Ingram, it was clear that they had forgotten
palm-trees, Pyramids, the Nile, and all Egypt.  They had escaped to a
much fairer paradise.

"Could I bear to live among Republicans?" said Fanny, repeating the
last words of her American lover, and looking down from her donkey to
the ground as she did so.  "I hardly know what Republicans are, Mr.
Ingram."

"Let me teach you," said he.

"You do talk such nonsense.  I declare there is that Miss Dawkins
looking at us as though she had twenty eyes.  Could you not teach her,
Mr. Ingram?"

And so they emerged from the palm-tree grove, through a village crowded
with dirty, straggling Arab children, on to the cultivated plain,
beyond which the Pyramids stood, now full before them; the two large
Pyramids, a smaller one, and the huge sphynx's head all in a group
together.

"Fanny," said Bob Damer, riding up to her, "mamma wants you; so toddle
back."

"Mamma wants me!  What can she want me for now?" said Fanny, with a
look of anything but filial duty in her face.

"To protect her from Miss Dawkins, I think.  She wants you to ride at
her side, so that Dawkins mayn't get at her.  Now, Mr. Ingram, I'll bet
you hall-a-crown I'm at the top of the big Pyramid before you."

Poor Fanny!  She obeyed, however; doubtless feeling that it would not
do as yet to show too plainly that she preferred Mr. Ingram to her
mother.  She arrested her donkey, therefore, till Mrs. Damer overtook
her; and Mr. Ingram, as he paused for a moment with her while she did
so, fell into the hands of Miss Dawkins.

"I cannot think, Fanny, how you get on so quick," said Mrs. Damer.
"I'm always last; but then my donkey is such a very nasty one.  Look
there, now; he's always trying to get me off."

"We shall soon be at the Pyramids now, mamma."

"How on earth I am ever to get back again I cannot think.  I am so
tired now that I can hardly sit."

"You'll be better, mamma, when you get your luncheon and a glass of
wine."

"How on earth we are to eat and drink with those nasty Arab people
around us, I can't conceive.  They tell me we shall be eaten up by
them.  But, Fanny, what has Mr. Ingram been saying to you all the day?"

"What has he been saying, mamma?  Oh!  I don't know;--a hundred things,
I dare say.  But he has not been talking to me all the time."

"I think he has, Fanny, nearly, since we crossed the river.  Oh, dear!
oh, dear! this animal does hurt me so!  Every time he moves he flings
his head about, and that gives me such a bump."  And then Fanny
commiserated her mother's sufferings, and in her commiseration
contrived to elude any further questionings as to Mr. Ingram's
conversation.

"Majestic piles, are they not?" said Miss Dawkins, who, having changed
her companion, allowed her mind to revert from Mount Sinai to the
Pyramids.  They were now riding through cultivated ground, with the
vast extent of the sands of Libya before them.  The two Pyramids were
standing on the margin of the sand, with the head of the recumbent
sphynx plainly visible between them.  But no idea can be formed of the
size of this immense figure till it is visited much more closely.  The
body is covered with sand, and the head and neck alone stand above the
surface of the ground.  They were still two miles distant, and the
sphynx as yet was but an obscure mount between the two vast Pyramids.

"Immense piles!" said Miss Dawkins, repeating her own words.

"Yes, they are large," said Mr. Ingram, who did not choose to indulge
in enthusiasm in the presence of Miss Dawkins.

"Enormous!  What a grand idea!--eh, Mr. Ingram?  The human race does
not create such things as those nowadays!"

"No, indeed," he answered; "but perhaps we create better things."

"Better!  You do not mean to say, Mr. Ingram, that you are an
utilitarian.  I do, in truth, hope better things of you than that.
Yes! steam mills are better, no doubt, and mechanics' institutes and
penny newspapers.  But is nothing to be valued but what is useful?"
And Miss Dawkins, in the height of her enthusiasm, switched her donkey
severely over the shoulder.

"I might, perhaps, have said also that we create more beautiful
things," said Mr. Ingram.

"But we cannot create older things."

"No, certainly; we cannot do that."

"Nor can we imbue what we do create with the grand associations which
environ those piles with so intense an interest.  Think of the mighty
dead, Mr. Ingram, and of their great homes when living.  Think of the
hands which it took to raise those huge blocks--"

"And of the lives which it cost."

"Doubtless.  The tyranny and invincible power of the royal architects
add to the grandeur of the idea.  One would not wish to have back the
kings of Egypt."

"Well, no; they would be neither useful nor beautiful."

"Perhaps not; and I do not wish to be picturesque at the expense of my
fellow-creatures."

"I doubt, even, whether they would be picturesque."

"You know what I mean, Mr. Ingram.  But the associations of such names,
and the presence of the stupendous works with which they are connected,
fill the soul with awe.  Such, at least, is the effect with mine."

"I fear that my tendencies, Miss Dawkins, are more realistic than your
own."

"You belong to a young country, Mr. Ingram, and are naturally prone to
think of material life.  The necessity of living looms large before
you."

"Very large, indeed, Miss Dawkins."

"Whereas with us, with some of us at least, the material aspect has
given place to one in which poetry and enthusiasm prevail.  To such
among us the associations of past times are very dear.  Cheops, to me,
is more than Napoleon Bonaparte."

"That is more than most of your countrymen can say, at any rate, just
at present."

"I am a woman," continued Miss Dawkins.

Mr. Ingram took off his hat in acknowledgment both of the announcement
and of the fact.

"And to us it is not given--not given as yet--to share in the great
deeds of the present.  The envy of your sex has driven us from the
paths which lead to honour.  But the deeds of the past are as much ours
as yours."

"Oh, quite as much."

"'Tis to your country that we look for enfranchisement from this
thraldom.  Yes, Mr. Ingram, the women of America have that strength of
mind which has been wanting to those of Europe.  In the United States
woman will at last learn to exercise her proper mission."

Mr. Ingram expressed a sincere wish that such might be the case; and
then wondering at the ingenuity with which Miss Dawkins had travelled
round from Cheops and his Pyramid to the rights of women in America, he
contrived to fall back, under the pretence of asking after the ailments
of Mrs. Damer.

And now at last they were on the sand, in the absolute desert, making
their way up to the very foot of the most northern of the two Pyramids.
They were by this time surrounded by a crowd of Arab guides, or Arabs
professing to be guides, who had already ascertained that Mr. Damer was
the chief of the party, and were accordingly driving him almost to
madness by the offers of their services, and their assurance that he
could not possibly see the outside or the inside of either structure,
or even remain alive upon the ground, unless he at once accepted their
offers made at their own prices.

"Get away, will you?" said he.  "I don't want any of you, and I won't
have you!  If you take hold of me I'll shoot you!"  This was said to
one specially energetic Arab, who, in his efforts to secure his prey,
had caught hold of Mr. Damer by the leg.

"Yes, yes, I say!  Englishmen always take me;--me--me, and then no
break him leg.  Yes--yes--yes;--I go.  Master, say yes.  Only one
leetle ten shillings!"

"Abdallah!" shouted Mr. Damer, "why don't you take this man away?  Why
don't you make him understand that if all the Pyramids depended on it,
I would not give him sixpence!"

And then Abdallah, thus invoked, came up, and explained to the man in
Arabic that he would gain his object more surely if he would behave
himself a little more quietly; a hint which the man took for one
minute, and for one minute only.

And then poor Mrs. Damer replied to an application for backsheish by
the gift of a sixpence.  Unfortunate woman!  The word backsheish means,
I believe, a gift; but it has come in Egypt to signify money, and is
eternally dinned into the ears of strangers by Arab suppliants.  Mrs.
Damer ought to have known better, as, during the last six weeks she had
never shown her face out of Shepheard's Hotel without being pestered
for backsheish; but she was tired and weak, and foolishly thought to
rid herself of the man who was annoying her.

No sooner had the coin dropped from her hand into that of the Arab,
than she was surrounded by a cluster of beggars, who loudly made their
petitions as though they would, each of them, individually be injured
if treated with less liberality than that first comer.  They took hold
of her donkey, her bridle, her saddle, her legs, and at last her arms
and hands, screaming for backsheish in voices that were neither sweet
nor mild.

In her dismay she did give away sundry small coins--all, probably, that
she had about her; but this only made the matter worse.  Money was
going, and each man, by sufficient energy, might hope to get some of
it.  They were very energetic, and so frightened the poor lady that she
would certainly have fallen, had she not been kept on her seat by the
pressure around her.

"Oh, dear! oh, dear! get away," she cried.  "I haven't got any more;
indeed I haven't.  Go away, I tell you!  Mr. Damer! oh, Mr. Damer!" and
then, in the excess of her agony, she uttered one loud, long, and
continuous shriek.

Up came Mr. Damer; up came Abdallah; up came M. Delabordeau; up came
Mr. Ingram, and at last she was rescued.  "You shouldn't go away and
leave me to the mercy of these nasty people.  As to that Abdallah, he
is of no use to anybody."

"Why you bodder de good lady, you dem blackguard?" said Abdallah,
raising his stick, as though he were going to lay them all low with a
blow.  "Now you get noting, you tief!"

The Arabs for a moment retired to a little distance, like flies driven
from a sugar-bowl; but it was easy to see that, like the flies, they
would return at the first vacant moment.

And now they had reached the very foot of the Pyramids and proceeded to
dismount from their donkeys.  Their intention was first to ascend to
the top, then to come down to their banquet, and after that to
penetrate into the interior.  And all this would seem to be easy of
performance.  The Pyramid is undoubtedly high, but it is so constructed
as to admit of climbing without difficulty.  A lady mounting it would
undoubtedly need some assistance, but any man possessed of moderate
activity would require no aid at all.

But our friends were at once imbued with the tremendous nature of the
task before them.  A sheikh of the Arabs came forth, who communicated
with them through Abdallah.  The work could be done, no doubt, he said;
but a great many men would be wanted to assist.  Each lady must have
four Arabs, and each gentlemen three; and then, seeing that the work
would be peculiarly severe on this special day, each of these numerous
Arabs must be remunerated by some very large number of piastres.

Mr. Damer, who was by no means a close man in his money dealings,
opened his eyes with surprise, and mildly expostulated; M. Delabordeau,
who was rather a close man in his reckonings, immediately buttoned up
his breeches pocket and declared that he should decline to mount the
Pyramid at all at that price; and then Mr. Ingram descended to the
combat.

The protestations of the men were fearful.  They declared, with loud
voices, eager actions, and manifold English oaths, that an attempt was
being made to rob them.  They had a right to demand the sums which they
were charging, and it was a shame that English gentlemen should come
and take the bread out of their mouths.  And so they screeched,
gesticulated, and swore, and frightened poor Mrs. Damer almost into
fits.

But at last it was settled and away they started, the sheikh declaring
that the bargain had been made at so low a rate as to leave him not one
piastre for himself.  Each man had an Arab on each side of him, and
Miss Dawkins and Miss Damer had each, in addition, one behind.  Mrs.
Damer was so frightened as altogether to have lost all ambition to
ascend.  She sat below on a fragment of stone, with the three dragomans
standing around her as guards; but even with the three dragomans the
attacks on her were so frequent, and as she declared afterwards she was
so bewildered, that she never had time to remember that she had come
there from England to see the Pyramids, and that she was now
immediately under them.

The boys, utterly ignoring their guides, scrambled up quicker than the
Arabs could follow them.  Mr. Damer started off at a pace which soon
brought him to the end of his tether, and from that point was dragged
up by the sheer strength of his assistants; thereby accomplishing the
wishes of the men, who induce their victims to start as rapidly as
possible, in order that they may soon find themselves helpless from
want of wind.  Mr. Ingram endeavoured to attach himself to Fanny, and
she would have been nothing loth to have him at her right hand instead
of the hideous brown, shrieking, one-eyed Arab who took hold of her.
But it was soon found that any such arrangement was impossible.  Each
guide felt that if he lost his own peculiar hold he would lose his
prey, and held on, therefore, with invincible tenacity.  Miss Dawkins
looked, too, as though she had thought to be attended to by some
Christian cavalier, but no Christian cavalier was forthcoming.  M.
Delabordeau was the wisest, for he took the matter quietly, did as he
was bid, and allowed the guides nearly to carry him to the top of the
edifice.

"Ha! so this is the top of the Pyramid, is it?" said Mr. Damer,
bringing out his words one by one, being terribly out of breath.  "Very
wonderful, very wonderful, indeed!"

"It is wonderful," said Miss Dawkins, whose breath had not failed her
in the least, "very wonderful, indeed!  Only think, Mr. Damer, you
might travel on for days and days, till days became months, through
those interminable sands, and yet you would never come to the end of
them.  Is it not quite stupendous?"

"Ah, yes, quite,--puff, puff"--said Mr. Damer striving to regain his
breath.

Mr. Damer was now at her disposal; weak and worn with toil and travel,
out of breath, and with half his manhood gone; if ever she might
prevail over him so as to procure from his mouth an assent to that Nile
proposition, it would be now.  And after all, that Nile proposition was
the best one now before her.  She did not quite like the idea of
starting off across the Great Desert without any lady, and was not sure
that she was prepared to be fallen in love with by M. Delabordeau, even
if there should ultimately be any readiness on the part of that
gentleman to perform the role of lover.  With Mr. Ingram the matter was
different, nor was she so diffident of her own charms as to think it
altogether impossible that she might succeed, in the teeth of that
little chit, Fanny Damer.  That Mr. Ingram would join the party up the
Nile she had very little doubt; and then there would be one place left
for her.  She would thus, at any rate, become commingled with a most
respectable family, who might be of material service to her.

Thus actuated she commenced an earnest attack upon Mr. Damer.

"Stupendous!" she said again, for she was fond of repeating favourite
words.  "What a wondrous race must have been those Egyptian kings of
old!"

"I dare say they were," said Mr. Damer, wiping his brow as he sat upon
a large loose stone, a fragment lying on the flat top of the Pyramid,
one of those stones with which the complete apex was once made, or was
once about to be made.

"A magnificent race! so gigantic in their conceptions!  Their ideas
altogether overwhelm us poor, insignificant, latter-day mortals.  They
built these vast Pyramids; but for us, it is task enough to climb to
their top."

"Quite enough," ejaculated Mr. Damer.

But Mr. Damer would not always remain weak and out of breath, and it
was absolutely necessary for Miss Dawkins to hurry away from Cheops and
his tomb, to Thebes and Karnac.

"After seeing this it is impossible for any one with a spark of
imagination to leave Egypt without going farther a-field."

Mr. Damer merely wiped his brow and grunted.  This Miss Dawkins took as
a signal of weakness, and went on with her task perseveringly.

"For myself, I have resolved to go up, at any rate, as far as Asouan
and the first cataract.  I had thought of acceding to the wishes of a
party who are going across the Great Desert by Mount Sinai to
Jerusalem; but the kindness of yourself and Mrs. Damer is so great, and
the prospect of joining in your boat is so pleasurable, that I have
made up my mind to accept your very kind offer."

This, it will be acknowledged, was bold on the part of Miss Dawkins;
but what will not audacity effect?  To use the slang of modern
language, cheek carries everything nowadays.  And whatever may have
been Miss Dawkins's deficiencies, in this virtue she was not deficient.

"I have made up my mind to accept your very kind offer," she said,
shining on Mr. Damer with her blandest smile.

What was a stout, breathless, perspiring, middle-aged gentleman to do
under such circumstances?  Mr. Damer was a man who, in most matters,
had his own way.  That his wife should have given such an invitation
without consulting him, was, he knew, quite impossible.  She would as
soon have thought of asking all those Arab guides to accompany them.
Nor was it to be thought of that he should allow himself to be
kidnapped into such an arrangement by the impudence of any Miss
Dawkins.  But there was, he felt, a difficulty in answering such a
proposition from a young lady with a direct negative, especially while
he was so scant of breath.  So he wiped his brow again, and looked at
her.

"But I can only agree to this on one understanding," continued Miss
Dawkins, "and that is, that I am allowed to defray my own full share of
the expense of the journey."

Upon hearing this Mr. Damer thought that he saw his way out of the
wood.  "Wherever I go, Miss Dawkins, I am always the paymaster myself,"
and this he contrived to say with some sternness, palpitating though he
still was; and the sternness which was deficient in his voice he
endeavoured to put into his countenance.

But he did not know Miss Dawkins.  "Oh, Mr. Damer," she said, and as
she spoke her smile became almost blander than it was before; "oh, Mr.
Damer, I could not think of suffering you to be so liberal; I could
not, indeed.  But I shall be quite content that you should pay
everything, and let me settle with you in one sum afterwards."

Mr. Damer's breath was now rather more under his own command.  "I am
afraid, Miss Dawkins," he said, "that Mrs. Damer's weak state of health
will not admit of such an arrangement."

"What, about the paying?"

"Not only as to that, but we are a family party, Miss Dawkins; and
great as would be the benefit of your society to all of us, in Mrs.
Damer's present state of health, I am afraid--in short, you would not
find it agreeable.--And therefore--" this he added, seeing that she was
still about to persevere--"I fear that we must forego the advantage you
offer."

And then, looking into his face, Miss Dawkins did perceive that even
her audacity would not prevail.

"Oh, very well," she said, and moving from the stone on which she had
been sitting, she walked off, carrying her head very high, to a corner
of the Pyramid from which she could look forth alone towards the sands
of Libya.

In the mean time another little overture was being made on the top of
the same Pyramid,--an overture which was not received quite in the same
spirit.  While Mr. Damer was recovering his breath for the sake of
answering Miss Dawkins, Miss Damer had walked to the further corner of
the square platform on which they were placed, and there sat herself
down with her face turned towards Cairo.  Perhaps it was not singular
that Mr. Ingram should have followed her.

This would have been very well if a dozen Arabs had not also followed
them.  But as this was the case, Mr. Ingram had to play his game under
some difficulty.  He had no sooner seated himself beside her than they
came and stood directly in front of the seat, shutting out the view,
and by no means improving the fragrance of the air around them.

"And this, then, Miss Damer, will be our last excursion together," he
said, in his tenderest, softest tone.

"De good Englishman will gib de poor Arab one little backsheish," said
an Arab, putting out his hand and shaking Mr. Ingram's shoulder.

"Yes, yes, yes; him gib backsheish," said another.

"Him berry good man," said a third, putting up his filthy hand, and
touching Mr. Ingram's face.

"And young lady berry good, too; she give backsheish to poor Arab."

"Yes," said a fourth, preparing to take a similar liberty with Miss
Damer.

This was too much for Mr. Ingram.  He had already used very positive
language in his endeavour to assure his tormentors that they would not
get a piastre from him.  But this only changed their soft persuasions
into threats.  Upon hearing which, and upon seeing what the man
attempted to do in his endeavour to get money from Miss Damer, he
raised his stick, and struck first one and then the other as violently
as he could upon their heads.

Any ordinary civilised men would have been stunned by such blows, for
they fell on the bare foreheads of the Arabs; but the objects of the
American's wrath merely skulked away; and the others, convinced by the
only arguments which they understood, followed in pursuit of victims
who might be less pugnacious.

It is hard for a man to be at once tender and pugnacious--to be
sentimental, while he is putting forth his physical strength with all
the violence in his power.  It is difficult, also, for him to be gentle
instantly after having been in a rage.  So he changed his tactics at
the moment, and came to the point at once in a manner befitting his
present state of mind.

"Those vile wretches have put me in such a heat," he said, "that I
hardly know what I am saying.  But the fact is this, Miss Damer, I
cannot leave Cairo without knowing--.  You understand what I mean, Miss
Damer."

"Indeed I do not, Mr. Ingram; except that I am afraid you mean
nonsense."

"Yes, you do; you know that I love you.  I am sure you must know it.
At any rate you know it now."

"Mr. Ingram, you should not talk in such a way."

"Why should I not?  But the truth is, Fanny, I can talk in no other
way.  I do love you dearly.  Can you love me well enough to go and be
my wife in a country far away from your own?"

Before she left the top of the Pyramid Fanny Damer had said that she
would try.

Mr. Ingram was now a proud and happy man, and seemed to think the steps
of the Pyramid too small for his elastic energy.  But Fanny feared that
her troubles were to come.  There was papa--that terrible bugbear on
all such occasions.  What would papa say?  She was sure her papa would
not allow her to marry and go so far away from her own family and
country.  For herself, she liked the Americans--always had liked them;
so she said;--would desire nothing better than to live among them.  But
papa!  And Fanny sighed as she felt that all the recognised miseries of
a young lady in love were about to fall upon her.

Nevertheless, at her lover's instance, she promised, and declared, in
twenty different loving phrases, that nothing on earth should ever make
her false to her love or to her lover.

"Fanny, where are you?  Why are you not ready to come down?" shouted
Mr. Damer, not in the best of tempers.  He felt that he had almost been
unkind to an unprotected female, and his heart misgave him.  And yet it
would have misgiven him more had he allowed himself to be entrapped by
Miss Dawkins.

"I am quite ready, papa," said Fanny, running up to him--for it may be
understood that there is quite room enough for a young lady to run on
the top of the Pyramid.

"I am sure I don't know where you have been all the time," said Mr.
Damer; "and where are those two boys?"

Fanny pointed to the top of the other Pyramid, and there they were,
conspicuous with their red caps.

"And M. Delabordeau?"

"Oh! he has gone down, I think;--no, he is there with Miss Dawkins."
And in truth Miss Dawkins was leaning on his arm most affectionately,
as she stooped over and looked down upon the ruins below her.

"And where is that fellow, Ingram?" said Mr. Damer, looking about him.
"He is always out of the way when he's wanted."

To this Fanny said nothing.  Why should she?  She was not Mr. Ingram's
keeper.

And then they all descended, each again with his proper number of Arabs
to hurry and embarrass him; and they found Mr. Damer at the bottom,
like a piece of sugar covered with flies.  She was heard to declare
afterwards that she would not go to the Pyramids again, not if they
were to be given to her for herself, as ornaments for her garden.

The picnic lunch among the big stones at the foot of the Pyramid was
not a very gay affair.  Miss Dawkins talked more than any one else,
being determined to show that she bore her defeat gallantly.  Her
conversation, however, was chiefly addressed to M. Delabordeau, and he
seemed to think more of his cold chicken and ham than he did of her wit
and attention.

Fanny hardly spoke a word.  There was her father before her and she
could not eat, much less talk, as she thought of all that she would
have to go through.  What would he say to the idea of having an
American for a son-in-law?

Nor was Mr. Ingram very lively.  A young man when he has been just
accepted, never is so.  His happiness under the present circumstances
was, no doubt, intense, but it was of a silent nature.

And then the interior of the building had to be visited.  To tell the
truth none of the party would have cared to perform this feat had it
not been for the honour of the thing.  To have come from Paris, New
York, or London, to the Pyramids, and then not to have visited the very
tomb of Cheops, would have shown on the part of all of them an
indifference to subjects of interest which would have been altogether
fatal to their character as travellers.  And so a party for the
interior was made up.

Miss Damer when she saw the aperture through which it was expected that
she should descend, at once declared for staying with her mother.  Miss
Dawkins, however, was enthusiastic for the journey.  "Persons with so
very little command over their nerves might really as well stay at
home," she said to Mr. Ingram, who glowered at her dreadfully for
expressing such an opinion about his Fanny.

This entrance into the Pyramids is a terrible task, which should be
undertaken by no lady.  Those who perform it have to creep down, and
then to be dragged up, through infinite dirt, foul smells, and bad air;
and when they have done it, they see nothing.  But they do earn the
gratification of saying that they have been inside a Pyramid.

"Well, I've done that once," said Mr. Damer, coming out, "and I do not
think that any one will catch me doing it again.  I never was in such a
filthy place in my life."

"Oh, Fanny! I am so glad you did not go; I am sure it is not fit for
ladies," said poor Mrs. Damer, forgetful of her friend Miss Dawkins.

"I should have been ashamed of myself," said Miss Dawkins, bristling
up, and throwing back her head as she stood, "if I had allowed any
consideration to have prevented my visiting such a spot.  If it be not
improper for men to go there, how can it be improper for women?"

"I did not say improper, my dear," said Mrs. Damer, apologetically.

"And as for the fatigue, what can a woman be worth who is afraid to
encounter as much as I have now gone through for the sake of visiting
the last resting-place of such a king as Cheops?"  And Miss Dawkins, as
she pronounced the last words, looked round her with disdain upon poor
Fanny Damer.

"But I meant the dirt," said Mrs. Damer.

"Dirt!" ejaculated Miss Dawkins, and then walked away.  Why should she
now submit her high tone of feeling to the Damers, or why care longer
for their good opinion?  Therefore she scattered contempt around her as
she ejaculated the last word, "dirt."

And then the return home!  "I know I shall never get there," said Mrs.
Damer, looking piteously up into her husband's face.

"Nonsense, my dear; nonsense; you must get there."  Mrs. Damer groaned,
and acknowledged in her heart that she must,--either dead or alive.

"And, Jefferson," said Fanny, whispering--for there had been a moment
since their descent in which she had been instructed to call him by his
Christian name--"never mind talking to me going home.  I will ride by
mamma.  Do you go with papa and put him in good humour; and it he says
anything about the lords and the bishops, don't you contradict him, you
know."

What will not a man do for love?  Mr. Ingram promised.

And in this way they started; the two boys led the van; then came Mr.
Damer and Mr. Ingram, unusually and unpatriotically acquiescent as to
England's aristocratic propensities; then Miss Dawkins riding, alas!
alone; after her, M. Delabordeau, also alone,--the ungallant Frenchman!
And the rear was brought up by Mrs. Damer and her daughter, flanked on
each side by a dragoman, with a third dragoman behind them.

And in this order they went back to Cairo, riding their donkeys, and
crossing the ferry solemnly, and, for the most part, silently.  Mr.
Ingram did talk, as he had an important object in view,--that of
putting Mr. Damer into a good humour.

In this he succeeded so well that by the time they had remounted, after
crossing the Nile, Mr. Damer opened his heart to his companion on the
subject that was troubling him, and told him all about Miss Dawkins.

"I don't see why we should have a companion that we don't like for
eight or ten weeks, merely because it seems rude to refuse a lady."

"Indeed, I agree with you," said Mr. Ingram; "I should call it weak-
minded to give way in such a case."

"My daughter does not like her at all," continued Mr. Damer.

"Nor would she be a nice companion for Miss Damer; not according to my
way of thinking," said Mr. Ingram.

"And as to my having asked her, or Mrs. Damer having asked her!  Why,
God bless my soul, it is pure invention on the woman's part!"

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Mr. Ingram; "I must say she plays her game well;
but then she is an old soldier, and has the benefit of experience."
What would Miss Dawkins have said had she known that Mr. Ingram called
her an old soldier?

"I don't like the kind of thing at all," said Mr. Damer, who was very
serious upon the subject.  "You see the position in which I am placed.
I am forced to be very rude, or--"

"I don't call it rude at all."

"Disobliging, then; or else I must have all my comfort invaded and
pleasure destroyed by, by, by--"  And Mr. Damer paused, being at a loss
for an appropriate name for Miss Dawkins.

"By an unprotected female," suggested Mr. Ingram.

"Yes, just so.  I am as fond of pleasant company as anybody; but then I
like to choose it myself."

"So do I," said Mr. Ingram, thinking of his own choice.

"Now, Ingram, if you would join us, we should be delighted."

"Upon my word, sir, the offer is too flattering," said Ingram,
hesitatingly; for he felt that he could not undertake such a journey
until Mr. Damer knew on what terms he stood with Fanny.

"You are a terrible democrat," said Mr. Damer, laughing; "but then, on
that matter, you know, we could agree to differ."

"Exactly so," said Mr. Ingram, who had not collected his thoughts or
made up his mind as to what he had better say and do, on the spur of
the moment.

"Well, what do you say to it?" said Mr. Damer, encouragingly.  But
Ingram paused before he answered.

"For Heaven's sake, my dear fellow, don't have the slightest hesitation
in refusing, if you don't like the plan."

"The fact is, Mr. Damer, I should like it too well."

"Like it too well?"

"Yes, sir, and I may as well tell you now as later.  I had intended
this evening to have asked for your permission to address your
daughter."

"God bless my soul!" said Mr. Damer, looking as though a totally new
idea had now been opened to him.

"And under these circumstances, I will now wait and see whether or no
you will renew your offer."

"God bless my soul!" said Mr. Damer, again.  It often does strike an
old gentleman as very odd that any man should fall in love with his
daughter, whom he has not ceased to look upon as a child.  The case is
generally quite different with mothers.  They seem to think that every
young man must fall in love with their girls.

"And have you said anything to Fanny about this?" asked Mr. Damer.

"Yes, sir, I have her permission to speak to you."

"God bless my soul!" said Mr. Damer; and by this time they had arrived
at Shepheard's Hotel.

"Oh, mamma," said Fanny, as soon as she found herself alone with her
mother that evening, "I have something that I must tell you."

"Oh, Fanny, don't tell me anything to-night, for I am a great deal too
tired to listen."

"But oh, mamma, pray;--you must listen to this; indeed you must."  And
Fanny knelt down at her mother's knee, and looked beseechingly up into
her face.

"What is it, Fanny?  You know that all my bones are sore, and I am so
tired that I am almost dead."

"Mamma, Mr. Ingram has--"

"Has what, my dear? has he done anything wrong?"

"No, mamma:  but he has;--he has proposed to me."  And Fanny, bursting
into tears, hid her face in her mother's lap.

And thus the story was told on both sides of the house.  On the next
day, as a matter of course, all the difficulties and dangers of such a
marriage as that which was now projected were insisted on by both
father and mother.  It was improper; it would cause a severing of the
family not to be thought of; it would be an alliance of a dangerous
nature, and not at all calculated to insure happiness; and, in short,
it was impossible.  On that day, therefore, they all went to bed very
unhappy.  But on the next day, as was also a matter of course, seeing
that there were no pecuniary difficulties, the mother and father were
talked over, and Mr. Ingram was accepted as a son-in-law.  It need
hardly be said that the offer of a place in Mr. Damer's boat was again
made, and that on this occasion it was accepted without hesitation.

There was an American Protestant clergyman resident in Cairo, with
whom, among other persons, Miss Dawkins had become acquainted.  Upon
this gentleman or upon his wife Miss Dawkins called a few days after
the journey to the Pyramid, and finding him in his study, thus
performed her duty to her neighbour, -

"You know your countryman Mr. Ingram, I think?" said she.

"Oh, yes; very intimately."

"If you have any regard for him, Mr. Burton," such was the gentleman's
name, "I think you should put him on his guard."

"On his guard against what?" said Mr. Burton with a serious air, for
there was something serious in the threat of impending misfortune as
conveyed by Miss Dawkins.

"Why," said she, "those Damers, I fear, are dangerous people."

"Do you mean that they will borrow money of him?"

"Oh, no; not that, exactly; but they are clearly setting their cap at
him."

"Setting their cap at him?"

"Yes; there is a daughter, you know; a little chit of a thing; and I
fear Mr. Ingram may be caught before he knows where he is.  It would be
such a pity, you know.  He is going up the river with them, I hear.
That, in his place, is very foolish.  They asked me, but I positively
refused."

Mr. Burton remarked that "In such a matter as that Mr. Ingram would be
perfectly able to take care of himself."

"Well, perhaps so; but seeing what was going on, I thought it my duty
to tell you."  And so Miss Dawkins took her leave.

Mr. Ingram did go up the Nile with the Damers, as did an old friend of
the Damers who arrived from England.  And a very pleasant trip they had
of it.  And, as far as the present historian knows, the two lovers were
shortly afterwards married in England.

Poor Miss Dawkins was left in Cairo for some time on her beam ends.
But she was one of those who are not easily vanquished.  After an
interval of ten days she made acquaintance with an Irish family--having
utterly failed in moving the hard heart of M. Delabordeau--and with
these she proceeded to Constantinople.  They consisted of two brothers
and a sister, and were, therefore, very convenient for matrimonial
purposes.  But nevertheless, when I last heard of Miss Dawkins, she was
still an unprotected female.










This etext was produced by Judy Boss.





The Valiant
Runaways

By

GERTRUDE
ATHERTON



TO

GEORGE AND GILBERT JONES

Of New York


WITHOUT WHOSE ENCOURAGEMENT THIS YARN WOULD
NEVER HAVE BEEN FINISHED



The Valiant Runaways



I

Roldan Castanada walked excitedly up and down the verandah of his
father's house, his thumbs thrust into the red silk sash that was
knotted about his waist, his cambric shirt open at the throat as if
pulled impatiently apart; the soft grey sombrero on the back of his
curly head making a wide frame for his dark, flushed, scowling face.

There was nothing in the surroundings to indicate the cause of his
disturbance. The great adobe house, its white sides and red tiles
glaring in the bright December sun, would have been as silent as a tomb
but for the rapid tramping of Roldan and the clank of his silver spurs
on the pavement. On all sides the vast Rancho Los Palos Verdes cleft the
horizon: Don Mateo Castanada was one of the wealthiest grandees in the
Californias, and his sons could gallop all day without crossing the
boundary line of their future possessions. The rancho was as level as
mid-ocean in a calm; here and there a wood or river broke the sweep;
thousands of cattle grazed. Now and again a mounted vaquero, clad in
small-clothes vivified with silver trimmings, dashed amongst tossing
horns, shouting and warning.

But Roldan saw none of these things. There was reason for his disquiet.
News had arrived an hour before which had thrown his young mind into
confusion: the soldiers were out for conscripts, and would in all
probability arrive at the Rancho Los Palos Verdes that evening or the
following morning. Roldan, like all the Californian youth, looked
forward to the conscription with apprehension and disgust. Not that he
was a coward. He could throw a bull as fearlessly as his elder brothers;
he had ridden alone at night the length of the rancho in search of a pet
colt that had strayed; and he had once defended the women of the family
single handed against a half dozen savages until reinforcements had
arrived. Moreover, the stories of American warfare which he had managed
to read, despite the prohibition of the priests, had stirred his soul
and fired his blood. But army life in California! It meant languishing
in barracks, hoping for a flash in the pan between two rival houses, or
a possible revolt against a governor. If the Americans should come with
intent to conquer! Roldan ground his teeth and stamped his foot. Then,
indeed, he could not get to the battlefield fast enough. But the United
States would never defy Mexico. They were clever enough for that. His
anger left him, and he gave a little regretful sigh. Not only would he
like that kind of a battle, but it would be great fun to know some
American boys. Then he shook his head impatiently and dismissed these
tourist thoughts. The present alone was to be considered.

There were two ways to avoid conscription. One was to marry--Roldan
sniffed audibly; the other lay in flight and eluding the men until their
round was over for the year.

Roldan did not like the idea of running away from anything; he and
several of his father's vaqueros had once made an assault upon a band of
cattle thieves and hunted them into the mountains: that was much more to
his taste. Nevertheless there was one thing he liked less than showing
his heels, and that was giving up his liberty. Not to gallop at will
over the rancho, or sleep in a hammock, to coliar the bulls and shout
with the vaqueros at rodeo, to be the first at the games and the races,
to wear his silken clothes and lace ruffles, and eat the delightful
dishes his mother's cooks prepared! And then he was a very high-spirited
young gentleman. Although the same obedience, almost reverence, was
exacted of him by his parents that was a part of the household religion
in California, yet as the youngest child, who had been delicate during
his first five years, he had managed to get very badly spoiled. He did
not relish the idea of leading a life of monotony and discipline, of
performing hourly duties which did not suit his taste, above all of
being ordered to leave his father's house as if he were a mere Indian.
No, he decided, he would not go into the army--not this year nor any
other year. He would defy the governor and all his men.

When Roldan made up his mind he acted promptly. No time was to be lost
in this case. Now was the hour of siesta; he could have no better time
to get away. A note would relieve his parents of a certain amount of
anxiety; and if they did not know where he was they could not be held
accountable. His blood tingled at the presentiment of the adventures he
should have in that perilous journey through a country of which he knew
nothing beyond his father's and the adjoining rancho. And as adventures
would be but half spiced if experienced alone, he determined--and not
from selfish motives only--to save his best beloved friend, Adan Pardo,
from the grasp of the law likewise.

He went within and slung about himself two pistols and a dagger. After
he had made a small bundle of linen and raided the pantry, he went out
to the corral, saddled his horse and packed the saddle bags, wound his
lariat securely about the pommel, then galloped away on a series of
adventures memorable in the annals of California.

II

Roldan's way lay over his father's leagues until two hours after
nightfall. As he passed, every now and again, a herd of cattle, lounging
vaqueros called to him: "Ay, Don Roldan, where do you go?" or, "The
little senor chooses a hot day for his ride." But he excited no
curiosity. Like all Californians he half lived in the saddle; and he was
often seen riding in the direction of Don Esteban Pardo's rancho, to
spend a few days with his chosen friend.

As he approached the house he saw the family sitting on the long
verandah: the pretty black-eyed girls in full white gowns, their dark
hair flowing to the floor, or braided loosely; Don Esteban, a silk
handkerchief knotted about his head, reclining in a long chair beside
his wife, a stout woman, coffee-coloured with age, attired in a dark
silk gown flowered with roses. Indian servants came and went with
cooling drinks. Although it was December, Winter had loitered and fallen
into deeper sleep than usual on her journey South this year.

Adan was leaning against a pillar, moody and bored. He was the youngest
of the boys. His brothers, elegant caballeros, who spent most of their
time in the capital or on other ranches, were kind to their younger
brother, but not companionable. Therefore, when Roldan galloped into
sight, he gave a shout of joy and ran down the road. Roldan drew rein
some distance from the house, that the conference, which must take place
immediately, might be unheard by older ears.

"Listen, my friend," he said rapidly, interrupting Adan's voluble
hospitality. "The soldiers are out for conscripts--"

"Ay, yi!--"

"Now listen, and don't talk until I am done. I WILL NOT be drafted as if
I had no will of my own, and rot in a barrack while others enjoy life.
Neither will you if you have the spirit of a Pardo and are worthy to be
the friend of Roldan Castanada. So--I fly. Do you understand?--and you
go with me. We will dodge these servants of a tyrant government the
length and breadth of the Californias. When the danger is over for this
year we will return--not before. Now, you will ask me to go to my room
as soon as possible after you have given me some supper, for I am tired
and want sleep. You also will take a nap. When all is quiet I shall call
you and we will start."

Adan had listened to this harangue with bulging eyes and tongue rolling
over his teeth. But Roldan never failed to carry the day. He was a born
leader. Adan's was the will that bent; but his talent for good
comradeship and his quiet self-respect saved him from servility.

In appearance he was in sharp contrast to the slender Roldan, of the
classic features and fiery eyes. Short, roly-poly, with a broad, good-
natured face, his attire was also unmarked by the extreme elegance which
always characterised Roldan. In summer he wore calico small-clothes, in
winter unmatched articles of velvet or cloth, and an old sombrero
without silver.

"Ay! yi!" he gasped. "Ay, Roldan! Holy Mary! But you are right. You
always are. And so clever! I will go. Sure, sure. Come now, or they will
think we conspire."

Roldan dismounted, and was warmly greeted by the family. The girls rose
and courtesied, blushing with the coquetry of their race. Roldan cared
little for girls at any time, and to-night was doubly abstracted, his
ear straining at every distant hoof-beat. He retired as early as he
politely could, but not to sleep. Indeed, he became so nervous that he
could not wait until the family slept.

"Better to brave them, Adan," he said to his more phlegmatic friend,
"than that sergeant, should he get here before we leave. Come, come, let
us go."

They dropped out of the window and stole to the corral where the riding
horses were kept. It was surrounded by a high wall, and the gate was
barred with iron; but they managed to remove the bars without noise,
saddled fresh horses and led them forth and onward for a half mile, then
mounted and were off like the wind.

They knew the country down the coast on the beaten road, but they dared
not follow this, and struck inland. The air was now of an agreeable
warmth; the full moon was so low and brilliant that Roldan called out he
could count the bristling hairs on a coyote's back.

In less than two hours they were climbing a mountain trail leading
through a dense redwood forest. In these depths the moon's rays were
scattered into mere flecks dropping here and there through the thick
interlacing boughs of the giant trees. Those boughs were a hundred feet
and more above their heads. About them was a dense underforest of young
redwoods, pines, and great ferns; and swarming over all luxuriant and
poisonous creepers.

They were silent for a time. The redwood forests are very quiet and
awesome. At night one hears but the rush of the mountain torrent, the
cry of a panther or a coyote, the low sigh of wind in the treetops.

"Ay, Roldan," exclaimed Adan, suddenly. "Think did we meet a bear?"

"We probably shall," said Roldan, coolly. "These forests have many
'grizzlies,' as the Americans call them."

"But what should we do, Roldan?"

"Why, kill him, surely."

"Have you ever seen one?"

"Never."

"But it is said that they are very large, my friend, larger than you or
I."

"Perhaps. Keep quiet. I like to hear the forest talk."

"What strange fancies you have, Roldan. A forest cannot talk."

"Oh--hush."

"Ay, yi, Roldan! Roldan!"

The horses were standing upright, neighing pitifully. Adan gave a hoarse
gurgle and crossed himself.

"The adventures have begun," said Roldan.

In a great swath of moonlight on a ledge some yards above them, standing
on his hind legs and swinging his forepaws goodnaturedly, was an immense
grey bear. Suddenly he extended his arms sociably, almost
affectionately.

"We cannot retreat down that steep trail," said Roldan, rapidly. "He
could follow faster and the horses would fall. To the left! in the
brush, quick!--a bear cannot run sideways on a mountain."

The boys dug their spurs into the trembling mustangs, who responded with
a snort of pain and plunged into the thicket. Only the bold skill of the
riders saved them from pitching sidewise down the steep slope, despite
the brush, for they were unshod and their knees had weakened.

But the grizzly, alas! was still master of the situation. In less than a
moment the boys saw him lumbering along above them. He evidently had
possession of a trail, more or less level.

"Dios de mi alma!" cried Adan. "If he gets ahead of us he will come down
and meet us somewhere. We shall be lost--eaten even as a cat eats a
mouse, a coyote a chicken."

"You will look well lining the dark corridors of the bear, my friend.
Your yellow jacket with those large red roses, which would make a bull
sweat, would hang like tapestry in the houses of Spain. Those hide
boots, spotted with mud, and the blood of the calf, would keep him from
wanting another meal for many a long day--"

"Ay, thou fearless one! Why, it is said that if the grizzly even raises
his paw and slaps the face every feature is crushed out of shape."

"I should not be surprised."

They plunged on, tearing their clothes on the spiked brush and the
thorns of the sweetbrier, fragrant lilac petals falling in a shower
about them, great ferns trodden and rebounding. The air was heavy with
perfume and the pungent odour of redwood and pine.

Roldan had passed Adan. Suddenly his horse stumbled and would have gone
headlong had not his expert rider pulled him back on his haunches.

"What is it? What is it?" cried Adan, who also had been obliged to pull
in abruptly, and who liked horses less when they stood on their hind
legs. "Is it the bear upon us? But, no, I hear him--above and beyond.
What are you doing, my friend?"

Roldan had dismounted and was on his hands and knees. In a half moment
he stood erect.

"We are saved," he said.

"Ay? What?"

"It is a hole, my friend--large and deep and round. Did you put any meat
in your saddle-bags?"

"Ay, a good piece."

"Raw?"

"Yes."

"Give it to me--quick. Do not unwrap it."

Adan handed over the meat, then dismounted also.

"A bear-trap?" he asked.

"Yes, a natural one. Come this way, before I unwrap the meat."

The boys forced their way to the south of the large hole, dragging the
still terrified horses, who were not disposed to respond to anything
less persuasive than the spur. Roldan approached the edge of the
excavation and shook the meat loose, flinging the paper after it. As the
smell of fresh beef pervaded the air it was greeted by a growl like
rising thunder, and almost simultaneously the huge unwieldy form of the
bear hurled itself down through the brush. The boys held their breath.
Even Roldan felt a singing in his ears. But the grizzly, without pausing
to ascertain his bearings, went down into the hole at a leap. He made
one mouthful of the meat, then appeared to realise that he was in a
trap. With a roar that made the horses rear and neigh like stricken
things, he flung himself against the sides of his prison, drew back and
leaped clumsily, tore up the earth, and galloped frantically to and fro.
But he was caught like a rat in a trap.

The boys laughed gleefully and remounted their horses, which also seemed
to appreciate the situation, for they had quieted suddenly.

"Adios! Adios!" cried Roldan, as they forced their way up to the trail
the bear had discovered. "You will make a fine skeleton; we will come
back and look at you some day."

But it was not the last they were to see of Bruin in the flesh.

III

An hour later they began to descend the mountain on the other side, and
by dawn espied a ranch house in a valley. The white walls were pink
under the first streamers of the morning. The redwoods rose like a solid
black wall on the towering mountains on every side.

"Ay!" exclaimed Roldan, drawing a deep sigh. "Sleep and a hot breakfast.
They will be good once more."

"They will," answered Adan, who had been collapsing and digging his
knuckles into his eyes for an hour and more.

They feared that no one might be stirring, but, as they approached the
verandah, the door opened and a stout smiling Californian, dressed in
brown small-clothes, appeared.

"Who have we here?" he cried. "But you are early visitors, my young
friends."

"We are dodging the conscript," said Roldan. "You will not betray us?"

"I should think not. I'd hide my own boys, if the mountains did not do
that for me. Come in, come in. The house is yours, my sons. Burn it if
you will. Tired? Here. Go in and get into bed. The servants are not up,
but I myself will make you chocolate and a tortilla."

The boys did not awaken for eight hours. When they emerged, somewhat
shamefacedly, they found the family assembled on the verandah, drinking
their afternoon chocolate, and impatient with curiosity. There were no
girls to criticise the dilapidated garments--which the kind hostess had
mended while the boys slept; but there were two youths of fourteen and
fifteen and two young men who were lying in hammocks and smoking
cigarritos.

Roldan and Adan were made welcome at once.

"My name is Jose Maria Perez," said the host, coming forward. "This is
my wife, Dona Theresa, and these are my sons, Emilio, Jorge, Benito, and
Carlos. What shall we call you, my sons?"

"My name is Roldan Castanada of the Rancho Los Palos Verdes, and this is
my friend Adan Pardo of the Rancho Buena Vista."

"Ay! we have distinguished visitors. But you were just as welcome
before. Sit down while I go and see if the big stew I ordered is done.
Caramba! but you must be hungry."

The four lads quickly fraternised, and Roldan began at once to relate
their adventures, continuing them over the steaming dish of stew. When
he reached the point which dealt with the outwitting of the bear, Don
Emilio sprang from his hammock.

"A bear trapped?" he cried. "A grizzly? We will have a fight with a
bull. You are rested, no? As soon as you have eaten, come and show us
the way."

The boys, always ready for sport, and believing that they were beyond
the grasp of the law for the present, eagerly consented. An hour later
Don Emilio, Don Jorge, the four lads, and three vaqueros all sallied
forth to capture one poor bear. The vaqueros dragged a sled, and much
stout rope.

When they reached the trap darkness had come, but the four boys held
lighted torches over the hole--this was their part. The bear,
disheartened with his long and futile effort to escape, lay on the
uneven surface below, alternately growling and roaring. As the torches
flared above him he sprang to his feet with a vast roar, his eyes as
green and glittering as marsh lights. In a moment a lasso had flown over
his head and he was on his back. But his formidable legs were not to be
encountered rashly. Each was lassoed in turn, also his back; then his
huge lunging body was dragged up the side of the excavation and onto the
sled. There he was bound securely; then the rope about his neck was
loosened and he was fed on a hind quarter of sheep. But it placated him
little. His anger was terrific. He roared until the echoes awoke, and
strained at the rope until it seemed as if his great muscles must
conquer.

But he was powerless, and the procession started: first Roldan and
Benito with their torches; then two vaqueros dragging the sled, the
third holding the rope which encircled the bear's neck, ready to tighten
it on a second's notice. Following were Don Jorge and Don Emilio, then
the two other young torch bearers. Thus was poor Bruin carried
ignominiously out of the forest where he had been lord, to perform for
the benefit of the kind he despised. That night he rested alone in a
high walled corral, liberated by the quick knife of one of the vaqueros,
who sprang through the door just in time to save himself.

There was an angry guest on the ranch that night. The bear's lungs,
which were of the best, had little repose, and he flung himself against
the earth walls of the corral until they quivered with the impact. The
horses in the neighbouring corrals whinnied; the cows in the fields
bellowed. It was a vocal night, and few slept.

Nevertheless everybody was excited and good-natured next morning.
Immediately after breakfast they went out to the corral, and by means of
a ladder mounted the wall and stood on the broad summit. At a signal
from Don Emilio a vaquero opened the gate cautiously and drove in a
large bull, who had been carefully irritated since sunrise.

The two unamiable beasts, glad of an object to vent their spleen upon,
flew at each other. The bear, giant as he was, was ignominiously rolled
in the dust by the furious onslaught of bulk and horns. He recovered
himself with surprising alacrity, however, and rushed at the bull. The
latter, off guard for the moment, and struggling for his lost breath,
was hurled on his back. He rolled over quickly, but before he could
gather his legs under him, the bear sat himself squarely upon the heavy
flanks. The bull jerked up his head, his eyes injected, his tongue
rolling out. The bear raised one of his mighty paws and dealt him a box
on the ear. The head fell with an ugly thud on the hard floor of the
corral. The bear adjusted himself comfortably and licked his paws.

On the wall the onlookers were far more excited than the gladiators in
the arena. The Perezes sympathised with their personal property, but
Roldan and Adan felt that the bear was their menagerie, and that their
honour was at stake. Party feeling ran very high. Roldan and Benito were
twice separated by their anxious elders.

"Ay! yi!" cried Carlos. "The bull wakes."

The poor bull, in truth, despite the crushing weight on his vitals,
raised his head again, shook himself feebly, and was once more boxed
into unconsciousness. The side of his face was crushed; his body was
slowly flattening. The family encouraged him with tears and spirit.

"Ay, Ignacio, Ignacio, my poor one!" cried Don Jose. "Arouse thyself and
kill the brute. Ay! thou wert so beautiful, so elegant, thy sleek sides
like the satin of Dona Theresa--and he like a wild man that has never
washed. Where is thy pride, Ignacio? Arouse thyself!"

Thus encouraged, the bull raised his head once more. The bear gave him a
whack that snapped his spinal cord, then rose and swung himself round
the enclosure with the arrogant mien of a bloated sultan who has swept
off a troublesome head. This attitude aroused Benito to fury.

"Ay, the cheat! the assassin!" he cried. "It was not a fair fight. Our
Ignacio had no chance--"

"That is not true!" exclaimed Roldan. "He had the same chance at the
first. If you are not satisfied, Senorito Benito, then fight me."

No sooner said than done. The boys, who stood some distance from the
others, doubled their fists and rushed at each other like two fighting
cocks. They pommelled for several minutes, then locked their arms about
each other and went reeling about the wall, to the horror of the others,
who dared not approach lest they should inflame them further.

"Jump down! Jump down, you imbeciles!" cried Don Jose." Do you wish to
be food for the bear? A misstep--" The words ended in a hoarse gurgle.
Dona Theresa shrieked. Adan and Carlos sobbed. The young men turned cold
and weak. The two boys had fallen headlong into the corral.

They were sobered and fraternal in a moment. The bear stood upon his
hind legs and opened his arms invitingly. He stood in front of the gate.

"Ay! ay!" gasped Benito. "He will eat us!"

"No; he will eat the bull first; but he will hug us to death--that is,
if he gets us--which he won't. Adan!" he cried, "lower the ladder."

Benito began to cry, his terror enhanced by the babel of voices on the
wall, each of which was suggesting a different measure. On the opposite
wall and in the branches of a neighbouring tree were the Indian servants
and the vaqueros. They stared stupidly, with shaking lips.

Adan had recovered his presence of mind. With a firm hand, he lowered
the ladder. But his wit was not quick. He should have carried it along
the wall and placed it behind the boys. Instead, it descended several
yards away. The bear, who appeared to be no fool, lowered his forepaws
and trotted slowly toward the boys.

"Juan!" shouted Roldan to a vaquero. "Lasso the bull and drag him to the
west side--far from the gate."

The vaquero, alert enough under orders, swung the lasso with supple
wrist--and missed. The boys dodged the bear, who seemed in no haste, but
stalked them methodically, nevertheless. The vaquero swung again. This
time the rope caught the horns, was tightened by a quick turn, and the
carcass went thudding across the yard. The bear gave a furious howl and
plunged after. The boys scampered up the ladder. Don Jose took each by
the collar and shook them soundly. When they were released they embraced
each other.

"Ay! but I was inhospitable to fight my guest," sobbed Benito.

"Ay, my friend," said Roldan, with dignity, winking back the tears
started by various emotions. "It is I who should have had my ears boxed
by the bear for insulting my host, and bringing anguish to the house of
Perez." Then he embraced Adan, but this time mutely.

Dona Theresa had been carried to her room, where she lay prostrated with
a nervous headache; but her family and guests did ample justice to the
chickens stewed in tomatoes, the red peppers and onions, the fried rice,
tamales, and dulces which her cook had prepared in honour of the event.
Excitement and good will reigned; even Don Jose had forgiven the young
offenders, and they all talked at once, at the top of their voices, as
fast as they could rattle and with no falling inflection. Roldan and
Adan were pressed to remain at the Hacienda Perez until the search was
over, and although the former had a secret yearning for adventure he was
more than half inclined to consent.

After a brief siesta the entire male population of the hacienda retired
to the wall of the corral to pot the bear. It was agreed that each
should fire at once, and that he who missed should have no dulces for a
week.

The bear was sitting near the middle of the corral, surly but replete,
for he had eaten of the bull. Don Jose gave the signal. Twenty-two shots
were fired. The bear gave a roar which awoke the echoes of the forest,
lunged frantically on shattered legs, then fell, an ugly heap of dusty
grey hair.

As the smoke cleared and Don Jose was announcing that only two Indian
servants had missed, Benito clutched Roldan's arm suddenly.

"Look up," he said. "Do you see anything? Are not those men; soldiers?"

Roldan looked up to a ledge of the high mountain before the house. A
bend of the trail traversed a clearing. In this open were three men on
horseback, motionless for the moment.

"Adan!" shouted Roldan. He ran down the ladder.

"I cannot be sure that those are the soldiers," he called up to Don
Jose. "But I take no risks. We must go."

The others descended hastily. "My sons will have to hide too," said Don
Jose. "There is plenty of time. In a moment those men will be in the
forest again and can see nothing more for half an hour. We must do
nothing while they watch--there! they have gone."

He shouted to the vaqueros to saddle six fresh horses, and ordered the
house servants to pack the bags with food.

"There is a cave in the mountain on the other side which I defy anyone
to find," said Don Jose. "If there were a war my sons should fight, but
I need them now."

While the horses were saddling, Roldan and Adan consulted together. At
the end of a few moments the former went up to Don Jose.

"I think it would be wiser to separate," he said. "Adan and I will go
one way, your sons another. That will put them off the track; and the
cave, Carlos says, is not very large."

"As you like," said Don Jose, who was perturbed and busy. "A vaquero
will go with you for a distance and advise you."

The truth was, Roldan fancied lying inert in a cave for several days as
little as he fancied the somnolent life of a barrack, and Adan, who had
a secret preference for the cave, was too loyal to oppose him.

In ten minutes the horses were ready, affectionate good-byes said, and
Roldan and Adan, followed by many good wishes, and prayers to return,
started southeastward through a dense canon.

IV

The vaquero guided the boys rapidly through the canon. The almost
perpendicular walls, black with a dense growth of brush and scrub trees,
towered so high above them that the atmosphere was damp and the long
strip of sky was like a pale-blue banner. The trail was well worn, and
there was nothing to impede their progress. The mustangs responded to
the lifted bridle and ran at breakneck speed. They emerged at the end of
half an hour. It was an abrupt sally, and the great level plain before
them seemed a blaze of sunlight.

"Bueno," said the vaquero, halting. "Ride straight ahead. Keep to the
trail. At night you will come to a river. Before you reach it all trace
of you will be lost, because between now and there are many side trails,
and as the ground is so hard they cannot tell which you take. Cross the
river and take the trail to the left. That will bring you to the
Mission--about twenty miles farther--where the good padres will let you
rest and give you fresh horses. The senor, meanwhile, will throw the
officers off the scent. But if you are wise, you will make for the
Sierras and hide there. Adios, senor, adios, senor;" and he wheeled
about and disappeared into the darkness of the canon.

"We are like the babes in the wood," said Adan. "I feel as if we never
should find our way home again."

"We shall," said Roldan, stoutly; although he, too, felt the chill of
the immense solitude. "And we have begun well! What an adventure to
start with! I am sure we shall have more."

Adan crossed himself.

The boys rode at a long even gallop, the high chaparral closing behind
them. Every half hour they paused, and Roldan, dismounting, held his ear
to the ground. But as yet they were unpursued.

A soft wind blew over the plain, fragrant with the honeydew of the
chaparral. The sun set in a great bank of yellow cloud. Then the night
came suddenly.

A few moments later Roldan called: "Halt!" and held up his hand. "I hear
the rush of the water," he said. "We must be near the river."

"It sounds as if it was high," said Adan. "It has rained hard this
month. Suppose these horses don't swim?"

"We'll make them. Come on."

"Ay! yi!" exclaimed Adan, not many moments after.

They pulled up suddenly on the banks of the river, a body of water about
three hundred yards wide. It was swollen almost level with the high
banks. The tumultuous waters were racing as if Neptune astride them was
fleeing from angry gods. There is something unhuman in the roar of an
angry river: it has a knell in it.

Roldan and Adan looked at each other. The latter's face had paled.
Roldan contracted his lids suddenly, and when his friend met the glance
that grew between them he compressed his lips and involuntarily
straightened himself: he knew its significance.

"We must cross," said Roldan. "It would never do to spend the night on
this side. If they followed, they would never suspect us of crossing. If
we remained here, we could not hear them until they were upon us."

"Very well," said Adan.

Roldan raised his bridle. The mustang did not move forward, but cowered.
"I don't like to hurt horses," said the young don, "but he's got to go."
He clapped his spurs savagely against the animal's sides, and the next
moment the waves were lashing about him.

Adan was beside him at once, and together they breasted the rushing
waters. The mustangs were strong and made fair headway, incited by
terror and the spur. The water was very cold, but the boys scarcely felt
it. Their eyes were strained toward the opposite shore, measuring the
distance, which seemed to grow less very slowly. The stars were thick
and the moon was floating just above the chaparral, but the darkness
about them was grim, and only a narrow line of white indicated the
shore.

The horses were not able to keep a straight course. The current lashed
them about more than once, but they righted, shook the water from their
quivering nostrils, and plunged on.

The boys' glance so persistently sought their haven that they saw
nothing of what was passing about them. They were within twenty yards of
the shore. Adan, having the stronger beast, was some little distance
ahead. He did not observe it. He was registering a vow that if he
reached land in safety he would be drafted every year of his life before
he would ford another river after heavy rain.

Suddenly Roldan became conscious that the wiry little body between his
gripping knees had relaxed somewhat the tension of its muscles. Was the
poor brute collapsing? Roldan leaned over and patted his neck. It
responded for a moment, then fell back again. Roldan set his lips. As he
did so he cast about him the instinctive glance of those in peril. A
huge log was bearing down upon him like a projectile.

In a second his feet were out of his stirrups and he was crouching on
the mustang's back. The log struck the beast full in the side, tossing
Roldan as if he had been a feather. The mustang gave a hoarse neigh,
unheard above the roar of the water.

Roldan, keeping his face from the pounding waves as best he could,
struck out for the bank. But the current was too much for his slender
body, plucky as it was. He made a mighty effort and shouted,--

"Adan!"

The high clear note pierced to his companion's ear. Adan turned his
head, uttered a cry, and pulled his unwilling mustang about. But the
current was carrying the white face on the waves rapidly past.

"Lariat!" Roldan managed to scream.

Adan's faculties had been paralysed for the moment, but they responded
almost automatically to that imperious will. He unwound the lariat
rapidly from the pommel, hastily gathered the loops, then flung it with
sure hand straight at his friend. It fell about Roldan's neck. The boy
jerked it over his shoulders, then signed to Adan to proceed.

Adan once more urged his horse forward, not daring to look behind.
Roldan made no attempt to swim; he merely used his arms to keep his head
above water. There were but a few yards farther. The mustang, despite
his double load, made them, and scrambled up the bank. Adan, realising
for the first time that he was stiff with cold, scrambled off and pulled
in the rope with hands that were aching and almost numb. He heard Roldan
strike the bank, a moment later the snapping of brush. Roldan's head
rose into view, Adan gave a last despairing tug, and a moment later the
two boys lay on their backs, panting for breath.

V

"Do you want any more adventures?" asked Adan feebly, after a time.

"Not at present," said Roldan.

He raised himself stiffly. "Come," he said, "this will never do. We
shall both have rheumatism. We must have a fire at once."

Adan groaned pathetically, but got on his feet. They had found refuge in
the open; but a grove of trees was near, and in a quarter of an hour
they had piled a heap of branches and chaparral as high as an Indian
pyre, hunted up two pieces of flint, and sent sparks flying through the
dry mass.

The boys divested themselves of their dripping clothes and hung them
close to the fire, then raced up and down with what energy was left in
them to scotch the chill night air. Finally they paused breathless
before the pile, which was now roaring merrily.

"I should like to know what we are to have for supper," said Roldan.
"That Mission is twenty miles away, and I for one can't walk to it.
Climb up a tree and see if there is a light anywhere."

"Thanks, senor," said Adan, "when my clothes are dry."

"True, we must keep our skin. I have it!" He sprang on the back of the
mustang, who also had fallen upon reaching the shore but had risen to
nibble for supper, and stood on the tips of his feet. "I can see well,"
he announced. "But all the same I can see nothing. We must stay here."

He dismounted, and relieving the mustang of the heavy saddle, emptied
the bags. "The bread and sweets are soaked," he said, "not fit for a pig
to eat; but we can do something with the meat. Fetch some coals."

Adan with infinite difficulty managed to scrape a few coals apart from
the bonfire, and over this they scorched the meat. As they crouched on
the ground they looked like two little white savages, and they were
neither comfortable nor happy.

"We must keep this fire going all night," said Roldan, "or we shall be
eaten by bears, to say nothing of rattlesnakes--"

"Hist!" whispered Adan. "I hear one." Both boys sprang to their feet.

"Where?"

"Near the horse."

Roldan seized his pistol and ran in the direction indicated, keeping his
eyes on the ground. Suddenly he paused. Something just beyond the light
was growing into a series of graceful loops. A long neck slowly lifted
itself and two baleful eyes fixed upon Roldan. He raised his pistol, and
the rattler was beheaded as neatly as if it were stuffed and dismembered
with a pen knife. It shot out to full length, and the clever marksman
took it by its horny tail and dragged it to the fire.

"He didn't know that we'd have him for supper," said Adan, gleefully.
"Here, let us eat our steak and then I'll skin him."

The steak proved tough, and when it had been disposed of with many
grumblings, the rattlesnake was skinned and roasted, and proved very
delicate and edible.

"Now," said Roldan, "we must sleep." Their clothes being dry they
dressed; and after inspecting with a torch a circle of about two hundred
yards to see that there were no snake holes, they built a hasty ring of
chaparral, set fire to it that beasts and reptiles should keep their
distance, then lay down and slept. Roldan was always a light sleeper,
and with the fire on his mind awoke every few hours and gathered fresh
chaparral or roused the heavier Adan. Coyotes wailed in the distance,
and once as Roldan gathered brush he heard again the deadly rattle. But
they were not disturbed, and even the skies were kind, for although
clouds gathered, they passed.

They awoke in the morning, fresh and vigorous--but also hungry; and
there was little to eat.

"I don't think I should fancy rattlesnake for breakfast," said Roldan,
and Adan shuddered at the mere thought. They cooked a small piece of
meat, all that was left of their store, and it but whetted their
appetite.

"There's only one thing to do," said Roldan, "and that is to get to the
Mission as quickly as possible. Chocolate! Beans! possibly chicken!
Think of it. Come! Come!"

Adan scrambled to his feet and saddled the mustang. It was agreed that
they should ride him by turns, the other running at a brisk trot.

The sun was barely up when they started. A light mist lay on the
turbulent waters and puffed among the sweet-scented chaparral. Roldan
rode during the first hour, Adan running ahead, his glance darting from
right to left, but encountering eyes neither malignant nor savage.
Shortly after he mounted the horse the mist lifted and rolled back to
the ocean. They had left the chaparral some time before and now
discovered that they were in an open plain. In the distance were high
hills over which wound a white trail. Between these hills and the
travellers was a moving mass of something. Adan reined in suddenly.

"Roldan," he said, "are those horses? You have the longer sight."

Roldan made a funnel of his hand. "Surely, surely!" he cried. "What
luck! I hate walking. They are probably wild, but I never saw the
mustang I could not lasso."

"Yes, you can do the lassoing," said Adan, grimly. "My thumb nearly went
off last night, and is twice its size."

"Adan," said his friend, laying his hand on his comrade's knee. "I
haven't thanked you. I haven't mentioned it; but it is because--well--I
lay awake an hour last night trying to think of something to say--and--
and--thinking that I loved you better than my own brothers--"

"That will do, then," said Adan, gruffly. "We'll be kissing each other
in a minute as we did at the Hacienda Perez; and I think that we are
getting too big for that. I hear that American boys never kiss each
other."

"Don't they?" asked Roldan, pricking up his ears. "How I should like to
know some American boys. They must know so many things that we do not.
Who told you?"

"Antonio Scarpia has been in America, you know--in Boston. He came back
last month and rode over a few days ago for the night. I asked him many
questions. He says they never show any feeling except when they get mad,
and that they walk and row and play ball--with the feet, caramba!--and
run about in the snow. He says they would think we were like girls with
our fine clothes and our hammocks--"

"Girls!" cried Roldan, indignantly. "I'd like to see American or any
other boys do better with that bear than we did, or lasso a friend in
the midst of a boiling river as you did. And if they come here to laugh
at us they'll find one pair of fists that are not soft if they do have
lace ruffles over them. And I'd like to see them live all day on a horse
as we do."

"True, true, you are always right," said Adan, soothingly. "Ay, I think
those horses are coming this way. Better get up."

He moved back onto the anquera and Roldan sprang to his place and
unwound the lariat. Like all of its kind, it was a slender woven cord
about eighteen feet in length and made of tough strips of untanned hide.
It was an admirable weapon in skilled hands, but not to be trifled with
by the amateur. Many a careless Californian had lost a finger or thumb,
and more than one had owed it lockjaw.

The wild horses advanced rapidly for a time, but when they saw that the
brother to which curiosity had attracted them was apparently of an
eccentric build they suddenly paused and scattered. Roldan raised the
bridle and dashed in pursuit; but the others were unincumbered, fleet of
foot and terrified. They fled like the wind.

"Drop off!" commanded Roldan, reining in. "Quick! I WILL have one."

Adan slid to the ground and the mustang sprang lightly forward. Roldan
had singled out a well-built black, a little heavier than his mates and
consequently somewhat in their rear. The mustang, who had slept off his
fatigue, had no need of spur; he seemed to enter into the spirit of the
chase--possibly realised that if the chase failed he might have a double
load to carry. He dashed over the rough adobe plain, Roldan holding the
bridle high in his left hand, the coiled lasso in his right. Adan
waddled after, far in the rear. The other horses had fled to the four
winds, but the pursued, occasionally ducking his head and kicking up his
hind legs as if in contempt of the pretensions of mere man, made
straight for the hills. Being undisciplined, however, he got over the
ground clumsily, stumbled once or twice in the wide cracks of the adobe
soil, and finally stopped short for want of wind. He swung about and
glared defiantly at his pursuers out of injected eyes. He had never seen
a lasso before, possibly not a man; but his instinct told him that the
horse and rider behind him were not roving the plain in his own aimless
fashion. He stood pawing the ground and shaking his great red nostrils.
Suddenly to his surprise the part of the horse new to him lifted itself,
and a black coiling something, graceful and swift as a rattlesnake,
sprang through the air with a sharp audible rush. A quarter of a moment
later he neighed with rage and terror: his neck was in a vice.

He gave a leap that nearly dragged Roldan from his saddle; but that
expert young gentleman had secured the lariat to the high pommel of his
saddle in a trice, and Don Jose Perez's mustang had thereafter to bear
the brunt of the strain.

The wild animal pulled and tugged and tore up the ground; but finding
that he but increased his own discomfort, he gradually subsided, and
when Roldan finally turned about and rode slowly toward Adan he followed
meekly enough.

When Adan saw the procession start in his direction he sat down on a
stone to rest, and when it reached him he obeyed orders and sprang on
the mustang's back as Roldan slipped off.

"That was well done, my friend," he said approvingly. "I could see it
all; but I thought my eyes would fly out of my head."

Roldan walked cautiously up to his prize and attempted to pat it gently
on the head. But it was some moments before he was able to touch the
beast, who was sulky, cross, and frightened. When he did he swiftly
loosened the lariat, and this procured him a meed of favour. The horse
then allowed himself to be patted all down the side and back, nor once
raised his hoof.

Suddenly Roldan sprang to his back, gripping the mane with his hands,
the flanks with his knees. But this was one liberty too much. The horse
stood on his hind legs, made as if to go over backward, then suddenly
stiffened all four legs and sprang up and down as automatically as if
worked by a spring. Roldan was now in his element. He had broken in more
than one bucking horse. He remained as immovable as a fly on the top of
a coach, only giving an occasional prick with his spur to madden the
animal and wear him out the sooner.

Roldan had cast the lariat from the animal's neck as soon as he mounted,
and it was well that he had, for his quarry made a sudden dash and did
not stop for half a mile,--when he paused on his forefeet, waving his
hind in the air.

But still Roldan kept his seat, Adan shouting: "Bravo! Bravo!" by way of
encouragement.

The battle lasted nearly an hour; then the mustang confessed himself
conquered, and the boys sought out the trail, from which they had
wandered far, and continued their journey.

"Caramba!" exclaimed Roldan, "but I am famished, not to say tired. If it
had been ten miles instead of twenty, it would not have been worth
while."

VI

They rode on rapidly, too hungry to talk. The ground began to rise, and
they advanced through hills sprouting with the early green of winter.
Once they paused, and tethering the horses where they could feed, shot
several quail and roasted them. But the pangs of hunger were by no means
allayed, and when, in the early afternoon, they saw the white walls of
the Mission below them, they gave a shout of joy.

The Mission stood in the middle of a valley, well away from woods and
hills, and surrounded by a large vineyard and orchard. On the long
corridor traversing the building adjoining the church, several figures
in habit and cowl walked slowly behind the arches. Indians were in the
vineyards and orchards and moving about the rancheria adjacent to the
main buildings. Cattle were browsing on the hills. A stream tangled in
willows cut a zig-zag course across the valley.

The boys rode quickly down the hillside. As the padres heard the
approaching hoof-beats they paused in their walk, and shading their eyes
with their hands gazed earnestly at the travellers.

"Friends! Friends!" cried Roldan gaily, as the tired steeds trotted up
to the corridor. The boys dismounted and made a deep reverence. One of
the priests, a man with a grave stern face came forward.

"Who are you, my children?" he asked. "You are the sons of aristocrats,
and yet you are torn and unkempt, and one of you has ridden many leagues
without a saddle. Are you runaways? The shelter of the Mission is for
all, but we do not countenance insubordination."

Roldan introduced himself and his friend. "We are runaways, my father,"
he added, "but from the government; and we have arranged that our
parents shall not be anxious. We do not wish to be drafted."

The priest's brow relaxed. The padres had little respect for a system
that owed its existence mainly to the vanity of governors and generals,
and the present governor, Micheltorena, had by no means won the approval
of the Church.

"You are welcome, my sons," he said. "If the officers come we cannot
deny your presence; but I do not think they will find their way here,
and we certainly shall not send for them. You are hungry and tired, no?"

"Father, we could eat our horses."

The padre laughed, and calling a young brother who was piously telling
his beads bade him go and see that a hasty luncheon was prepared. An
Indian came and took the mustangs, and the boys were led by the
hospitable priest into a large room, comfortably furnished, the walls
hung with some very good religious pictures.

The padres, in truth, were glad of visitors at any time. They were
clever educated men who had given their lives to christianising
brainless savages in a sparsely settled country; and any news of the
outer world was very welcome. They pushed back their hoods and sat about
the boys, their faces beaming with interest and amusement as they
listened to the adventures of those wayward youths. And as all men, even
priests, love courage and audacity, they clapped their hands together
more than once or embraced the lads heartily.

When luncheon was announced and the doors of the long refectory thrown
open, the boys were shown in as if they had been princes and told to
satisfy themselves. This they did, nor ever uttered a word. The priests
had tactfully withdrawn. Roldan and Adan ate enough beans, rice, cold
chicken, tongue, and dulces to make up for their prolonged fast, and
finished with a cup of chocolate and a bunch of grapes. After that they
went to sleep in two clean little cells, to which they were conducted,
nor awakened until all the air was ringing with the sweet-voiced clangor
of mission bells.

Roldan turned on his elbow and looked out of the window. The square was
rapidly filling with Indians, some running in willingly enough, others
driven in at the end of the leash by the lay brethren. All knelt on the
ground for a few moments. Roldan, whose eyes were very keen, and, during
these days, preternaturally sharpened, noted that several of the Indians
were whispering under cover of the loud mutterings about them. The face
of the Californian Indian is not pleasant to contemplate at any time: it
is either stupid or sinister. Roldan fancied he detected something
particularly evil in the glance of the whispering savages, and resolved
to warn the priests.

The scene was peaceful enough. The cattle browsing on the hills gave the
landscape an air of great repose, and the mountains beyond were lost
under a purple mist. The large stone fountain in the court splashed
lazily. As the worshippers rose and withdrew, the silver bells rang out
a merry peal, announcing that the morrow would be Sunday.

Roldan fell asleep again. When he awoke it was dark outside, but on the
table by his cot was a lighted taper and a dish of fruit. He ate of the
fine grapes and pears, then rose and opened his door. In the small room
beyond a young priest was seated at a table, bending over a large leaf
of parchment, to which he was applying a pen with quick delicate
strokes. He looked up with a smile.

"What are you doing?" asked Roldan, curiously, approaching the table.

"Illuminating the manuscripts of a mass. Look." And he displayed the
exquisite border to the music, the latter written with equal precision
and neatness. "This will be alive when I am not even dust. No one will
know that I did it; but I like the thought that it may live for
centuries."

"If I did it, I should sign my name to it," said Roldan, with his first
prompting of ambition. "But I never could do that; I have not the
patience. I mean to be governor of the Californias."

"I hope you may be," said the young priest, gravely.

"Are all your Indians docile?" asked Roldan, abruptly.

The priest raised his head. "Why do you ask?"

Roldan related his suspicions.

The priest shot a furtive glance through the open window at the dark
square.

"I don't know," he said slowly. "Sometimes I have thought--you see, many
are stubborn and intractable, and have to be flogged and chained.
Privately I think we are wasting our energies. We will leave California
several beautiful monuments for posterity to wonder at, but as for the
Indians we will end where we began. They are always escaping and running
back to the mountains. Their every instinct is for barbarism; they have
not one for civilization, nor can any be planted whose roots will not
trail over the surface. The good Lord intended them to be savages,
nothing more; and it is mistaken sentimentalism--However, it is not for
me to criticise, and I beg, Don Roldan, that you will not repeat what I
have said."

"Of course I shall not; but tell me, do you think there is danger?"

"We have one rather bright young Indian--there are about a dozen
exceptions in all California, and they are treacherous. His name is
Anastacio, and he has great influence with the other Indians. A good
many of them are angry at present because they have been punished for
stealing grapes and stores, and just now they are rather excited because
it has been proposed to banish Anastacio to a Mission where there are
more soldiers,--he is regarded as the inciter of the outrages."

"Have you soldiers here?"

"Eleven. The guard house is in the left hand corner of the square. But
what could they do in an uprising? We must get rid of Anastacio. I will
go now and speak to Padre Flores."

Roldan went out into the square and strolled over to the soldiers'
quarters. The door was closed, but light streamed from an uncovered
window, and he had a good view of the guard room. A half dozen soldiers
were lying about on benches, half-dressed, smoking the eternal
cigarrito. Two were at a table writing. None looked alert, but as Roldan
passed out of the plaza to the open beyond, he encountered a sentinel
who was ready to gossip with the young don and told him that three more
were on duty on the several sides of the square.

Roldan strolled on to the rancheria, a collection of six or eight
hundred huts of mud and straw among a thicket of willows by the creek.
Here all was dark and quiet. He glanced through several of the
uncurtained windows and saw whole families peacefully asleep. Suddenly
he paused and held his breath, at the same time retreating into the
heavy shade of a willow. A number of doors had opened almost
simultaneously; there was the sharp crunch of dry brush, and dark
figures glided, with the snake-like motion peculiar to the Indian,
toward the upper end of the rancheria.

Roldan waited a moment, then followed softly. He had set himself the
duty of saving the Mission which had shown him hospitality, and was not
to be deterred. Moreover, the spirit of adventure was by no means
quenched.

In a few moments he paused opposite a large hut, from which issued a
subdued murmur. The window had been covered, but a thin ray of light
pierced through a crack in the door, and to this Roldan applied his eye.

The room was crowded with Indians standing respectfully about a man in
the middle of the room, whom Roldan knew instinctively to be Anastacio.
He was big and clean-limbed and sinewy, with small cunning eyes, a
resolute mouth and chin, and an air of perfect fearlessness. Roldan
warmed to him, and looked with admiration and envy at the muscles on his
splendid limbs.

He was speaking rapidly in the native patois, and Roldan could gather
little of his meaning beyond what his gestures conveyed. He shook his
fist in the direction of the Mission, snapped his fingers in scorn,
pointed toward the mountains, then made the motion of speeding an arrow
from the bow, at the same time contracting his face hideously.

Roldan stayed as long as he dared, then returned hastily to the Mission.
A friar was locking up for the night, and began to chide the young guest
for being out so late, but Roldan interrupted him impatiently.

"Can I see Padre Flores to-night?" he asked. "I must see him. It is
important."

"He has retired to his cell, but I will take your message; and he never
denies himself to those that need him."

He went to the end of the corridor and tapped at a door. In a few
moments he returned.

"Padre Flores will see you," he said.

The priest was standing by the little altar in the corner of his cell
when Roldan entered.

"What is it, my son?" he asked. "Have you learned anything new? Padre
Estenega has told me of your suspicions."

Roldan rapidly related what he had seen. The priest's face became grave
and anxious.

"There is trouble brewing, I fear," he said. Then he smiled suddenly.
"You ran away to avoid fighting. It would be odd if you found yourself
in the midst of it."

"I did not run away to avoid fighting," said Roldan, flushing hotly.
"Pardon, father; I meant that you have misunderstood. I do not choose to
be shut up in a barrack against my will, but I am ready to fight; and,
although I am not yet sixteen, you shall see that I can help you protect
your Mission. And Adan too."

"I am sure of it. I did but tease you. And your part shall begin to-
night. You are rested, no?"

"I feel as if I wanted no more sleep for a week."

"Very well. Tell brother Antonio--whom you met on the corridor just now
--to let you in the church by the side door and give you the key, with
which you will lock yourself in. Then go up into the belfry and watch.
It is the full of the moon and clear. If you merely see a dozen or more
figures gliding about the rancheria, that will mean that they are
plotting, and intend no action to-night. If you see several hundred, run
down and bring me word. But if you see a mass of men rise at once and
descend upon the west gate, ring the bells. I shall go and warn the
soldiers, and every priest and brother will sleep on his pistol to-
night. But I don't think they are organised as yet. Before dawn I shall
send a messenger to the nearest town for reinforcements. Go, my son. You
are a brave and clever lad."

Roldan ran down the corridor and secured admission to the church. When
he had locked the door behind him, the vast dark building, beneath whose
tiles priests lay buried, shook his spirit as night and the plains had
not done, and he wished that he had brought Adan. Then he jerked his
shoulders, reflected that cowards did not carry off the prizes of the
world, and determined that his first should be the admiration and
approval of the priests and soldiers of this great Mission. He walked
rapidly down the nave, trying not to hear the hollow echo of his
footsteps, then opened several doors before he found the one behind
which was the spiral stair leading to the belfry. His supple legs
carried him swiftly up the steep ascent, and in a moment he was
straining his eyes in the direction of the rancheria.

The belfry was about ten feet square. The massive walls contained three
large apertures, through which the clear sonorous notes of the great
bells carried far. Just beneath the arch Roldan had selected as
observatory, and on the side opposite the plaza was the private garden
of the padres, surrounded by cloisters. An aged figure, cowled, his arms
folded, was pacing slowly.

Roldan, glancing over his shoulder, saw Padre Flores return from the
soldiers' quarters; but in the rancheria there was no motion but the
swaying tops of the willows, and no sound anywhere but the hoot of the
owl and the yap of the coyote.

It was a long and lonely watch. Roldan felt as if he were suspended in
air, cut off from Earth and all its details. Although his military
instinct had been aroused and he burned for fight, his spirit grew
graver in that isolation, and he resolved to do all he could to save the
Mission from attack. It was there for peace and good deeds, and its
preservation was of far more importance than a small pair of spurs for
Master Roldan.

Nevertheless, Roldan was to win his spurs.

Toward morning he saw an Indian, attended by a priest, let himself out
of a gate and steal toward the corral. A few moments later he
reappeared, leading a mustang up the valley in the shadow of the trees.
The priest re-entered the gate, and Roldan knew that the messenger had
gone forth for help.

At sunrise a brother came running up the stair. "Better go down," he
said, smiling. "I am going to ring for mass, and it will deafen you. You
saw nothing, of course?"

"Nothing."

"We did not expect it, and slept. It takes time to organise."

"Have they any weapons?"

"Their bows and arrows. We have always thought it best to leave them
those in case of assault by savage tribes."

Roldan descended the stair as the bells rang out their peremptory
summons. Although he was tired and sleepy, he determined to remain in
the church during mass, and knelt near the altar by a pillar where he
could command a view of the nave. Almost the first to enter was
Anastacio. He carried himself proudly--like a warrior, thought Roldan--
and advancing to the altar bowed low, then knelt stiffly, his eyes
closed.

The others drifted in slowly: the women kneeling on the right, the men
on the left. Finally all the priests and brothers, except Padre Flores,
who conducted the service, entered and knelt in the aisle. Padre Flores'
garments were as rich as any worn in old Spain, and the candelabra about
him were as massive. The images of the saints were clad in white satin
embroidered with gold and silver thread. On the walls were many high-
coloured paintings of saints, softened by the flood of light from the
wax candles.

Roldan watched keenly all the faces within the line of his vision. They
were mostly sleepy. Suddenly, as his glance shifted, it encountered the
eyes of Anastacio. Those powerful crafty orbs were fixed upon him under
drawn brows.

"He suspects me," thought Roldan, and then once more demonstrated that
several of his talents were diplomatic. He glanced past the Indian
indifferently to the women, then to the priests, and from there to the
paintings and altar, his regard but that of the curious traveller.

When Roldan left the church he encountered Adan, who evidently had
entered last and knelt near the door.

"Where did you go last night?" Adan demanded loudly.

"I sat up talking to the priests and roaming about the square," replied
Roldan. Anastacio was almost at his elbow.

"Well, I had had sleep enough by twelve o'clock and I went into your
cell, and then spent the rest of the night waiting for you to come
back."

"I hope breakfast is ready. Come."

They went to the refectory, where Padre Flores embraced Roldan heartily,
but made no allusion to his watch; there were Indian servants present.
After breakfast the two boys walked up and down the middle of the
square, and Roldan related his experience of the night. Adan listened
with open mouth and shortened breath.

"Caramba!" he ejaculated. "Is there to be a fight?"

"I am sure of it. Are you frightened?"

"Not I. I'd rather fight Indians than ford a river. But do you think we
can hold out?"

"We can try. And if they don't make the attack to-night, we shall have
the better chance, because the reinforcement will arrive to-morrow. But
that Anastacio suspects me, and doubtless he has discovered in some way
that the messenger has gone. I am sure there will be trouble to-night,
and I am going now to get a good sleep. Do you sleep, too; and see that
you eat no dulces for supper, lest they make you heavy."

He awoke about four in the afternoon. There was a babel of voices in the
plaza, and he sprang out of bed, excited with the thought that war had
begun. But he saw only a typical Mission Sabbath afternoon. Several
hundred Indians were seated on the ground in groups of two or three,
gambling furiously. Through the open gates opposite, Roldan could see a
spirited horse-race, a crowd of Indians betting at the top of their
voices.

Roldan went to the kitchen and asked for a cold luncheon, then sought
Padre Flores. The priest was in his cell, and as he saw Roldan he
motioned to him to close the door.

"I can learn nothing, my son," he said; but something in the air tells
me that there will be trouble to-night. Will you watch again?"

"I will, my father."

"We will all sleep on our pistols. Now listen. All we can do is to
protect the gates. If you ring once that means that the Indians are
advancing on the south gate, the one nearest the rancheria. But they are
crafty, and will doubtless seek to enter by one less guarded. Two peals
will mean the west gate, three the east, and a wild irregular clamour
the north. Can you remember?"

"I can, my father," said Roldan, proudly.

"I believe you. Go up into the tower at sundown, which is the hour when
the gates are closed. As soon as you have finished ringing you can come
down and join in the fight. The arms will be kept in the room where we
sat yesterday until your meal was made ready. Now go, my son, and God
bless you. Ah!" he called after him. "Wait a moment. Get a cassock and
put it on. It will make you shapeless among the bells. Otherwise you
might be seen."

Roldan was at his post as soon as the Indians had been driven through
the gates for the night. They straggled about the valley, still talking
excitedly; but there was nothing unusual in this, the watcher had been
told. Gradually they moved toward the rancheria, disappeared into it,
and the valley was as quiet as it had been the night before.

In the great court there were rifts of light at irregular intervals; the
heavy wooden shutters of every window were ajar. Roldan felt the nervous
tension of those minds below, and with it a sense of companionship, very
different from the oppressive loneliness of his previous watch.

The clock of the Mission had just struck eleven when Roldan stood
suddenly erect and hooped his hands about his eyes. Something was moving
in the willows beside the river. The moon shone full on the rancheria,
and when the outer edge of the latter appeared to broaden and project
itself the effect was noticeable at once.

Roldan watched breathlessly. In a moment there could no longer be any
doubt: a broad compact something was moving down the valley toward the
Mission. And an army of cats could not have made less sound.

He laid his hand on the bell rope. The Indians came swiftly, but their
course was not yet defined. When within a hundred yards of the Mission
they deflected suddenly to the right. Their destination was not the
south gate.

Roldan closed his eyes for a half moment to relieve them of the strain,
then opened them and held his breath. Only the outer fringe of the
little army could now be seen; it was crawling close to the western
wall. In a few moments they were beneath Roldan; he could hear the
slight impact with the air. Then once more he strained his eyes until he
thought they would fly from his head, and his lungs seemed bursting.
They were approaching the west gate.

They passed it. There could be no doubt now that they purposed to attack
the north gate; but Roldan dared not ring until they were well away from
the west side, lest they change their plans and his signal mislead.

As they reached the corner of the wall they suddenly accelerated their
pace as if impatience mastered them. When the tail of the procession had
whisked about and Roldan saw a compact mass move like a black cloud
before the wind toward the north gate, he caught the rope in both hands
and jangled with all his might.

The great clapper hurled itself against the mighty sides of the bell
with a violence which split the nerves and made the ear-drums creak. The
blood surged to Roldan's head, carrying chaos with it. He had a confused
sense of a flood of light in the plaza below, but could hear no other
sound except the deafening uproar in his ears. Suddenly something gave
way beneath his feet. He had an awful feeling of disintegration, of
solid parting from solid in empty space. He kicked out wildly. His feet
touched nothing. Then his head suddenly cleared, although the deep tones
of the bell still seemed echoing there, and he became aware that his
descent had stopped, and that his hands, torn and aching, were still
clutching the rope. He knew what had happened. He had stepped too far
and gone through one of the arches.

There was no time for fright. He began to pull himself up by the rope,
hand over hand. At the same time he was acutely conscious of many
things. The Indians were yelling like demoniacs and battering at the
gate. In the garden on the other side, the old priest was shouting Ave
Marias in a high quavering voice. A breeze had sprung up and Roldan felt
the chill in it. And he felt the weight of the cassock. The heavy
woollen garment fatigued his arms and impeded his progress. Were it not
for that he could scramble up like a monkey.

He was within two feet of the top. Suddenly he felt a slackening of the
rope, accompanied by a faint sickening sound. The rope was old, it was
giving way.

Roldan made a wild lurch for the projecting floor of the belfry. The
rope broke. He went down.

He had heard that a drop, however swift, might seem to occupy hours to
the doomed. To his whirling horror-struck brain this descent certainly
seemed very long. It was almost as if he were sauntering. Nor was he
tumbling over and over. He had shut his eyes tight when the rope
snapped. He opened them, gave a shuddering glance downward, then laughed
almost hysterically: his cassock, ample even for a man, had caught the
breeze and spread out on all sides like a parachute.

And although the descent occupied but a moment longer, he comprehended
the situation, with his abnormally sharpened senses, as clearly as
though he stood on high with a spy glass.

All the inhabitants of the Mission proper--the priests, brothers,
soldiers, and house servants--were standing before the north gate,
firearms in hand. Beyond were some twenty-five Indians battering and
yelling, making noise enough to induce the belief that they numbered ten
times as many more. The rest were not to be seen, but it was not
difficult for Roldan to suspect their purpose.

He lighted on the stone steps of the church, tore off his heavy garment,
and ran toward the north gate. As he did so the east gate fell with a
crash, and five hundred Indians rushed into the plaza.

They uttered no sound. The guard at the upper end of the square was not
aware of their advent until Roldan reached them. He was out of breath,
but he caught the arm of the man nearest him and pointed. In a second
the word had passed, and the handful of defendants stared helplessly at
the advancing hordes. But only for a moment. Padre Flores shouted to
fall into line, then ordered them not to fire in the same breath.
Anastacio, somewhat ahead of his followers, was approaching with a white
rag in his hand.

When within a yard of the missionaries he paused and saluted
respectfully.

"A word, my fathers," he commanded, and in excellent Spanish.

"Go on," said Padre Flores, sternly.

"We have not come to kill," said Anastacio, slowly and with great
distinctness: the noise beyond the north gate had ceased. "You know that
we never kill the priests, nor do we care for blood. We have come for
the stores of the Mission--all your great winter supply, except a small
quantity which we will leave you that you may not suffer until you can
get more. We are tired of this life. We belong to the mountains. We
cannot see that we are any better for your teachings, and we certainly
are not as strong. Now let us do our work in peace, and all will be
well. But if you fire, we let our arrows go, and we are twenty to one."

All turned anxiously to Padre Flores. They were not warlike, and if no
bodily harm was intended they could see no reason for resistance.

"You have us at disadvantage," said Padre Flores, coldly. "I cannot
sacrifice those in my charge, if you do not mean to kill. I agree to
your terms on one condition: that we retain our firearms. I pass my word
that no one shall shoot. I cannot take your word--nor that of any
Indian. As you say, our teachings are thrown away."

"I take yours," said Anastacio, undisturbed. "All I ask is that you
remain here under charge of twenty of my followers until I call them
away."

He marched off, after planting his guard; and for the next two hours he
and his men looted the Mission and packed the trove on horses which had
been brought up, or on the backs of the bigger Indians. At the end of
that time he shouted to his prisoners to come down and enter the
Mission.

Roldan and Adan had been exchanging bitter condolences over the
humiliating change in the warlike programme, but the raw air of the
morning had chilled their enthusiasm, and Roldan, moreover, began to
feel reaction from the shock to his nerves. It was not every day that a
boy sailed down through forty feet of space and lit on his feet, and his
nerves were out of tune.

When Anastacio called, he went with the rest, but lagged behind. The
door of the Mission sala was open. The priests entered first, their
heads scornfully erect; then the brethren, the soldiers, and servants.
As Roldan and Adan were about to enter, the door was suddenly pulled to,
coarse hands were clapped over their mouths, and, kicking, struggling,
biting, scratching, they were borne swiftly across the courtyard and out
of the gates. There they were set on their feet, and found themselves
face to face with Anastacio.

"Don't yell," he said. "There is no one to come to the rescue. We shall
not hurt you unless you try to run away. Then I myself will beat you.
Get on that horse, both of you."

"I am tired," said Roldan, indifferently. "I want to sleep."

"Sleep? Very well. Come here."

He lifted him upon a large horse, then mounted behind and encircled him
with one arm.

"Go to sleep," he said; and cantered rapidly down the valley, followed
by his thieving horde.

VII

When Roldan awoke he shivered slightly: the breath of winter was about
him. He peered into the dusk, but could only gather that he was in a
forest of huge trees on the side of a mountain. High above the wind was
surging. He had a curious sense of travelling through the depths of the
sea in a vacuum, the roar of suspended waters just over his head.
Behind, between the giant trees, was a moving column of horses and men.

"Where are we?" he asked Anastacio.

"In the mountains, in a redwood forest. My pueblo is not far."

"What mountains? What forest?"

"That you will not know."

"Where is Adan?"

"On a stout mustang between two faithful followers of mine."

"They are unnecessary. He would not leave me."

"Perhaps not. Sometimes the white man lies and sometimes he is true."

Roldan sat up; his tired head had rested against the shoulder of his
captor.

"Suppose I get behind you," he said. "It will be more comfortable for us
both. That is, if you can trust me," with an attempt at sarcasm.

"I trust you. Get behind."

Roldan slipped down, sprang up, then strained his eyes once more into
the depths of the forest. Nothing moved but that winding procession.
Occasionally a coyote yapped or a wildcat yelled. Suddenly something
fell against his face, pricking it gently. He looked over Anastacio's
shoulder. They were passing into an open. The air was full of white,
whirling particles.

"It snows," said Anastacio; "but we are soon there."

"We are in the Sierras," thought Roldan. He looked about with intense
interest; he had never seen snow before; and to penetrate the mystery of
the mighty Sierras had been one of the hopes of his life. The ground was
white, and crunched under the horses' hoofs. The air was thick with
snow-stars glittering under the full radiance of the moon. Roldan forgot
that he was a captive. His mind had made its first impulse to the
mysteries of night and solitude during the few moments between his entry
into another forest and the encounter with the bear; it now made its
first real opening. He was vaguely troubled by the embryonic thoughts
that in their maturity come to men who have lived and suffered, when
they are alone in a forest at night, far from other men.

Again they plunged into the forest. No snow penetrated the treetops,
knit together by centuries and storms. All was black again, and the deep
ocean of leaf and branch roared faintly overhead.

Roldan felt oppressed and thoughtful. He looked into the future and saw
himself a man. He would be governor of the Californias, and make himself
a good and great man, wiser than the idle caballeros who patronised him;
he would teach them the folly of their useless lives.

"Look," said Anastacio, abruptly. "We are here. It is a pueblo of my
fathers, and will serve us now."

He pointed with his riding switch through the trees to a vague
whiteness, and in a moment they emerged into another open. It was a
clearing some three hundred feet square, crowded with dilapidated
hovels, white under a light fall of snow. It was in the heart of the
Sierras, on the flat of a peak; and high on every side reared other
peaks, glittering with snow, black with redwoods. The snow clouds had
passed. The moon rode in a dark blue sky set thick with stars. The
silence, the repose, were appalling.

Roldan jumped to the ground, and accompanied by Anastacio, ran up and
down to get the cold and fatigue of night travel out of his body. In a
few moments they were joined by Adan, who came waddling up, his broad
face knit with perplexity and delight.

"I leave you now," said Anastacio, "but remember--if you attempt to
escape you carry poisoned arrows in your backs."

"Ay, Roldan!" exclaimed Adan, when their formidable host was out of
hearing. "But this was more than we bargained for. I don't know whether
I like it or not."

"I must say I don't like the idea of being in the power of savages--
Indians," said Roldan, contemptuously. "But as we started out for
adventure we must take black bread with white. I think I do rather like
this, but I shall not if we have to stay here too long and nothing
happens."

"Isn't anything likely to happen?" asked Adan, anxiously.

"How can one tell? And who could find this place? But if worst comes to
worst we'll run away--and not with poisoned arrows in our backs,
either."

"That we will," said Adan, emphatically. "We've done that before."

The boys were given a good supper of meat roasted over coals, and a
slice of Mission cake, then were escorted by Anastacio to the largest of
the huts.

"Enter and sleep," he said. "It is my hut. I shall sleep beside you."

VIII

The boys slept soundly between two excellent Mission blankets in a
corner of the hut, whose walls and floors had been well swept with
Mission brooms. Anastacio, despite his contempt for the trammels of
civilisation, had developed an aristocratic taste or two. He slept by
the door, but when the boys awoke he was not there. The pueblo, but for
two sentinels standing before the door, was apparently deserted. The sun
was looking over the highest peak, suffusing the black aisles of the
forest with a rosy glow, reddening the snow on hut and level and rocky
heights. There was not a sound except the faint murmur of the treetops.

"Where is the world?" asked Roldan. "Are there ranches, with cavalcades
and bull-fights, lazy caballeros lying in hammocks smoking cigarritos,
or dancing the night through with silly girls? Dios de mi alma! I feel
as if I did not care."

"Caramba!" exclaimed Adan, "I am famished. Do you suppose they have left
us anything to eat?"

"I suppose there is nothing to do but ask one of these dogs to be good
enough to give us breakfast--no, not ask. I could starve, but not beg of
an Indian."

He beckoned haughtily to one of the sentinels, who approached and
saluted respectfully.

"Breakfast," said the young don, curtly. "We wish to eat at once."

The Indian went over to a large stone oven and took out four meal cakes,
which he carried to the boys, then fetched them fruit and wine.

"Where is Anastacio and the others?" asked Roldan, breakfast over.

"In the temascal."

Roldan sprang to his feet. "Do you hear that, Adan?" he cried. "We have
always wanted to see Indians in temascal." To the sentinel, "Take us
there at once."

The Indian scowled. "But for you, senor, we, too, are in the temascal."

"Take us to the temascal," said Roldan, peremptorily, and the savage, in
whom servility had been planted by civilisation, yielded to the will of
the aristocrat. He bent his shoulders and said: "Bueno; come!"

The boys followed him through the brush, the sweet-scented chaparral on
which the honey-dew still lingered, to another and smaller clearing.
Here were several long rows of earthen huts, three or four feet high,
out of which smoke poured through an aperture in the roof of each. Near
by was a broad creek to which the bank sloped gently from the clearing.
The creek, some three feet deep, murmured over coloured stones and
sprouting trees. The long fine strands of the ice grass trailed far over
the water, motionless. Huge bunches of maidenhair, delicate as green
lace, clung to the steep bluffs on the opposite side. Forests of ferns
grew close to the water's edge. Down through a rift in the cliffs
tumbled a mountain stream over its rocky bed.

"Are they stewing in those things?" asked Roldan.

The Indian nodded. Roldan, followed closely by Adan, approached one of
the temascals and opened the door cautiously. At first they could see
nothing, so dense was the smoke; but when much had rushed out through
the new opening, they saw two prostrate figures, sweating from every
pore. Their eyes were closed, they breathed stertorously. The expression
on their heavy faces was beatific.

"Caramba!" exclaimed Adan, as Roldan closed the door, "I am glad they
like it. What a lot of trouble to get clean."

"As they never take a bath, they couldn't get clean any other way; and
besides it rests them after any great exertion--Mission raiding, for
instance--and they also fancy it drags every humour out through the
pores of the skin. They'll be coming out soon. Let us go down to the
creek and wait."

The smoke was ascending upward in straight columns through the still
air, scarcely clouding the brilliant morning, not a wreath wandering
into the aisles of the forest. The sun climbed higher, melting the light
fall of snow, its rays dancing among the silver ripples of the water,
vivifying the many greens about the creek.

The boys amused themselves flinging pebbles at the darting trout and
discussing chances of escape.

"We must not fly too soon," said Roldan, "or we shall run into the
soldiers. Of course they are scouring the country after these robbers."

"This is a good place to hide in until the Mission food gives out; but
I'd prefer even the barracks to living on acorns--Ay, look!"

The door of one of the temascals had opened. A limp figure tottered
forth and down to the bank. He almost fell into the creek, but had
sufficient wit uncooked to rest his head on a projecting stone.
Presently came another, then another, and another, until the bright
rocks were covered with dusky forms, the heads bobbing just above the
surface, supported on stump or stone. The boys barely recognised
Anastacio. Where was that commanding presence, that haughty mien? Bowed
like an old man, blind from smoke, with simmering brain, he reeled into
the water with as little dignity as his creatures.

But in less than an hour all had sprung forth briskly, danced about in
the sun to dry, and started on a run for the pueblo. Roldan and Adan
followed close, knowing that a feast alone would satisfy appetite after
the temascal. And in a little time the smell of roast meat pervaded the
morning, great cakes were roasting. The boys were invited to eat apart
with Anastacio. At the conclusion of the meal the host, who had not
spoken, solemnly poured out three glasses of fire-water. He swallowed
his at a gulp. The boys sipped a few drops, winking rapidly. Then Roldan
thought it time to speak: his chief was visibly thawed.

"What are you keeping us for?" he asked.

"Ransom." Anastacio lit a cigarrito--one of the padre's--and lay back
on a bearskin.

"Do you know why we ran away? To escape the conscription. If you give us
up, all our adventures, our dangers, our escapes, will be as nothing,
and we shall be punished besides."

Anastacio moved his eyes to Roldan's with a flash of interest.

"Good! I hate the government. You shall stay here until the time of
conscription is over. Then I will get a big sack of Mexican dollars, a
herd of cattle, a caponara of horses, and much tobacco and whiskey. Who
are your fathers?"

Roldan explained.

Anastacio flushed under his thick skin. "Good. I will double the
ransom--and the guard."

"The conscription will be over in a few weeks--"

"You could not go before. We too must hide. Of course the soldiers are
behind. I have many scouts watching. Now go to sleep."

The following week was clear and bright, but very cold. The boys, bred
in the warm basin of California, must have suffered had not Anastacio
ordered one of his minions to make them coat and boots from the skin of
the coyote. Every morning the chief drilled his men with the tactics of
a born commander who had let no opportunity for observation escape him.
The military discipline of the pueblo was only relaxed for three hours
in the afternoon, during which time the Indians were given full taste of
the freedom they coveted that they might battle for it the more
passionately when the time came. They gambled, slept, shot game in the
forest, exercised the horses, which were in corral about a mile from the
camp. The boys shot deer with Anastacio, and wrestled in the plaza.
Occasionally the taciturn Indian unbent when sitting by the great
bonfire in the open at night, and told wild tales of savage life before
the padres came. Roldan admired his splendid supple body and fearless
manhood, but the Indian was too sinister to inspire affection. Adan was
loudly bored. Roldan's ardent imagination sustained him.

At the end of the week the scouts having failed to discover any sign of
the enemy, Anastacio determined to go down to the river in the valley
for a fortnight's salmon fishing. He, too, was bored. The fangs of
civilisation are long and tenacious.

It was on a brilliant winter's morning that Anastacio, his captives, and
his five hundred men wound their way down through the cold forest on the
mountain into the soft warm air of the valley. There had been no rain
for three weeks, and the river was not more than half full; and it was
very quiet. They camped on the bank, well away from the scattered groups
of trees, that they might not lose a ray of sunshine; and Roldan and
Adan forgot that they were under constant surveillance. There were no
tents; they slept in the open air, the boys in the centre of a square of
Indians. During the day they caught many fine salmon, and salted what
they did not eat, to sell to the rancheros.

It was on the sixth night that Roldan, who was wakeful, suddenly raised
himself on his elbow and listened intently. Far away, above the murmur
of the river, the audible slumbers of the camp, he heard a low, precise,
monotonous sound. He knew what it meant. For a moment he hesitated. The
chances of escape seemed to grow less daily. It was true that he was in
no danger, that he would eventually be restored to his parents--but with
his adventures cut short. He was fond of his home, but it was always
there, and he was keen for variety: his life had been very uneventful.
On the other hand, if that advancing army conquered the Indians, might
not his and Adan's captivity be far more distasteful than it was at
present? He sprang up and called Anastacio. In a second that warrior was
on his feet and had leaped over his alert sentinels into the square.

"What is it?" he demanded.

"Listen."

Anastacio threw himself full length and laid his ear to the ground. A
moment later he was erect again. He caught Roldan by one shoulder and
Adan by the other. By this time every Indian in the camp was pressing
about his chief.

"They are not two miles away," said Anastacio. "And the dawn will be
here in an hour. There are ten miles between us and the mountains. I
don't wish to fight in the open without knowing their numbers."

Roldan danced up and down with sudden excitement. "I have a plan," he
cried. "You can trust me. I don't want to go back."

Anastacio bent his keen malevolent eyes close above the young
Spaniard's, then loosened his hold.

"Bueno," he said. "I trust you."

"The straw," said Roldan. "Bring it all here."

Anastacio gave the order, and an immense carreta of straw was trundled
up.

"Now," said Roldan, "gather it into bunches the size of a man's head and
tie each firmly. The tide is running toward the enemy, and it is too
dark to see clearly. Do you understand, senor?"

Anastacio made a loud exclamation, caught Roldan in his arms and kissed.
him, much to that haughty young gentleman's disgust, then tied the first
bunch himself. Roldan, Adan, and some forty of the quicker Indians
rapidly manipulated the straw, and in little more than ten minutes had
cast a hundred round compact bundles into the hurrying tide. As they
sailed away they certainly looked, under the heavy shadow of the banks
and the black-blue of the sky, like an army of men swimming with the
desperate haste of terror, their heads alone above water.

"Now!" cried Anastacio, "to the mountains."

They had brought only pack-horses. There was nothing to do but run, and
Anastacio, driving his entire following ahead of him, sped to cover. It
was not twenty minutes before they heard a sharp volley of musketry, and
if their breath had not been short they would have laughed aloud at the
success of Roldan's strategy. The sky was turning grey as they reached
the straggling outposts of the forest on the mountain. The firing had
ceased. Their ruse had doubtless been discovered.

"We will hide for twenty-four hours and rest," Anastacio said to Roldan,
who was the only person he condescended to hold converse with, although
he allowed Adan to sun himself in his presence. "By that time, too, I
shall know their numbers. If they are many I'll draw them into the
mountains and fire from ambush. If few, they shall have open fight."

"You will let us see it?" asked Roldan, eagerly. "Of course I cannot
fight my own people; but I don't want to be sent to the pueblo, and I do
want to see a fight."

Anastacio hesitated. "Bueno," he said, "I owe you much. You give me the
word of the California don that unless I am killed you will not run
away?"

"I promise. There is nothing else to do. That is to say, I promise not
to run away before this battle is over."

"That is what I mean," said Anastacio, curtly. "Now we will sleep."

He disposed his men in the forest above a narrow, rocky canon into which
the enemy would hardly venture. Roldan volunteered to keep watch with
the two sentinels, and returned with them to the outskirts of the
forest. The enemy was marching steadily across the valley. After a time
they halted, and lay down for a time. Early in the afternoon they
resumed march, then halted again within a mile of the mountain, sending
two scouts ahead. By this time Anastacio had joined his sentinels, and
all four hid in the underforest between the great trees.

The scouts, keeping as much under cover as was possible, crept up the
lower spur of the mountain, their glance describing a constant half-
circle. When they were within a few feet of the fugitives, Anastacio
raised his bow and discharged two arrows in rapid succession. One buried
itself in the jugular of the foremost scout, and he huddled down among
the soft leaves without a cry. The other, equally well aimed, entered
the shoulder of the second scout, where it quivered violently for a few
seconds, then was torn forth and flung to the ground with a cry of
defiance. The Californian, disregarding his wound, raised himself to his
full height and pointed his pistol. But vaguely: the quiet, feathery
young redwoods told no tales. Then his eye fell upon his dead brother.
He turned and fled.

"They will not enter the forest," said Anastacio; "and when I am ready
they will fight, not before. Have you pencil and paper, senor?"

Roldan produced a treasured note-book that a relative had brought him
from Boston.

"Write," said the chief; and he dictated:--

SENOR DON CAPITAN,--At noon to-morrow we fight in the valley near the
eight oak trees and the two madronos. Do you wish to fight sooner you
can come into the mountains. It will be better for us.
ANASTACIO.

He tore out the leaf, crawled down the mountain as non-apparently as a
python, and pinned it high on an outstanding redwood, then returned and
told his sentinels to sleep, replacing them with others.

IX

That evening Anastacio called Roldan to him.

"I fear treachery," he said. "Who can trust five hundred men that have
learned too much? And the white men, they have better brains than mine.
I watch to-night. Will you watch with me, senor?--that I can sleep
before morning and rest for the fight."

"I will," said Roldan, enthusiastically. "And Adan also?"

"It matters not."

When the dusk was so thick in the aisles that every moving frond looked
like a man looming suddenly, one of the sentinels returned with the news
that the paper had been taken from the tree, and that the Californians
had pitched tents, and to all appearance were at rest for the night.

It was not likely that the enemy would venture into the forest at night.
They were not a large body, they were not pressed for time, nor were
they the heroes of many wars. The Indians were comparatively safe until
morning; nevertheless, Anastacio was too good a general to relax
vigilance. When night came he and the two boys went down the mountain
and sent the outpost back to sleep. They ventured out where the trees
grew far apart, and the brilliant stars of California illumined the
great valley like so many thousand watch-fires.

The three sat down side by side, their gaze directed steadily downward
and outward.

"Why do you fight at all?" asked Roldan. "You could stay in these
mountains until the Californians were dust, and not be caught."

"And live like hunted beasts. I like the valley; the sun in winter, the
cool mountains in summer. If I am victor to-morrow, all the Indians in
California will call me chief. They will run here from every Mission and
hacienda, and from every hill and mountain, like little ones to their
good father; and we will drive the priests out of the country, and make
the hidalgos, the caballeros, the soft silk-dressed donas our friends or
our slaves--as they wish. California belongs to us. The Great Spirit
put us here, not the white man. If it was for them why did they not grow
out of the earth as we did? Why were we put here at all if our land was
not for us? We were happy until these priests came to drive us mad
making boots and mud bricks and wine all day, driven like dogs to the
kennel, flogged when we wanted to lie in the sun--"

"But, Anastacio," interrupted Roldan, who had listened to this strange
outburst with the vague consciousness that the soul of an expiring race
had opened its lips for a brief moment, "you are far more clever than
most Indians. If it were not for the priests you would be no better than
the most ignorant of them."

"If I am clever now, senor, was I not clever in the beginning? You do
not make cake out of bran. The Great Spirit sent his light into me and
said: 'Thou shalt be a great chief.' I could have done as well and
better without the priests. What good did it do me to read and tell my
beads and make chocolate? Was I happy at the Mission? Not for one moon,
senor. I felt as if I had a wild beast chained in me that choked and
panted for the free life of my youth, of my fathers. I ran away from the
Mission twenty-three times--and was brought back and flogged. Many times
I would have crushed my head with a stone had it not been that all the
other Indians of the Mission ran to me like dogs, and that I could make
them tremble with a word and obey with a look. I knew that the Great
Spirit had given me what these poor creatures had not, and that one day
I would give California to them again. It has begun."

"But we have better things to eat and drink and more comfortable houses
and clothes than you have in your pueblos. I like what the priests call
'civilisation.'"

"It is for the white man, not for the Indian with a skin like the earth
and a heart like the wild-cat. If we did not know of fine bread and thin
wine and heavy shoes and cursed bags about our legs we should not want
them. Padre Flores says that he and the other priests came here to make
us happy. Why not let us be happy in our own way? We needed no
teaching."

Years after, Roldan, who grew to know the world well and many men,
recalled the conversation of that night, and meditated upon the strange
workings of the human mind: the fundamental philosophy of life differs
little in the brain of the savage and the brain of the student-thinker.

"We are told that we must progress, grow better," he said.

"Hundreds and hundreds of years Indians lived and died here before the
priests came. All legends say they were happy. Now they 'progress,' and
suffer--in the body and in the spirit. One life is for us, another for
you. Should the white man have many children and children's children
until all the mountains and valleys of California are his, then will all
the Indians die, even though they are treated well for they are slaves--
no more. Are they happy? For what were they made? To be slaves and die
from the earth before they are threescore and ten, to be no more
remembered than the beasts of the field?"

"I hope you'll win to-morrow," cried Roldan, his young mind moved to
pity, and profoundly disturbed. "You can never get California away from
the Spaniard, and I can't wish you to; but you might, if you rallied all
the Indians to you, become powerful enough to live in the way you like
best, and I hope you will. Why should men say: 'I am better than you; I
will make you like myself?' How do we know? I have ridden like the wind,
and coliared a bull with the best vaquero in the Californias, but I am
afraid my mind has had fifteen years of siesta. Now--well, I shall be
governor of the Californias one day, and then I shall send all the
Indians back to the mountains."

Anastacio put out his hand, and the two civilisations decreed by Nature
to stand apart from the beginning to the end of time clasped in brief
friendship.

"I will be your friend," said the Indian, "and the white man need not
despise the friendship of a great chief. California is a fair land.
Others will come to it besides the Spaniard. If Anastacio has thousands
of Indians to run to his call they will fight when he bids them."

"Caramba! you are right," exclaimed Roldan. "Those Americans--"

"American boys?" asked Adan, eagerly.

"Now," said Anastacio, "I sleep. Awake me when the sky turns grey."

He stretched himself out and slept at once. The boys drew close together
and speculated upon the fateful morrow. They agreed to remain close
together, out of sight of the enemy, but where they could watch the
Indian forces. If Anastacio fell they would flee at once.

X

The small Californian force--it numbered little over two hundred men--
was under the command of Juan Pardo Mesa, a captain notable for his
victorious encounters with Indians and for his knowledge of their
cunning. He was on the alert at dawn next morning, and long before the
sun had spurned the tops of the Coast range, his assumption of meditated
treachery was confirmed. A rising wind had set the young redwoods in
motion. Before long the practised eye of Captain Mesa saw an increased
agitation among the feathery branches, his ear caught a slight
crackling. His men were flat on the ground. He stood in the shadow of a
large oak. A moment later a dusky form crept out to where the brush grew
more sparsely, hesitated a moment, and apparently passed back word that
all was well; he was immediately followed by many of his kind; and the
lower slope of the mountain, burnt bare by fire, seemed suddenly
swarming with huge black rats.

Mesa waited until they were well away from cover, then gave the expected
order: two hundred muskets, carbines, and flintlock pistols were
discharged, and one piece of artillery.

But Anastacio, no mean general himself, was also on the alert for the
unexpected. In a few moments he had marshalled his forces in the form of
a hollow square, and ordered them to discharge their arrows from a
recumbent position. Owing to the heavy shadows, the aim of the
Californians had been uncertain, and only a few of the Indians had
fallen. Roldan and Adan were safe behind two large redwoods just above
the Indian army.

The firing continued steadily all the morning, but resulted in few
mortal wounds. There was not a poisoned arrow in the pueblo. The balls
did more serious damage, and several Indians rolled groaning down the
slope. The rest were undaunted. They were more than two to one, and had
implicit faith in their chief's assurance that they were bound to rout
the Spaniard.

Under cover of the cloud of smoke his weapons had raised despite a
strong wind, Mesa executed two flank movements, justifying the tactics
of Anastacio: he detached forty men from the main body and directed them
to attack the Indians on both sides and to cut off their retreat to the
forest. They were almost upon the north and south ends of Anastacio's
square--after making a detour and advancing from a distance--when the
boys shouted a warning. In a moment arrows were flying to right and
left; and the answering volley was far more deadly than the effects of
firing up hill. The Indians stood their ground, fitting their arrows
with swift dexterity, encouraged by Anastacio, who glided from point to
point like a hungry cobra, discharging two arrows to every man's one.
His only hope was to keep the Californians at long range until losses
compelled the latter to retreat: at close quarters arrows would be no
match for firearms.

The battle began at five in the morning. It was at four in the afternoon
that Roldan passed his hand across his burning eyeballs, then gripped
Adan's arm and said through his teeth,--

"Anastacio is hit. I saw him shake from head to foot."

"Madre de dios! Shall we run?"

"Not yet. My brain is on fire. War is awful, and yet I burn to have a
pistol in my hands. I am sorry for Anastacio--but Dios de mi alma!--to
see a brave Spanish officer bite the dust with the arrow of a dog in his
brain! Ay, he moves! He is not dead."

"His hand is as steady--but--do you notice?--all are not firing."

"The arrows are giving out. There is only one end. But I must see it
through. Mary! Mary! They are breaking."

The Indians, finding themselves almost without arrows, had sprung to
their feet, intending to make a rush for cover; but Mesa had anticipated
this move, and almost immediately his men had closed with the savages,
knocking them on the head with the butt-end of their muskets,
discharging their pistols at short range. The Indians. used both tooth
and nail, yelling like wildcats. The cool imperturbability of the
earlier part of the day had fled with their arrows. Anastacio fought
like a tiger. Despite his wounded thigh he stood firmly on his feet,
snatched the musket from a man his hands had throttled, and whirled it
about his head, threatening death to all that approached. His face was
swollen with passion, his eyes were starting from their sockets, his
long hair tossed wildly. The boys watched him with cold extremities and
hot cheeks and eyes. They were oblivious to the rest of the battlefield.
The fate of the indomitable chief, upon whose life the freedom of a race
perhaps depended, would have riveted the attention of older and wiser
brains. His movements were easy to follow; he was head above all and
shoulders above many.

Suddenly the boys gave a gasp. The head of Anastacio was no longer to be
seen above that surging throng. Had he been wounded in a vital part? A
moment later they gave a hoarse gurgling cry and clung together, shaking
like children in icy water. The head of Anastacio rose again--above the
crowd, then higher,--higher,--until it looked down upon the squirming
mass from six feet above. It was on the end of a pole.

XI

The boys turned and fled, scrambling blindly upwards. Instinctively they
ran in the direction of the pueblo, and when they were finally obliged
to sit down and fight for their lost breath they realised the course
they had taken.

The horror was still in their eyes, but neither spoke of what for a long
while to come must be uppermost in his mind.

"I think we may as well go to the pueblo," said Roldan, as soon as he
could speak. "We must have food, and we are very tired. We can rest
there a few days, then take two of the horses--we can do nothing without
horses--and start out again. If any of the Indians escape and come back,
they will not have spirit enough left to touch us."

"Bueno," said Adan. "The Mission blankets are there and they are soft,
and that oven makes good cakes. I hope the Indians go all with the
soldiers. I never want to see another."

The boys resumed their flight, but more leisurely. They had no
difficulty in keeping to the trail, but it wound over many a weary mile.
Night comes early in the mountain forest, and before two hours had
passed they were groping their way along the narrow road cut through the
dense brush, and clinging to each other. They were brave lads; but long
fasting, and excitement, and a terrible climax to the most trying day of
their lives, had flung gunpowder among their nerves.

It was midnight when they reached the pueblo. The stars illumined
fitfully the deserted huts, black in the heavy shadows. A coyote was
yapping dismally, owls hooted in the forest. Both boys had a vision of
deep beds and hot suppers on the ranchos of their respective parents,
but they shut their teeth and raided the larder. There they found well-
cured meats and dried fruits, which appeased their mighty appetites;
then they went into Anastacio's hut, and wrapping themselves in the
Mission blankets were soon asleep.

It was Adan who awoke Roldan violently in the morning.

"The soldiers!" he whispered hoarsely.

Roldan, rubbing the sleep from his eyes, peered through a rift between
the wall of the hut and the shrunken hide which formed the door. A half
dozen soldiers stood in the plaza, glancing speculatively about.

"I see no trace of them," said one. "I cannot believe they would come
back to this place. Surely it was, as I said, more natural for them to
hide at the edge of the forest until we had gone."

"That dog said there was food here, and that they were more afraid of us
than of a long walk at night. Wherever they are, we find them. They are
a prize second only to the head of Anastacio. Search the huts."

Roldan sprang to his feet, pulling Adan with him. "Come," he said;
"follow me, and run as if you were as lean as a coyote. Remember they
won't shoot."

He flung aside the hide door. The two boys flashed out and round the
corner of the hut before the tired eyes and brains of the soldiers had
time to grasp the happening. A moment later they were in hot pursuit,
firing in the air, shouting terrific threats. But the rested and agile
legs of the boys had a good start, and plunged into narrow ways where
horses could not follow; and doubling, twisting, following paths but
recently beaten by Anastacio in pursuit of deer, Roldan and Adan were
soon far beyond the reach or ken of the men of war. It was an hour,
however, before they thought it wise to arrest their flight and pause to
recuperate in a redwood tree hollowed by fire. Two weeks of exposure and
unwonted exertions had hardened Adan's superfluous flesh, and he was
scarcely more spent than his clean-limbed friend, although every step
had been taken with protest.

"Caramba!" he said, in a hoarse whisper at length. "When I am back on
the rancho I won't walk for a year."

"You will have the habit by that time, my friend, and will walk in your
sleep. When I am governor you will be generalissimo of all the forces
and will keep your army as lively as an ant-hill."

"That is too long ahead, and we have not enough wind to argue about it.
What are we going to do now? How shall we get horses to leave this
forest? Where shall we sleep to-night? What shall we have for dinner? I
could eat a whole side of venison."

"Well, you won't, my friend. Let me think."

After a time he said: "We must stay here until night. Then we will go
back to the pueblo if we can find the way. As for food, we can have none
to-day. There are no berries at this time of year, and we have nothing
to shoot game with. Other people have gone the day without food, and we
can. When we get back to the pueblo, even if we cannot reach the larder,
we can find the corral without being seen. I don't believe that the
soldiers have found it, and the Indians in charge of the mustangs will
let us have two when they know what has happened. Now, do not let us
talk. It will make us more hungry."

Adan groaned, but accepted the decree of silence. The day wore on to
noon, and in the unbroken stillness the boys ventured out of the grimy
tree and lay at full length on the turf. The great redwoods towered in
endless corridors, their straight columns unbroken by branch or twig for
a hundred and fifty feet. Through the green close arbours above came an
occasional rift of sunshine, but the aisles were full of cold green
light. The boys shivered in their coyote skin coats and drew close
together; they dared not run about to keep warm; they must husband their
strength, and hunger was biting. There was no wind in the tree-tops, no
murmur of creek, only the low hum of the forest, that in their strained
ear-sense grew to a roar. Finally they fell asleep, and it was dark when
Roldan awoke. He shook Adan.

"Come," he said; and his partner, grumbling but acquiescent, got to his
feet and tramped heavily over the soft ground.

They had fled beyond paths, and Roldan could only trust to his locality
sense, which he knew to be good. But more than once they were brought to
halt before a wall of brush, which no man could have penetrated without
an axe. Then they would feel their way along its irregular bristling
side for a mile or more before it thinned sufficiently for egress.
Frequently they heard the deadly rattle, and more than once the near cry
of a panther, but there was nothing to do but push on. Precautions would
have availed them nothing, and there was no refuge nearer than the
pueblo. Sometimes they walked down aisles unchoked by brush but full of
moving shadows, above which sounded the lonely continuous hooting of the
owl. Now and again bats whirred past, and once a startled wildcat
scurried across the path and darted up a tree, crying with terror.

"If we only don't meet a bear," thought Roldan, who dared not speak lest
his voice should shake courage and terrors apart.

It was midnight when Adan announced with what emphasis was left in
him,--

"We are lost."

Roldan answered through his teeth: "Yes, but I think I hear the creek.
When we find that, all we have to do is to follow it south."

"My heart is in the South," muttered Adan. "We might follow that."

"I am ashamed of you," said Roldan, with a lofty scorn which was good
for five words and no more.

It was a half hour later that they stood upon the high bank of the creek
and looked gratefully up at the broad strip of night light. After the
dense shadows of the forest the cold light of stars seemed more radiant
than noon-day.

"We cannot follow along the bank for more than a little way at a time,
on account of the ferns and brush," said Roldan. "We should walk three
times the distance, and perhaps get lost again. I am going to wade. Will
you?"

"Madre de dios! And get rheumatism? My teeth clack together at the
thought."

"You will not be able to keep still long enough to get rheumatism, my
friend. By the grace of Mary we shall be on horseback all day to-morrow.
The water is not a foot deep, and the chill only lasts a moment. Take
off your boots."

"What is left of them," muttered Adan. But they were better than no
boots, and he took them off, and slung them round his neck. Roldan
scrambled down the bank and plunged into the creek. Adan, after a
moment's hesitation, followed with audible reluctance. He thrust the tip
of one foot into the icy water, withdrew it with a shout, tried the
other; then seeing that Roldan was splashing far ahead, jumped in with
both feet and ran along the slippery rocks, wondering when the change of
temperature would occur. His teeth clattered loudly. He pulled in and
executed a war-dance on the stones, then sat down on a fallen boulder
and rubbed his feet violently. Roldan kept steadily on, mindful of his
dignity as leader; but only as Adan joined him had his teeth ceased from
clattering and the warmth crawled back to his feet.

Cold, hungry, inexpressibly weary, the boys plodded on, sometimes in the
clear light of stars, sometimes under the chill blackness of meeting
trees. Fish and other slimy things darted across their feet; they
stepped to their waists into more than one treacherous pool. The dark
blue of the sky had turned to grey when Roldan raised his arm and
pointed to a squat dark object on the summit of the cliff.

"A hut," he said. "We are at the pueblo."

The boys crawled softly up the almost perpendicular bank and peered over
the edge. To all appearances the pueblo was deserted. If the soldiers
were there--and their horses were not--they slept within the huts. The
animal instinct, so bravely repressed, overcame the adventurers. They
ran across the open to the hut where the food was kept, and ate for
fifteen minutes without speaking or taking the trouble to hide
themselves.

XII

When they had satisfied their appetites they made two large packages of
dried meat and fruit, tying them securely with straw to their right
arms: saddle-bags there were none.

"Not a horse," whispered Adan. "Do you think the soldiers have gone?"

"I think they are lost, and as they did not stop to tie their horses
when they started after us, they won't see them again until they get
back to camp. Come."

Roldan peered cautiously into each of the huts in turn; all were empty.
Then the boys started for the corral, which the soldiers would not have
passed either on their way to the pueblo or in pursuit of the runaways.
They found the Indians in charge sound asleep in their hut, and did not
think it worth while to awaken them. The two mustangs they led forth,
vicious brutes at best, were very restless from prolonged inactivity.
Roldan's submitted to the saddle, but bolted as soon as he felt a
determined pair of legs about his sides; and as our adventurer had
neither whip nor spurs, all he could do was to hang on and shout to Adan
to follow close. This was the only thing that Adan's mustang was willing
to do, and the boys were borne blindly on, down one path, up another,
plunging deeper into the black recesses of the forest until they knew no
more of their whereabouts than if they had dropped from another sphere.

After many weary miles the mustangs slackened, and the boys dismounted
and cut two slender but stinging whips. After that they rose once more
to the proud supremacy of man over brute. But the situation was full of
peril. They were hopelessly lost, the redwoods were the home of the
grizzly and the panther, and they might come upon the soldiers at any
moment. But there was nothing to do but to ride on, and at least they
had horses and food.

They descended whenever descent was possible, for at the foot of the
mountain lay the open valley; but there were no trails; in all
likelihood they were where no man, red or white, had ever been before;
they had to force their way where the brush was thinnest, and as often
their flight was toward loftier heights.

As the day wore on the temperature fell, even in those forest depths
where the sun had not penetrated for a thousand years. The beauty of the
forest palled upon Roldan: those everlasting aisles with their grey
motionless columns, their green sinister light, the delicate fern wood
below, the dense mat of branch and leaf so high above. The redwoods
oppress and terrify when they have man completely at their mercy. They
look as if they could speak if they would, roar louder than the storms
that have never shaken them. But they know the value of silence, and the
silence of their inmost depths is awful.

After many hours the boys rode out upon a bare peak. But its outlook
told them nothing. Behind rose other peaks, below was the dense primeval
forest, rising and falling on other slopes. There was no glimpse of
valley anywhere. The sky was heavy with the grey lurid clouds of
concentrated storm.

"We will eat," said Roldan, briefly; "but not too much."

They tethered the mustangs that the beasts might eat of the abundant
grass, and consumed a small quantity of their store. Then they stretched
at full length on the ground to rest their weary bodies.

"Let us stay here the night," said Adan, with a cavernous yawn.

"It is hardly darker by night than by day in the forest, but perhaps it
is well to rest."

"I am one ache, no more," murmured Adan, and went to sleep.

Roldan pillowed his head on his arm and for once followed lead. He awoke
suddenly, his face wet and stinging. White stars were whirling, the
ground was white, the forest was half obliterated.

He shook Adan and dragged him to his feet.

"We must get into the redwoods at once," he said. "We shall be buried
here."

Adan gasped but cinched his saddle; the boys sprang upon the now
tractable mustangs and plunged into the forest below. The brush was
thin, and they pushed their way downward as rapidly as the steep descent
would permit. Sometimes the forest protected them from the storm, at
others the trees grew wide apart and the riders were exposed to its
pitiless rush. In these open spaces they could see nothing, could only
push blindly on, brushing the stinging particles from their faces, their
hands and feet almost numb. The snow in the open was already as high as
the horses' knees. There was no wind, only that silent sweeping of the
heavens. In the depths the high branches of the redwoods groaned
ominously under the stiffening weight, like giants in pain.

The forest thinned. The snow had its will of the earth. There was no
refuge under the larger trees that still stood, like outposts, here and
there; the branches were too high above. Once Adan suggested through his
stiff lips and unruly teeth that they turn back and take refuge in some
dense grove above; but Roldan shook his head peremptorily. He had heard
of the fearful storms of the Sierras; they lasted for days, and the snow
stood its ground for weeks. Their only hope was the valley.

But they descended only to rise again: in the white darkness of the
storm they dared not attempt to skirt the base of the peaks; they must
keep straight on, to the west, for there lay the valley.

Occasionally, where a grove of trees stood close and the snow lay
shallow, the boys got off and wrestled, rousing the blood in their legs
and arms; then urged their mustangs to greater speed. But the poor
brutes were very weary, and the blood in their veins was almost torpid.
Once they stood still and shook, whinnying pitifully. A huge grizzly, so
powdered as to be hardly distinguishable from the drifts about him,
floundered along to the right. The boys crossed themselves and awaited
their fate, with the apathy of numb and despairing brains; but the
monster was evidently aiming for the warmth of his home, and took no
notice of the meal in four courses standing in the middle of the path.

The night deepened. The snow thickened and sped down with an audible
rush, a sting in each beautiful white bee. The boys nodded, roused
themselves, fell forward, their arms mechanically stiffening about the
horses' necks. Once they flung out their hands and feet with a smothered
shriek. A tongue of flame seemed to leap down their throats and hiss
through their veins, while the world roared and heaved about them. Then
all sensation was over.

XIII

Roldan opened his eyes. His brain was heavy; he was conscious only of an
intense warmth. His arms appeared to be bound to his sides, his whole
body in a vise. He kicked out with a vigorous return of the instinct of
independence. The action shook his brain free and he understood: he was
tightly wrapped in a blanket, and there were other blankets upon him. He
raised his head. The room was one of familiar lineaments,--whitewashed
walls, a mat by the iron bed, an altar in the corner, linen with
elaborate drawn-work on bureau and washstand. The blood poured upward to
the young adventurer's face. Was this his room? Had he been ill and
dreamed strange happenings? He freed his arms and sat up. No; there was
no room in his father's house exactly like this, monotonous as were the
furnishing and architecture of the time.

He took his head between his hands and thought; the events of the past
weeks marched through his brain in rapid and precise succession--up to a
certain point: his senses had been frozen in the Sierras. From a raging
snowstorm to this blistering bed all was blank.

He disencumbered himself, slipped to the floor, and opened the door,
then scrambled back to bed as best he could; his legs felt as if they
had been boned. He was also one vast desire for food and drink. But that
glimpse through the door had raised his spirits. He was in a great adobe
house surrounding a court in which a fountain splashed among ferns and
little orange-trees. It was the house of a grandee, but there was none
like it in the neighbourhood of the Rancho de los Palos Verdes.

He waited with what patience he could muster until his open door should
attract attention, listening to the murmur of the fountain, inhaling the
fragrance of orange and magnolia, wondering if Adan, too, were safe,
angrily resenting his weakness.

The door cautiously opened wide, and a woman, stout, brown, but of
exceeding grace and elegance, entered and bent over him.

"Good-day, senora," said Roldan, politely. "I am very hungry. Where am
I? And is Adan here?"

The lady smiled and patted his cheek with a shapely and flashing hand.

"He is well and sleeping, my son, and you are both in the Casa of Don
Tiburcio Carillo, of the Rancho Encarnarcion, in a great valley many,
many leagues from the Sierras and the snow--Madre de dios! Pobrecitos!
So cold you must have been, so frightened--and you the sons of great
rancheros, no?"

Roldan modestly named his fortunate status, then sat up and kissed her
hand, as he had seen his gallant brothers kiss the hands of lovely young
donas. The lady looked much pleased and drew a chair beside the bed.
Roldan wondered if he should ever satisfy his raging appetite, but was
too polite to mention the subject again, and determined to satisfy his
curiosity instead.

"Senora, tell me how we came here," he asked. "My head will burst until
I know."

"Our bell mare, the most valuable on our rancho, strayed far the day
before yesterday. All that day and the next six vaqueros looked for her.
One traced her to the Sierras and went on in spite of the storm. He
found her, and, just afterward--you. He thought you were dead, but
poured aguardiente down your throats. You swallowed but did not awaken,
although he shook you and pounded you. Then he strapped your friend--
Adan, no? upon the back of Lolita, took you in his arms, and galloped
for home--you were almost at the foot of the mountain. Ay! but I was
frightened when you came. Gracias a dios that you are well and not
frozen. Bueno, I go to send you a good breakfast. Hasta luego."

She went out, and Roldan lay wondering if the breakfast were already
cooked. The door opened again. Roldan sat up. But it was Adan. He wore a
long nightgown and dug his knuckles into his eyes. His knees, too, were
shaky.

"Hist, Roldan," he whispered loudly. "Are you there, or do I dream?"

"Come into my bed and have breakfast--breakfast, Adan!"

Adan gathered his remaining energies, bolted across the room, and
climbed into bed.

"Dios de mi alma, Roldan," he gasped. "Where are we, and why are we
sweltered like sick babies? This is a fine place. Ay! may I never see
snow nor a redwood again!"

Roldan told what he knew of the beginning of their new chapter, and soon
after he finished two Indian servants entered with trays, set them on
the bed, and retired.

"Ay! this looks like home," cried Adan, almost in tears. "Chocolate!
Tortillas! Chicken with yellow rice!" He crossed himself fervently and
attacked the fragrant meal.

It was not a large breakfast, for it was many hours since they had eaten
before; they left not a grain of rice nor a shred on a bone. But half-
satisfied, although very comfortable, they made up their minds to dress.
On the chair was a complete outfit, suitable for a young don. Roldan
concluded it had been thoughtfully placed at his disposal that he might
not appear in the sala of Casa Carillo garbed like a coyote. How he
hated the memory of that ugly and infested garment.

"I, too, have a silk jacket and breeches by my bed," said Adan, "and a
lace shirt and silk stockings, and shoes with buckles. There must be
those of our age in the Casa Carillo, my friend. Bueno! I go to make a
caballero of myself. Hasta luego."

He opened the door and peered out, then ran hastily down the corridor to
his room. Who knew but there might be girls at the Casa Carillo?
Horrible thought!

The boys met a half hour later on the corridor, still weak, but
magnificent to look upon. Roldan's head was very high, despite his
protesting knees: he felt himself again.

"It is the hour of siesta," he said. "Let us lie in these hammocks and
wait. Ay! but it is warm, and the sky is blue, and the sun looks like
the copper lamp of my mother--the one that came from Boston. Who--even
an Indian--would live in the mountains when the valleys are so big and
warm?"

They extended themselves in two hammocks swung across the corridor and
watched the many doors on the several sides of the court. All were
closed, and the forest had hardly been more quiet than the Casa Carillo
in its hour of siesta. Through the arch of the gateway they could see
the green of fields, a corner of a vineyard, and rolling hills. On
either side of the entrance was a large magnolia-tree with broad shining
leaves and bunches of cream-white fragrance. The oranges were very
yellow, the palms very stately, the red tiles on the sloping roofs above
the white walls looked very fresh and red. There was colour and beauty
everywhere; and the boys were quite at peace, and content to be so.
Their appetite for adventure was dulled for the moment.

XIV

A door on the opposite corridor opened and a youth came forth. He jerked
his head diffidently at the guests and took the longest way round
instead of crossing the court; but when he reached the boys, who were
risen and awaiting him, he wore a dignified air of welcome, as befitted
a young gentleman of his race.

"Welcome to Casa Carillo, senores," he said gravely. "The house is
yours. Burn it if you will. I, myself, Rafael Carillo, am your slave."

To which Roldan replied: "We are at your feet, for you and yours have
rescued us from death and given us food and clothing when we most needed
it. Our lives are yours to do with as you wish."

"Then would we keep you here always, Don Roldan and Don Adan. All guests
are welcome at Casa Carillo, but doubly those that need it."

Then, formalities over, as boys are pretty much alike the world round,
Rafael was soon pouring forth eager questions, and our heroes were
reliving the events of the past weeks. Arm in arm they strolled out into
the wide beautiful valley, green with sprouting winter, the distant
mountains of terrible memory quivering under a dark blue mist.

"Hist!" said Rafael, suddenly. "Do you know what day this is?"

"Day?" The adventurers had lost all count of time.

"It is the day before Christmas, my friends."

"No! Madre de dios!" Roldan and Adan stood still. For a moment they felt
homesick. They saw the reproachful faces of their parents and brothers
and sisters, to say nothing of visions of unclaimed presents. But Rafael
gave them no time for regrets. He was the only child at home, and
delighted with his new companions.

"To-morrow many people will come," he said. "I have ten married sisters
and brothers. They all come from their ranchos, and many more. It will
be very gay, my friends."

"Good," said Roldan, dismissing regret. "We will enjoy."

"And after Christmas is gone I know of something else," said Rafael,
mysteriously. He glanced about. They stood in the midst of a great
vineyard, each engaged upon a large purple bunch. "Come," said Rafael,
with an air of mystery. "Not here. Some one may hide beneath the vines."

It was extremely unlikely, but the adventurers liked the suggestion and
followed their host breathlessly into the open field. "One day in the
summer," whispered Rafael, his eyes rolling about, "I went with four
vaqueros with a present of venison to Father Osuna. He was not at the
Mission, and a brother told us that he walked among the hills. I thought
I would go to meet him and receive his blessing. For a time I saw no
one, and I thought, 'Caramba! but the padre has long legs this hot
weather!' Just then he stood before me. He had walked out of the side of
the hill through a hole no wider than himself. He sweated like a bull
after coliar, and his cassock was gathered in his two hands, leaving his
bare shanks no more sacred than an Indian's. He did not look like a
priest at all, and I forgot to kneel to him, but stared with my mouth
open. And what do you think he did, my friends? He turned white like the
hand of a dona in her teens and--and--dropped his cassock. And--"

"Well? well?"

"What do you think rolled to the ground, my friends? Chunks of yellow
stuff that glittered, and a shower of sparkling yellow sand--beautiful
as sunshine on the floor. I gave a cry and ran to pick it up. I had
never seen anything so beautiful, I never had wanted anything so much. I
felt that I would die for it in that moment, my friends. But that
priest, what do you think he did? He gave a yell of rage, as if he could
tear me in pieces, and flung himself all over that sunshine of earth.
'My gold!' he cried. 'Mine! mine! You shall not take it from me.' 'If it
is yours it is not mine, my father,' I said, feeling ashamed,--though I
still wanted it; 'I will help you to pick it up.' He got up then, his
face very red again, and I could see that he was trying to put on his
dignity as fast as he had put down his cassock--he looked better with
both in place. 'My son,' he said,'the day is warm and I am very tired,
and, I fear, a little ill. These rocks are nothing. They please my eye,
and I pick them up sometimes as I walk among the hills. Leave them
there. I do not want them. We will return to the Mission.' 'If you do
not want them, then may I have them?' I asked--the blood flew all over
my body, my friends. He scowled as if I had asked him for the candles on
the altar. 'No,' he said, 'you cannot.' Then he put his big hand on my
shoulder--he could twist your neck in a minute with those hands--
'Listen to me, my son,' he said, very soft, and looking so kind now, you
can't think. 'There is poison in those stones, pretty as they are,
deadly poison. It has murdered millions of souls and hundreds of bodies.
Therefore I will not let you touch it--only a priest can touch it
without ruining his soul. Therefore I forbid you---forbid you--' he
shouted this over me, 'to tell any one of what you have seen to-day.
Neither your father nor your mother--no one. Do you understand?' I said
'Yes,' but I did not promise, and he was excited and did not notice.
Then he dragged me away, and I looked about for other rocks that
glittered. But there were none--not anywhere. And then I knew that they
had come out of the hill; but I said nothing, and when we got back to
the Mission and had had dinner and he was himself again and would have
spoken alone with me, I ran and got on my horse, and all the brothers
stood on the corridor to see me go. He came up to me and blessed me, and
whispered: 'Tell no one, my son. If you do'--and he gave me a look that
made my hair crackle at the roots. And to this day I have told no one.
Did I tell my parents the priest would know in six hours. No boy has
stayed here that I like. But now--"

"We will go to the hill and see for ourselves," said Roldan, promptly,
and Adan gasped with horror and delight.

"Ay, I knew you would. I am brave, but I dared not go myself--that padre
is too big. I wake up in the night and see his hands pawing in the air.
But three of us--we need fear no one."

"We will go as soon as the guests are gone. I have heard of this 'gold.'
ln Europe--I have an uncle who has travelled and has told me many
things--bueno, in Europe, they make it into money and give it for
things in big houses they call shops. Even here, in Monterey, and
perhaps the other towns, they have a little--it comes from Mexico. My
uncle said that one reason we were so happy was because we had so little
money--none at all, we might say. That we got what we wanted out of the
earth, or by trading with one another or with the skippers from Boston,
who are glad to give us what we need from other lands in return for our
hides and tallow. So, if we find this 'gold' perhaps we had better say
nothing about it; but to find it--that will be a great, a grand
adventure."

"We'll tell if we find it," said Adan, philosophically.

The boys concocted a plan of campaign to their satisfaction, then went
home to supper. Don Tiburcio and his wife, Dona Martina, were already
seated at the table in the big bare room. The grandee was a huge man
with a soft profile, and cheeks as large and cream-hued as one of the
magnolias hanging in the patio. He had an expression of indolent good-
nature above his straight mouth, and long hands that looked lean and
hard when they closed suddenly. He was a man of much influence in the
politics of his country. His small-clothes were of dark green cloth with
large silver buttons, the lace on his linen was fine and abundant. Dona
Martina wore a gown of stiff flowered silk and a profusion of topaz
ornaments. As the boys entered and bowed respectfully, Don Tiburcio eyed
them keenly, but shook them cordially by the hand.

"So you are the son of Mateo Castanada," he said to Roldan. "It is
evident enough, although you have something in the face that he has not.
Otherwise I should not have done him to death in more than one political
battle. Well, my sons, you are very welcome, and the longer you stay
with us the better. The officers passed here some days ago--Rafael hid
in the garret for the two days I feasted them, and they do not know that
I have a son so young. Well, you are in good time to help my son enjoy
his Christmas."

There was an abundant supper of meat with hot pepper-sauce, tomatoes and
eggs baked together, and many dulces. The boys wondered if dried meat
and coarse cakes were part of an adventurous dream.

The next morning chocolate was brought to the boys at half-past five,
after which they dressed, and mounting the mustangs. awaiting their
pleasure in the courtyard, went off for a morning canter. At Roldan's
suggestion they reconnoitred the hills behind the Mission and got the
bearings definitely shaped in their minds; the great raid was to be at
night. They returned to a big breakfast at nine o'clock, then rode out
again to meet the expected guests. It was but a few moments before they
saw several cavalcades approaching from as many different directions.
The young men and women, in silken clothes of every hue, were on horses
caparisoned with velvet, carved leather, and silver; in many instances a
girl had proud possession of the saddle, while her swain bestrode the
anquera behind, his arm supporting her waist. Roldan wondered if
anything would ever induce him to sacrifice his dignity like that. (It
may be remarked here, as this history has only to do with the famous
Californian's boyhood, that the day came when he could bow the knee to
the fair sex with as graceful an ardour as did he not employ his sterner
moments making laws and enforcing them.) The older folk travelled in
carretas, the conveyance of the country, a springless wagon set on
wheels cut from the solid thickness of the tree. It was driven by
gananes, sitting astride the mustangs and singing lustily. The interior
was lined with satin and padded, but was probably uncomfortable enough.
Everybody looked smiling and happy, and a number of lads left their
respective parties and cantered over to Rafael and his guests. A few
moments later they all galloped at the top speed of their much-enduring
mustangs to a great clump of oaks, where they dismounted and listened
with breathless interest to the adventures of Roldan and Adan. All had
been drafted, and must leave for barracks with the new year. They
complimented the adventurers in a curious mixture of stately Spanish and
eager youthfulness, and their admiration was so apparent that our heroes
would have doubled the dangers of the past on the spot.

When they returned home to dinner the great space before the house was
filled with shining horses pawing the ground under their heavy saddles.
The court and corridors were an animated scene, overflowing with dons
and donas in brilliant array. When dinner was over and the grown-up
guests and young girls were lingering over the Christmas dulces, all the
boys slipped away and went out to the huge kitchen, where countless
Indian servants were busy or resting. They demanded four dozen eggs and
help to blow them at once. The maids hastened to do the bidding of the
little dons, and in less than a quarter of an hour the eggs were free of
their natural contents, and all were busy refilling them with flour, or
cologne, or scraps of gold and silver paper. Then the boys stuffed the
fronts of their shirts, their sleeves, and their pockets with the eggs,
and hid themselves among the palms of the court. Presently the guests
came forth and scattered about the corridor, smiling and chatting in the
soft subdued Spanish way. Suddenly twelve eggs, thrown with supple wrist
and aimed with unfailing dexterity, flew through the air and crashed
softly on the backs of caballeros' curls and donas' braids, flour
powdering, gold and silver paper glittering on the dense blackness of
those Californian tresses, cologne shooting down dignified spines. There
was a chorus of shrieks, and then, as every head whisked about, and as a
blow did not count unless it struck at the back, the boys ran up to the
corridors, dodged under vengeful arms and continued the battle. Finally
they were chased out into the open, and the guests having been provided
with the remaining eggs by Dona Martina, the battle waged fierce and hot
until, exhausted, the guests retired for siesta.

But siesta was brief that day. In less than an hour's time all had
reappeared and were mounting for the race.

XV

The race took place in a field a mile from the house, on a straight
track. Four vaqueros in black velvet small-clothes trimmed with silver,
spotless linen, and stiff glazed black sombreros, walked up and down,
leading the impatient mustangs. Two of these horses were a beautiful
bronze-gold in colour, with silver manes and tails, a breed peculiar to
the Californias; one was black, the other as white as crystal. The
family and guests of Casa Carillo sat on their horses, in their
carretas, or stood just outside the fence surrounding the field. At one
end were the several hundred Indians employed by Don Tiburcio, and
several hundred more from the Mission. Father Osuna had also joined the
party from the Casa, and Roldan, who had seen hundreds of horse-races
and was built on a more complex plan than his contemporaries, got as
close to the priest as he dared and gave him his undivided attention.
Padre Osuna was a man of unusual height and heaviness of build. His
black eyes were set close to his fine Roman nose. The mouth was so
tightly compressed that its original curves were quite destroyed, and
the intellectual development of the brow was very marked. His hands
exerted a peculiar fascination over Roldan. They were of huge size, even
for so big a man, lean and knotted, with square-tipped fingers. The skin
on them was fine and brown; it looked as soft as a woman's. He used them
a good deal when talking, and not ungracefully; but they seemed to claw
and grasp the air, to be independent of the arms hidden in the
voluminous sleeves of the smart brown cassock. Other people watched
those hands too--they seemed to possess a magnetism of their own; and
every one showed this priest great deference: he was one of the most
successful disciplinarians in the Department of California, a brilliant
speaker, an able adviser in matters of state, and a man of many social
graces.

"More agreeable to meet in the sala of the Mission than in a cave at
midnight," thought Roldan. "Still--" His scent for danger, particularly
if it involved a matching of wits, was very keen.

The word was given. The race began. The dons shouted, the lovely faces
between the bright folds of the rebosos flushed expectantly. From the
black mass of Indians opposite came a mighty gurgle, which gradually
broke into a roar,--

"The black! Fifty hides on the black!"

"The little bronze! She is a length ahead! Madre de dios! Six doubloons
of Mexico on the little bronze!"

The priest pushed his way to the speaker, a wealthy ranchero who had
been more than once to Mexico.

"The white against the bronze, senor," he said. "Twenty otter skins to
the six doubloons of Mexico."

"Done, your reverence. I am honoured that you bet with me. But the
white--have you thought well, my father?"

"She breathes well, and her legs are very clean."

"True, my father, but look at the muscles of the little bronze. How they
swell! And the fire in the nostrils!"

"True, Don Jaime; and if she wins, the skins are yours."

As the horses darted down the track almost neck to neck, the excitement
routed Spanish dignity. The dons stood up in their saddles, shouting and
betting furiously. The women clapped their white idle hands, and
cheered, and bet--but with less recklessness: a small jewel or a second-
best mantilla. As they could not remember what they had bet when the
excitement was over, these debts were never paid; but it pleased them
mightily to make their little wagers. The men were betting ranchitas,
horses, cattle, and, finally, their jewels and saddles and serapes. For
each horse represented a different district of the Department, and there
was much rivalry.

The priest did not shout, and he made no more bets, but his eyes never
left those figures speeding like arrows from the bow, the riders
motionless as if but the effigies of men strapped to the creatures of
fire beneath. Sometimes the black gained then the little bronze; once
the white dashed a full three yards beyond his fellows, and Roldan saw
the great hands of the priest, which had been clinched against his
shoulders, open spasmodically, then close harder than ever as the white
quickly dropped back again.

It was a very close race. The excitement grew tense and painful. Even
Roldan felt it finally, and forgot the priest. The big bronze had quite
dropped out of it and was lagging homeward, hardly greeted by a hiss.
The others were almost neck and neck, the little bronze slightly in the
lead. "She wins," thought Roldan, "No! No! The black! the black! Ay, no,
the bronze! but no! no! Ay! Ay! Ay!" A roar went up that ended in a
shriek. The black had won.

Roldan looked at the priest. His skin was livid, his nostrils twitching.
But his mouth and eyes told nothing.

The crowd rode home, still excited, gay, cheerful. Their losses mattered
not. Were not their acres numbered by the hundred thousand? Did they not
have more horses and cattle than they would ever count? In those days of
pleasure and plenty, of luxury and unconsidered generosity, a rancho, a
caponara the less, meant a loss neither to be felt nor remembered.

After the bountiful supper the guests loitered for a time in the
courtyard, then the sala was cleared and the dance began. Several of the
girls danced alone, while the caballeros clapped and shouted. Then all
waltzed or took part in their only square dance, the contradanza. They
kept it up until morning. Needless to say, our heroes went to bed at an
early hour.

They were up the next morning with the dawn, and in company with Rafael
and the other guests of their own age, went for their canter. This time
they avoided the hills behind the Mission, as they had no wish to share
their secret, and a chance word might divulge all. They rode toward the
hills at the head of the valley. Roldan was still the hero of the hour,
and Rafael, although the most generous of boys, resented it a little. He
was not without ambitions of his own, and determined to seize the first
opportunity to remind his companions that the son of Don Tiburcio
Carillo, the greatest ranchero of that section of the Californias, had
not the habit to occupy the humble position of tag-behind even to so
brilliant and adventurous a guest as Roldan Castanada.

He soon found his opportunity.

As they reached the first hill they saw a bull feeding on its summit.
"Aha!" cried the young don of the Rancho Encarnacion. "Now I will make
for you a little morning entertainment, my friends. Coliar! coliar!"

"No! no!" cried the boys. "The hill is too steep. It is like the side of
a house. You will break your neck, my friend."

Roldan said: "It is dangerous, but it could be done."

"I can do it," said Rafael, proudly, "and I shall."

The other boys, good sportsmen as they all were, shouted, "No! no!"
again; but Rafael laughed gaily, and forced his horse up the almost
perpendicular declivity, leisurely unwinding his lariat from the high
pommel of his saddle, and tossing it into big snake-like loops, which he
gathered one by one into his hand, the last about his thumb. The bull
fed on unsuspecting. for the early green of winter was very delicious
after eight months of unrelenting sunshine. When Rafael reached the
summit he rode back for some distance, then came at the bull full
charge, yelling like a demon. The bull, terrified and indignant, gave a
mighty snort and leaped over the brow of the hill. It was much like
descending the slightly inclined side of a cliff, but he kept his
footing. The boys held their breath as Rafael rode straight over the
brow in the wake of the bull. With one hand he held the bridle in a
tight grip, in the other he held aloft the coils of the lariat. It
looked like a huge snake, and quivered as if aware that it was about to
spring. There was no cheering; the boys were too much alarmed. A mis-
step and there would be a hideous heap at the foot of the hill.

The little mustang appeared scarcely to touch the uneven surface of the
descent. He looked as if galloping in air, and tossed his head fiercely
as though to shake the rising sun out of his eyes. The bull seemed
continually gathering himself for a great leap, his clumsy bulk heaving
from side to side. But a quarter of the distance had been traversed when
the great curves of the lasso sprang forward, and, amidst a hoarse
murmur from the boys, caught the bull below the horns. But that was all.
The bull would not down! There would be no coliar! He merely ran on--the
brute! the beast!--jerking his horns defiantly, putting down his head,
nearly dragging Rafael from the saddle. But no! but no! Rafael has risen
in his saddle, he has forced his mustang the harder, he is almost level
with the bull--he has passed! He gives a great jerk, dragging the bull
to his knees, then another, and the bull is on his side and rolling over
and over down the hill, Rafael following fast, slackening his lariat.
The boys now cheer wildly, although danger is not over--yes, in another
moment it is, and Rafael, smiling complacently, is at the foot of the
hill, disengaging the humbled bull.

"Bravo!" said a voice from behind the horses. All turned with a start.
It was the priest. "Coliar was never better done," he added graciously;
and Rafael felt that the day was his.

The priest had ridden up unnoted in the tense excitement of the last few
moments. He sat a big powerful horse, and his bearing was as military as
that of the two great generals of the Californias, Castro and Vallejo.

As the boys, congratulations and modest acknowledgement over, were
making for home and breakfast, the priest pressed his horse close to
Roldan's. "I interested you much at the race yesterday, Don Roldan," he
said, with a good-humoured smile. "Why was that?"

Roldan was not often embarrassed, but he was so taken aback at the
abrupt sally he forgot to be flattered that the priest had evidently
thought it worth while to inquire his name; and stammered: "I--well, you
see, my father, you are not like other priests." Which was not
undiplomatic.

The priest smiled, this time with a faint flush of unmistakable
pleasure. "You are right, my son, I am not as other priests in this
wilderness. Would to Heaven I were, or--"

"Or that you were in Spain?" Roldan could not resist saying, then caught
his breath at his temerity.

The priest turned about and faced him squarely. "Yes," he said
deliberately, "and that I were a cardinal of Rome. Such words I have
never uttered to mortal before; but if I am not as other men, neither
are you as other lads. Some day you will be a Castro or an Alvarado; it
is written in your face. Perhaps something more, for changes may come
and your opportunities be greater. But I--I am no longer young; there is
no hope in California for me."

"Why do you not return to Spain?"

"I have written. They will not answer. In my youth I was wild. They
forced me to come here. I had no money. I was obliged to obey. I have
christianized a few hundred worthless savages who were better off in
their barbarism, and I have made myself a power among a few thousand men
of whom the outer world, the great world, knows nothing. My Mission is
the most prosperous in the Californias--and I--" he set and ground his
teeth.

Roldan thought of the gold. "When I am governor of the Californias, my
father," he said, "I shall send you back to Spain, for then I shall have
great influence--and much gold."

At the last word the priest's eyes flamed with so fierce a light that
Roldan shrank back repelled, feeling himself in the presence of a
passion of which he had no knowledge. But the priest controlled himself
at once. "Thank you, my son," he said with a brilliant smile. "And I do
not ask you to guard as your own what I have said. It is a part of the
power of such natures as yours that you know what to repeat and what to
leave unsaid." Then as they approached the house he suddenly took
Roldan's slender elegant hand in one of his mighty paws, shook it
heartily, and flinging his bridle to a vaquero, sprang lightly to the
ground and entered the courtyard, leaving our hero in a condition of
flattered bewilderment.

XVI

That day there was to be a grand rodeo, or "round-up:" the branding of
cattle; not only of the stock belonging to Don Tiburcio, but of many of
his neighbours, which would be driven over to his rancho for the
operation. This was one of the great occasions of the year. Immediately
after breakfast the neighbours began to arrive, magnificently mounted,
sparkling with gold and silver lace, their wives and daughters each
surrounded by her cavalcade. About ten the gorgeous company, led by the
host, started for an immense corral about three miles from the house.
The boys were well to the front, and established themselves on the wall
of the corral. The rest of the party remained on their horses, but
mounted the little slopes. The green winter landscape had suddenly
become a blaze of colour, and never was there a more animated scene.
Over all hung a light haze. The distant mountains, which could be seen
from the outer valley, were almost invisible. The priest, a huge brown
figure, on his big brown horse, stood on the very apex of the highest
knoll.

Presently, from various directions rose a low deep murmur, then a rumble
of growing volume as of an approaching earthquake. Men and women grasped
their bridles with firmer fingers, and pressed still nearer to the
crests of the many mounds. Then over the hills on every side came a mass
of tossing horns and sleek shining bodies, separated here and there by a
shouting vaquero, whose black and silver seemed pierced at every point
by those white curving horns. The cattle, several thousand in number,
trotted over the hills and toward the corral swiftly, but in good order,
held well in check by the careful vaqueros. There was no cheering, for
excitement was to be avoided. The cattle would stand any amount of the
shouting they were used to, but little from unaccustomed throats.

In the corral, at its farther end, stood, by an oven, a tall muscular
Indian, the most famous brander in that part of the country. He was
stripped to the waist, and as the first steer was driven through the
narrow gate, he plucked a red-hot iron from the coals. The beast,
kicking and bellowing, was flung to the ground by a dexterous twist of
his tail, two more Indians held him in position, and the branding was
accomplished.

Almost before he was up another was prostrate; and they followed each
other in such rapid succession that the wonder was some were not branded
twice. As fast as each brute received his mark he was driven out of
another gate and over the hills, lest his ill-nature should be the cause
of wild disorder.

The vaqueros handled their dangerous charges with admirable skill,
keeping those to be branded in groups of a hundred or more at some
distance from the corral, riding round them constantly with peremptory
shouts. Other vaqueros, belonging to the same herd, segregated the
animals immediately required and drove them in a straight line for the
corral. There was not a moment of pause. The vaqueros, the brander, and
his assistants seemed impervious to fatigue; the cattle, shifting
uneasily in their bands, leaped eagerly from the lines at the first
signal from the vaquero bearing down on them like a fury from the
corral. On the far side, otherwise deserted, the sore indignant beasts
scampered as fast as their legs could carry them whithersoever their
vaquero chose to drive.

After two hours or more, the atmosphere was charged with a certain
breathless excitement, as was natural enough. The constant cyclonic rush
of vaqueros and cattle, the angry bellowings, the increasing masses of
animals, the furious shouts of the men, had changed a peaceable
landscape into a vast theatre full of tragic possibilities. The waiting
cattle were growing more and more restless, and there was a low rumble
among them. Don Tiburcio motioned to his guests that it was time to
leave; moreover, it was nearing the dinner hour.

"Rafael!" he called. His son turned his head impatiently, but prepared
to obey; the Californian youth was brought up on rigid lines.

"Ay, must we go?" cried Adan. "I could stand here till night, even
without dinner, my friends."

"I, too, am sorry," began Roldan. "But what is the matter?"

The great masses of cattle had begun to heave suddenly. They were
uttering hoarse growls of terror. The mustangs of the vaqueros stood
suddenly still, quivering. Then, abruptly, a horrible stillness fell.
All things breathing seemed to petrify. But only for numbered seconds.
From beneath came a low roar, gathering in volume like the progression
of a tidal wave; then the world heaved and rocked.

"Temblor! temblor!" went up as from one mighty horrified throat. The
priest shouted to the boys: "Stay where you are;" to Don Tiburcio and
his guests: "With all your speed after me."

They understood his meaning. The cattle were leaping over one another,
bellowing madly, giving no heed to the hoarse cries of the terrified
vaqueros. In a moment a blaze of colour was flying down the valley, a
long brown arm lifted high above it. In twenty seconds five thousand
tossing horns and blazing eyes and heaving flanks were in pursuit.

The vaqueros did their best, although their faces were white and their
lips shaking. Three that were between the uniting herds, had their legs
crushed into their mustangs' sides, and were borne along and aloft,
shrieking horribly, adding to the fury of the stampede. Another, trying
to head the cattle off, rode into a sudden split in the hard adobe soil
and went down beneath those iron feet.

The boys clung together. The wall was broad, but it rocked continuously,
whether from other shocks or from the hoof-assaulted earth it would have
been impossible to say. A curving outer flank of the flying mass bulged
against it, and it quivered horribly with the impact. The boys strained
their eyes after the retreating points of colour. Would they escape?
Were the frightened mustangs fleeter of foot than those maddened brutes?
And if they were--the Casa!

"I think," said Roldan, "that we had better get down on the other side.
This wall may go down any minute; and the cattle are all looking in one
direction."

"You are right," said Rafael. "This way--Ay de mi!"

There was another heave of the earth, distinct from the steady vibration
of stampeding cattle. The adobe wall rocked violently, sprang, twisted,
crumbled to the ground, a heap of dust.

For a moment the boys were invisible. Then they emerged, one by one,
choking and spitting, rubbing their eyes with their knuckles. When they
had recovered some measure of vision they huddled together, staring with
affrighted eyes at the moving wall of cattle not twenty yards to their
left, hardly able to keep their balance.

Suddenly Roldan pulled his wits together. "Sit down," he said. "We are
the colour now of the earth. If we keep quiet and look no taller than
weeds they will not see us and we shall not be hurt."

The boys dropped to the ground and sat in silence, staring ahead of
them. Would that rushing, heaving, bellowing mass have no end? It was
indeed a long time before the last line, curiously compact, swept by.
Occasionally the earth jumped with brief abruptness, causing hair to
crackle at the roots, and dust-laden as it was, make as if to rise on
end. The squirrels were screeching in the trees. The birds pitifully
twittered. Even the leaves rustled in response to those terrible
quivers.

The cattle were a red streak at the end of the perspective. The boys
rose, shook themselves, and walked heavily to their tethered mustangs.
The poor beasts were trembling and whinnying; they greeted their young
masters with a quavering neigh of relief. The boys mounted; but although
they rode rapidly, with ever increasing impatience, they paused every
few moments to listen; there was likely to be a return stampede at any
moment. More than once they were obliged to swerve suddenly aside from
yawning rifts, and they passed a spring of boiling water, spouting and
hissing upward, which had not been there in the morning. They were too
frightened to talk; not only the paralysing awe of the earthquake was
upon them, but the least imaginative saw his home levelled to the
ground, his relatives and friends trodden down into the cracking earth.
Hills lay between them and the Casa Encarnacion.

There were two exits from the valley where the branding had taken place:
one, very narrow, to the right, which led directly to the house, the
other straight ahead, almost as broad as the valley itself. The boys saw
at a glance that pursued and pursuers had taken the more spacious way,
and they followed without consultation.

The crushed grass looked like green blood, but there was no other
evidence of slaughter; the mustangs had been fleeter than the cattle.
The latter had evidently kept well together, for on either side of a
swath some three hundred yards in width, the grass stood high.

They were in a wide valley now; they could see the great mountains,
still faint under their vapourous mist, the redwoods as rigid of outline
as if the heart of the world beneath had never changed its measure. Just
beyond this valley was a wood, then the Mission. Were twenty thousand
hoofs trampling among its ruins?

They left the valley, entered the wood, galloped down its narrow path,
and emerged. The Mission stood on its plateau above the river, as serene
and proud as the redwoods on the mountain. She had held her own against
many earthquakes and would against many more. But there was not a horn,
a horse, a man, nor a woman to be seen.

The boys dismounted, not daring to think. They walked toward the
buildings, then paused to listen. Through the open doors of the church
rolled the sonorous tones of Padre Osuna's voice, intoning mass. The
boys ran forward to enter the building. They paused on the threshold,
held by a sight, the like of which had never been seen in California
before, and never shall be again.

Near the entrance of the vast building were a multitude of half-clothed
dusky forms, prone. Between them and the altar were more than an hundred
horses, caparisoned with silver and carved leather, and gay anquera.
They stood as if petrified. On them, huddled to the arching necks, in an
attitude of prostrate devotion, were magnificent bunches of colour;
scarce an outline could be seen of the proudly attired men and women who
had fled before a tidal wave of tossing horns. Father Osuna, in his
coarse brown woollen robes, stood before the altar, chanting the mass of
thanksgiving. The church blazed with the light of many candles. The air
was thick and sweet with incense.

XVII

After the mass was over the boys learned the sequel of the morning's
terrible adventure. Between the second valley and the wood the cattle,
diverted by one of those mysterious impulses which govern masses of all
grades of intelligence, had deflected suddenly and raced for the hills.
The gay company was much shaken, but somewhat restored by the calm of
the church and the solemn monotonous roll of Father Osuna's voice. They
cantered slowly homeward, and crossed themselves fervently when they saw
the Casa Encarnacion none the worse for her shaking, beyond a few fallen
tiles. After dinner and siesta they recovered their natural spirits, and
the men and boys went forth with the vaqueros to hunt the cattle. These
were found at the foot of the mountain, weary and humble. Not a horn was
tossed in defiance at the volley of abuse hurled upon them, and they
allowed themselves to be driven to the ranches of their respective
owners without a protest.

That evening the household and guests of Casa Encarnacion spent in music
and dancing; so light of heart and careless of mind were the people of
that time and country.

A number of cattle had been trampled to death in the stampede, and the
bodies lay within a few miles of the mountains. It was inevitable that
bears would come out to eat the carcasses. On the night of the day of
terrifying memory no one felt equal to the exertion of another ten mile
ride and the subsequent battle with a possible herd of bears. But at
eight o'clock on the following night Don Tiburcio, Padre Osuna, the
boys, some ten of the caballeros, and as many vaqueros mounted and rode
forth for a good night's sport. The moon was thin and low. As they
approached the spot where the first of the wild band had succumbed to
fatigue they saw a dark object moving beside the carcass. The approach
was stealthy, but the bear suddenly raised his head. In a second five or
six lassos had sprung through the air. One caught the bear--a brown bear
of moderate size--about the neck, another about a hind leg. The brute
drew his legs together like a bucking horse and leaped into the air,
then plunged toward his tormentors; but those that had him in lasso
galloped in different directions, and poor bruin was quickly strained
and strangled to death. Two vaqueros were left to skin him, and the
party rode on. In a very few moments they saw a moving group some
distance ahead. Spurring their mustangs they dashed forward, letting the
lassos fly. Now the sport became truly exciting and dangerous. Some six
or eight brown bears, of varying sizes, growled furiously and bounded
toward the intruders. Three were caught in the meshes of the rope, the
others were making straight for the horses. There was only one thing to
do. The men put spurs and galloped rapidly away, the bears plunging
heavily in pursuit. When the men had outdistanced the bears by a hundred
yards or more, they wheeled suddenly and trotted back, once more letting
fly the lasso. This time all but one were roped; as they kicked in fury,
their hind legs were caught by the lariats held in reserve; and there
followed a scene of plunging and springing, galloping, shouting,
growling; and neighing, for the mustangs were fully alive to their part.

The one bear at liberty rode straight for Roldan.

He had hurled his lasso with the rest, and it was trailing. He jerked
about and fled for a mile or more, holding on with his legs while both
hands were occupied gathering in the rope and coiling it about the high
pommel of his saddle. Then he turned and charged full at the bear, who
was hot in pursuit and no mean runner. He hurled the lariat. It fell
short, and lay quivering on the ground like a huge wounded snake. Roldan
gave an exclamation, of surprise as much as of dismay: he was an expert
with the rope. He turned, however, dragging it in. It caught about the
mustang's hind legs. The beast went down, neighing with horror. Roldan
tried to jerk him to his feet. He seemed hopelessly entangled. Roldan
extricated himself, knowing that he was comparatively safe, as bears
prefer horse-meat to man's. He had no sooner got his feet free of the
boots than the mustang leaped to his feet and fled like a hare, dragging
the lariat in a straight line after him.

Roldan was alone, the bear not ten yards away. The rest of his party
were a mile and more behind. No one apparently had noticed his flight
with the solitary bear. The light was uncertain and the excitement over
there intense.

Roldan took to his agile young heels. But the bear gathered himself and
leaped, not once but several times. There was no doubt that his blood
was up, and that he meant a duel to the death. Roldan turned with a
catching of what breath was left in him. He mechanically drew his knife
from its pocket and flourished it at the advancing bear. Bruin cared as
little for steel as for rope. He came on with a mighty growl.

Roldan gave one rapid glance about. There was not even a tree in sight.
From his point of departure an object seemed approaching, but it was too
dark to tell as yet whether it was a horseman or another bear. The brute
was almost on him, panting mightily. All the senses between Roldan's
skeleton and his skin concentrated in the determination to live. He
sprang forward and plunged his long knife into the protruding injected
eye of the bear, then leaped aside, his dripping knife in his hand, and
danced about the maddened beast with the agility of a modern prize-
fighter. The bear, too, danced, as if obsessed by some infernal music;
and the skipping, and leaping, and dodging, and waltzing of these two
would have been ludicrous had it not been a matter of life and horrid
death. Through it all Roldan was vaguely conscious of approaching
hoofbeats, but there was no room in his consciousness for hope or
despair. He was not even aware that he was panting as if his lungs and
throat were bursting, nor even that his vision was a trifle blurred from
constant and rapid change of focus and surcharged veins. But he executed
his dance of life as unerringly as if fresh from his bed and bath. The
bear, a clumsy creature at best, and streaming and blinded with his
blood, was slackening a little, but there was life in him yet, and twice
its measure of vengeance. Suddenly he lay down, but became so abruptly
inert that Roldan was not deceived. Instead of putting himself within
reach of those waiting arms he fled with all his strength. It was then
that he knew how fully that strength was spent: his lungs and legs
refused to work with his will and impulse after the first hundred yards,
and he fell to the ground with a sensation of utter indifference,
longing only for physical rest. He heard the bear plunging after, the
loud sound of a horse's hoofs, mingled with a single shout, then gave up
his consciousness.

He awoke in a few moments. Adan was bending over him, propping his head.
"The bear?" he demanded, ashamed of the pitiful quality of his voice.

"I came just in time to rope him," replied Adan. "You were a fool, my
friend, to go off alone like that--but very brave," he added hastily,
knowing that Roldan did not like criticism.

"You are quite right. And this is the second time you and your lariat
have saved me. Perhaps it may be the other way some time."

"Likely it will if you go on hunting for adventures as the old women
hunt for fleas of a night. Do you feel able to get on my horse? It will
carry the two of us."

"If I were not equal to that much I should find another bear and go to
sleep in his arms."

XVIII

At last the night arrived for the gold quest. The guests had gone.
Roldan, Adan, and Rafael were alone on their side of the great house.
They waited, kicking their heels together with leashed impatience, until
eleven o'clock. The family and servants of Casa Encarnacion went to bed
at ten o'clock, but it was the custom of Don Tiburcio to go the rounds a
half or three quarters of an hour later and see that his strict laws
were as strictly obeyed. To-night, when he opened the doors of the three
young dons in succession, heels were still, and breathing was as
monotonous as his own would be an hour later. At eleven the boys dressed
and swung from their windows, not daring to leave by the courtyard. Nor
did they dare go to the corral and abstract three horses. Much to their
distaste, for there was nothing the Californian hated so much as to
travel on two legs, they were obliged to walk the miles between the Casa
and the hills. But their legs were young and their brains eager; in
little over an hour they were in sight of the Mission.

It looked very white and ghostly in the pale blaze of the moon, a huge
mass, full of prayer and discontent. Close beside it, but without the
walls, the Indians slept in the rancheria, quiescent enough, for they
had no Anastacio. At midnight the great bells in the tower had rung out,
filling the valley with their sweet silver clamour; but as the boys
approached and skirted the wall, some distance to the right, the Mission
might have been as lifeless as it is this year, in its desertion and
decay.

The hills were a mile behind. The Mission, like all of its kind, stood
on a broad open, that no hostile tribe might approach unseen. Cows and
horses lay in their first heavy sleep, their breathing hardly ruffling
the profound stillness. So great an air of repose did the silent walls
and sleeping beasts give to the landscape that the boys felt the quiet
of the night as they had not done in the other valley, and drew closer
together, almost holding their breath lest the priests might hear it. A
quarter of an hour later they were among the hills and standing before
the aperture whose secrets were known only to Padre Osuna. They glanced
at each other out of the corners of their eyes. Brave as they were, they
did not altogether like the idea of a possible encounter with a
rattlesnake or a bear in the dark and narrow confines of a cave. And if
there should be another earthquake! However, they had not come to turn
back, and Roldan pushed boldly in, the others following close.

For a time their way lay along a narrow passage. They had made two
abrupt turns before they dared to light the lantern they had brought.
When Rafael did, it revealed nothing but earthy walls and the imprint of
feet on the ground. After a little, however, the passage suddenly
widened, and it was Adan who uttered the first exclamation of surprise.
It was, indeed, a hoarse gurgle. The walls were veined with what
appeared to be irregular bands of dirty crystal, pricked with glittering
yellow. There were, perhaps, a thousand of these little points bared
from the jealous earth, and they shone with a steady baleful glare,
magnetising six youthful eyes, stirring in three careless brains the
ghosts of ancient gold-lust, whose concrete substance lay in the marble
vaults of Spain. Immediately Roldan's sympathy went out to the priest;
and he knew that that commanding intelligence could teach him one thing
the less.

There was a rough pick on the ground, and many junks of quartz. Roldan
struck and rubbed two pieces together. In a moment his palm was filled
with jagged pieces of yellow metal. He blew on them lovingly, then put
them in his pocket.

"Dios de mi alma!" gasped Rafael, whose eyes were bulging from his head.
"It is as beautiful as the stars of the sky,--the stars in the milky
way with the film over them."

"But we need no more stars," said Adan. "We shall take away our pockets
full, but what shall we do with it? Surely this was not made to rot with
the earth. But it is too small for what you call money, if that is so
big as you say, Roldan. It would make fine nails for a church door."

"Now is not the time to think what you will do with it," said Roldan.
"It is enough that we have it to get. Much is very loose in the crystal.
Rub free all that you can, and fill every pocket. We will take all we
can carry away, and come again and again. Some day, when we are men,
perhaps, we will find a use for it. I for one do not believe that
anything that makes you love it can do harm. Does not the Church teach
us to love all things? Now let us work and not talk."

The boys in turn hacked out great pieces of quartz and rubbed the free
gold loose. Much of it could only be crushed out in machinery made for
the purpose, but a sufficient quantity of the quartz was poor and soft.
As the boys worked, they grew more and more silent, more and more
absorbed. They forgot their delight in rodeo, coliar, bear-hunts, bull-
fights, riding about the ranches from morning till noon, the race, the
religious processions, the dulces of their mothers' cooks. A new and
mighty passion possessed them, the strongest they had ever known. Their
lips were pressed hard together--those soft Spanish lips that were
usually half apart--their eyes glowed with a steady fire. Their chests
rose and fell in short regular spasms.

Suddenly a thrill ran through Roldan. He had felt it before when a
rattlesnake, ready to strike, had fixed its green malignant eyes upon
him. He flashed the lantern about swiftly, twisting his neck with deep
anxiety. It would be no minor adventure to encounter a coiled rattler in
this narrow place. Then he saw something white shining out of the
darkness high above the rays, a large white disk, in which glittered two
points of light inexpressibly infuriate.

Roldan sprang to his feet with a warning cry. The other boys, greed
routed by the danger sense, were on their feet as quickly. As the three
lads, none very tall for his age, faced the gigantic bulk of the priest,
they looked cornered and helpless.

The priest, unconsciously beyond doubt, lifted his huge hands, opening
and shutting them slowly. The movement had an ugly significance, and the
hands, in the miserable glimmer of light, looked like great bats, and
seemed to pervade the cavern. Involuntarily the boys squirmed. Then
Roldan, mindful always of his proud position as captain of his small
band, stepped in front of that band and spoke with a vocal control that
did him much credit, considering that his heart seemed to be kicking in
the middle of his stomach.

"These hills are just beyond the Mission grant, Padre Osuna," he said.
"Nor are they on any rancho. Therefore what is in them is as much ours
as any man's. This is the first time that we have been here, but it will
not be the last; and when I am the governor of all the Californias, I
shall send many Indians to dig the very heart out of these hills. So
pick out all that you can now, Padre Osuna, for ten years hence--"

As he spoke fear gave place to exultation in finding himself pitted
against a man whom he intuitively respected more than any he had ever
met, and whom he knew most men feared and none understood. Moreover, he
heard two sets of teeth clattering behind him, and that alone would have
sent the blood of a born leader of men back to its skin.

But his speech did not proceed to the finish. The priest swooped down
and caught the three necks between his hands, easily spanning them,
pressing the heads hard together. Then he lifted the boys high in the
air and held them there, a kicking, humiliated trio. The blanched olive
of his face was reflected in the pallid brows at the extremity of his
rigid arms. His voice, which had been lost in passion, found itself.

"And when your Indians come, Senor Don Roldan," he said, "they will find
three skeletons six feet beneath the floor of this cave. You will never
leave this cave, not one of you. When you are dead for want of food and
drink, I shall return and bury you. And no one will seek you here."
Suddenly he dashed them to the ground. "A thousand curses go with you,"
he shrieked, "to make a murderer of me. I was near enough to hell
before--"

"And our fingers will scratch the ground beneath your feet," interrupted
Roldan, who between mortification and rage felt equal himself to murder,
but determined as ever to hold his own. "Our skulls will grin at you
from every corner as you work--"

"I don't care!" shouted the priest. "I don't care! Here you rot. This
gold is mine. No man shall touch it but myself."

"But if we promise never to return, and to tell no man of what we know,"
interposed Rafael, feebly.

The priest laughed. "With the glitter of gold in your brains? You could
not keep an oath on the cross." He turned swiftly and strode down the
passage.

"What will he do?" gasped Adan.

"Roll a stone over the entrance and secure it with others," said Roldan.
"There are plenty nigh. If we follow, he will beat us back with those
fists, and one blow would crack our skulls in two."

"Then what shall we do? Rot here? Starve to death? Madre de dios!"

"We have been between the teeth of death before, have we not? We shall
have many more adventures, my friends."

But although he spoke confidently he was profoundly disturbed. This was
no ordinary predicament. He knew that unless the priest relented they
stood small chance of seeing sun and stars again. Would he relent?
Roldan's own indomitable will and growing ambitions responded to the
awful forces in the man, overgrown and abnormal as they had become. That
the priest had some great end in view to which this gold was the means,
and that the gold itself had roused in him a controlling passion, he
could not doubt. The priest himself had told him something, the gold the
rest. With a sudden impulse of hatred Roldan emptied his pockets of the
metal and stamped upon it. He quieted suddenly, then stamped again, with
added vigour. Then he dropped and laid his ear to the ground.

"Stamp, Adan," he said, "and hard."

Adan shook his blood through his veins, and obeyed. Roldan sprang to his
feet. "We are above the tunnel of the Mission," he said. "And we have a
pickaxe. All we have to do is to dig."

XIX

It was three hours later that a mass of loosened earth caved suddenly,
carrying Adan with it. A wild yell came back. It stopped abruptly, the
tag end of it shot forth like the quick last blast from a trumpet.

"Hi, Adan!" called Roldan, excitedly, peering down into the dark. "Are
you hurt?"

"I know not! I know not! It is darker than a dungeon of a Mission." The
voice was quite distinct. It came from no great depth.

"Get out of the way," called Roldan. "I am coming." He waited a moment,
then dropped, falling on a mass of soft earth. Adan had prudently
retreated a few steps. He ran forward and helped Roldan to his feet,
just as Rafael came flying down.

"Now for the other end," said Roldan. "This air is not too good. And
that devil may return any moment."

They ran down the tunnel. It was wide and high, built for flying
priests, should the Mission be besieged and captured by savage tribes.
The air was close and heavy, but free from noxious gases. Bats whirred
past and rats scampered before them. Roldan paused after a moment and
lit his lantern. Its thin ray leaped but a few feet ahead, but would
frighten away any wild beast of the forest that might have wandered in.

The tunnel was straight. It also appeared to be endless.

"We have walked twenty leagues," groaned Adan, at the end of an hour.

"Two," said Roldan. "Without doubt this tunnel ends at the mountains,
and they are four leagues from the Mission. But you have taken longer
walks than this, my friend. Do you remember that night in the
mountains?"

"I had forgotten it for one blessed week. Rafael, to what have we
brought you? Your poor muscles are soft, where ours are now as hard as a
deserter's from an American barque--ay, yi!"

"If they have but the chance to become soft once more after they too are
hard!" muttered Rafael, who was panting and lagging. "That priest! that
priest!"

"It is true," said Roldan, pausing abruptly. "You will not dare to
return home at present--nor we. It is flight once more--to Los Angeles.
We will stay there--where he would not dare touch us if he came--until
he repents or makes sure that we will have told if we intend to tell.
Will you come?"

"Will I? I would go to Mexico if I could. I feel that there is not room
in the Californias for those hands and myself."

"I will take care of you," said Roldan, proudly, anxious to rout the
memory of his recent humiliation. "But come." And Rafael, too weary and
bewildered to resent the authority of his erst-while rival, trudged
obediently in the rear.

"It grows colder," said Adan, significantly.

"Yes," said Roldan. "We near the mountains."

Adan stopped. "Is it the mountains again?" he asked. "If it is, then I,
for one, prefer the priest."

"The mountains never scared you half as badly as the priest did," said
Roldan, cruelly. "And to say nothing of the fact that we need never get
lost in the mountains again, the embrace of a grizzly would be no harder
and more death-sure than one in the great arms of that fiend that wears
a cassock."

"True. You are always right. But promise that whatever happens you will
not lead us into the Sierras."

"I promise," said Roldan, much flattered by this unconscious tribute to
his leadership.

"Do you think that priest is really a devil?" asked Rafael, in an
awestruck voice.

"When a man has insulted you, you do not know what you think of him,"
said Roldan, flushing hotly. "If he only were not a priest I'd fight
him, big as he is. But at least I can outwit him. It consoles me to
think of his fury when he goes to the cave and finds us gone."

"We'd better get out of this tunnel before we talk about having the best
of the priest," said Adan. "Suppose he returns to kill us himself--"

"He will not return until to-morrow. Then he will have repented. He will
promise to let us go free if we keep his secret. But he will not have
that satisfaction, my friends. Yesterday he had a friend in Roldan
Castanada; I would have done anything for him, gladly kept his secret.
But to-day he has an enemy that he will do well to fear. A Spaniard
never forgets an insult."

"What shall you do?" asked Rafael, eagerly. "Expose him?"

"No, I do nothing mean. But I proclaim at Los Angeles that gold has been
discovered in the Californias, and in six days the hills will swarm, and
the priest in his cell will gnash his teeth."

"Ay!" exclaimed Adan. "Do you feel that?"

An icy blast swept down the tunnel, roughening skin and shortening
breath. A few moments later the low rhythm as of distant water came to
their ears. Roldan and Adan recognised that familiar music, and set
their teeth.

"And I prayed that I might never see another redwood," muttered Adan,
crossing himself.

The tunnel stopped abruptly. They stood before a mass of brushwood,
piled thickly to keep out wild beasts and delude the searching eye of
hostile Indians. Beyond, seen in patches, was a dazzle of white.

"Snow, of course," said Adan, with a groan.

The boys pulled the branches apart without much difficulty: the priests
had studied facility of egress and had raised the barrier from within.
In a few moments the boys stood in the sunlight; and the mountains
hemmed them in.

Adan stamped his foot savagely on the hard snow. "We are where we
started a week ago," he said. "No more, no less."

"No," said Roldan, who also had felt demoralised for a moment. "The
priests were too clever for that. They would want to get into the
shelter of the mountains, no more. I believe that from the top of that
point above the tunnel we can see the valley."

"Well, we can at least look," said Rafael, who was bitterly weary and
hungry, but determined not to be outdone by these hardened adventurers.

The boys made their way up the declivity as best they could through the
heavy snowdrifts, pulling themselves up by clutching at young trees and
scrub. They were thinly clad and very cold, and hunger was loud of
speech. When after a half-hour's weary climb, they reached the summit,
they drew a long sigh of relief, but their enthusiasm was too moderate
for words in present physical conditions. The valley lay below. Far
away, beyond leagues of low hills and wide valleys something white
reflected the sun. It was the Mission.

"We have not a moment to rest, unless we can find a safe hiding-place,"
said Roldan. "If he should return and find us gone, he would follow at
once."

"Where shall we go?" asked the others, who, however, felt a quickening
of blood and muscle at the thought that the priest might be under their
feet even then.

"How near is the next rancho, and whose is it?"

"A league beyond the Mission grant. It is Don Juan Ortega's."

"Very well, we go there and ask for horses."

The boys made their way rapidly down the slope, which after all was only
that of a foot-hill. Beyond were other foot-hills, and they skirted
among them, finally entering a canon. It was as dark and cold and damp
as the last hour of the tunnel had been, but the narrow river, roaring
through its middle, had caught all the snow, and there was scarce a
fleck on the narrow tilted banks. The hill opposite was the last of the
foot-hills; but how to reach it? The current was very swift, and boys
knew naught of the art of swimming in that land of little water.

Suddenly Roldan raised his hand with an exclamation of surprise and
pointed to a ledge overhanging the stream. A hut stood there, made of
sections of the redwood and pine. From its chimney, smoke was curling
upward.

The boys were too hungry to pause and reflect upon the possibility of a
savage inmate; they scrambled up the bank and ran along the ledge to the
hut. The door was of hide. They knocked. There was no response. They
flung the door aside and entered. No one was in the solitary room of the
hut, but over a fire in the deep chimney place hung a large pot, in
which something of agreeable savour bubbled.

Roldan glanced about. "I'd rather be invited," he said doubtfully.

But Adan had gone straight for the pot. He lifted it off the fire,
fetched three broken plates and battered knives and forks from a shelf,
and helped his friends and himself. Then he piously crossed himself and
fell to. It was not in human necessities to withstand the fragrance of
that steaming mess of squirrel, and the boys had disposed of the entire
potful before they raised their eyes again. When they did, Rafael, who
sat opposite the door, made a slight exclamation, and the others turned
about quickly. A man stood there.

He was quite unlike any one they had ever seen. A tall lank man with
rounded shoulders, lean leather-like cheeks, a preternatural length of
jaw, drab hair and chin whiskers, and deeply-set china-blue eyes, made
up a type uncommon in the Californias, that land of priest, soldier,
caballero, and Indian. He was clad in coyote skins, and carried a gun in
his hand, a brace of rabbits slung over one shoulder. He did not speak
for some seconds, and when he did, it was to make a remark that was not
understood. He said: "Well, I'll be durned!"

His expression was not forbidding, and Roldan recovered himself at once.
He stood up and bowed profoundly.

"Senor," he said, "I beg that you will pardon us. We would have craved
your hospitality had you been here, but as it was, our hunger overcame
us: we have not eaten for many hours. But I am Roldan Castanada of the
Rancho de los Palos Verdes, senor, and I beg that you will one day let
me repay your hospitality in the house of my fathers."

"Holy smoke!" exclaimed the man, "all that high-falutin' lingo for a
potful of squirril. But you're welcome enough. I don't begrudge anybody
sup." Then he broke into a laugh at the puzzled faces of his guests, and
translated his reply into very lame Spanish. The boys, however, were
delighted to be so hospitably received, and grinned at him, warm,
replete, and sheltered.

The man began at once to skin a rabbit. "Seein' as how you haint left me
nothin', I may as well turn to," he said. "And it ain't every day I'm
entertainin' lords."

The boys did not understand the words, but they understood the act, and
reddened.

"I myself will cook the rabbit for you, senor," said Adan.

"Well, you kin," and the man nodded acquiescence.

"You are American, no?" asked Roldan.

"I am, you bet."

"From Boston, I suppose?"

The man guffawed. "Boston ought to hear that. She'd faint. No, young
'un, I'm not from no such high-toned place as Boston. I'm a Yank though,
and no mistake. Vermont."

"Is that in America?"

"In Meriky? Something's wrong with your geography, young man. It's one
of the U. S. and no slouch, neither."

He spoke in a curious mixture of English and of Spanish that he adapted
as freely as he did his native tongue. The boys stared at him,
fascinated. They thought him the most picturesque person they had ever
met.

"When did you come?" asked Roldan.

"I'll answer any more questions you've got when I've got this yere
rabbit inside of me. P'r'aps as you've been hungry you know that it
doesn't make the tongue ambitious that way. I'll have a pipe while it's
cookin'."

He was shortly invisible under a rolling grey cloud. The tobacco was the
rank stuff used by the Indians. The boys wanted to cough, but would have
choked rather than be impolite, and finally stole out with a muttered
remark about the scenery.

When they returned their host had eaten his breakfast and smoked his
second pipe.

"Come in," he said heartily. "Come right in and make yourselves ter
home. My name's Jim Hill. I won't ask yourn as I wouldn't remember them
if I did. These long-winded Spanish names are beyond me. Set. Set. Boxes
ain't none too comfortable, but it's the best I've got."

"Oh, this box is most comfortable," Roldan hastened to assure him. "And
we are very thankful to have anything to sit on at all, senor. You could
not guess the many terrible adventures we have had in the last few
weeks."

"Indeed! Adventures? I want ter know! You look as if hammocks was more
to your taste. Oh, no offence," as Roldan's eyes flashed. "But you are
fine looking birds, and no mistake. Howsomever, we'll hear all about
them presently. It's polite to answer questions first. You was asking me
a while back how I come here. I come over those mountains, young man,
and I don't put in the adjectives I applied to them in the process outer
respect to your youth. But they'd make a man swear if he'd spent his
life psalm singin' before."

"We know," said Roldan, grimly. "We've been in them. What did you eat?
And did you get lost?"

"I ate red ants mor' 'n once, and I usually was lost. When I arrived at
that Mission down yonder the amount of flesh I had between my bones and
my skin wouldn't have filled a thimble. But that priest--he's a great
man if ever there was one--soon fixed me up. I lived like a prince for
a month, and I could be there yet if I liked, but I'd kinder got used to
livin' alone and I liked it, so I come here. Besides, I found so much
prayin' and bell ringin' wearin' on the nerves, to say nothin' of too
many Indians. I ain't got no earthly use for Indians. Why priests or
anybody else run after Indians beats me. Where I was brought up 't was
the other way. They're after us with a scalpin' knife, and if we're
after them at all it's with all the lead we kin git. If the murderin'
dirty beasts is willin' to stay where they belong, well, I for one
believe in lettin' 'em."

"Do you--ah--like the priest, Don Jim?"

"What? Well, that's better than 'Don Himy,' as they call me down there.
You bet I like the priest. He's a gentleman, and as square as they make
'em, that is, with a poor devil like me; I guess he's one too much for
your dons when he feels that way. But he's a man every inch of him,
afraid of nothin' under God's heaven, and as kind and generous as a--as
some women. What he rots in this God-forsaken place for I can't make
out."

"What did you come to California for?"

"Well, that ain't bad. I come here, my son, because I was lookin' for a
cold climate. My own was warm, accordin' to my taste, and somehow
Californy seemed as if it ought to be fur enough away to be cool and
nice."

"It's very hot in the valleys."

"So it is. So it is. But as you see, I prefer the mountains."

"Do you often go to the Mission?"

"Every month or so I go down and have a chin with Padre Osuna. It keeps
my Spanish in, and I shouldn't like to lose sight of him. I got word
from him the other day that he wanted to see me mighty particular, and
I'm wonderin' what's in the wind. Maybe you heard him say."

"No," said Roldan; but he guessed.

"Now," said Hill, "spin your yarn. I'm just pinin' to hear those
adventures."

Roldan appreciated the sarcasm, but was too secure in the wealth of the
past month to resent it. He began at the beginning and told the story
with his curious combination of reserve and dramatic fire. As he had
already told it several times it ran glibly off his tongue and had
several inevitable embellishments. The man, whose cold blue eyes had
wandered at first, finally fixed themselves on Roldan; and his whole
face gradually softened. When Roldan finished with his and Adan's rescue
by Don Tiburcio's vaquero, he held out his hand and said solemnly,--

"Shake."

Roldan allowed his hand to be gripped by that hairy paw; he was too
elated to resent it as a familiarity.

"You've got pluck," continued Hill, "and I respect pluck mor' 'n
anything else on earth. You're a man and a gentleman, and Californy'll
be proud of you yet. Got any more?"

Roldan related the tale of Rafael's prowess with the bull, his own
encounter with the bear, and Adan's timely interference. Hill then shook
the hands of the two other boys, and told them that as long as he had a
roof above his head they could share it, and that he'd do anything to
help them but steal horses, so help him Bob. Roldan then told the tale
of the earthquake and stampede.

"Ugh!" exclaimed Hill, with a shudder. "That's one thing I can't abide--
your earthquakes. I tell you it's enough to take the grit outen a
grizzly to hear the land sliden on the mountain and the big redwoods
that has got their roots about the bed-rock come roarin' down. When an
earthquake comes I go and stand in the middle of the creek so as I can
see what's comin' all round. Once I was on the side of the mountain when
one of those shakes come and I slid down twenty feet before I could stop
myself. It's just the one thing that has happened to me that I can't
help thinkin' about. Well, what kin I do for you? You're welcome to stay
here, but this hut ain't no great shakes for such as you. Be you goin'
home, now that the conscription's over?"

"No!" said Roldan, emphatically, "we are not. There are other reasons
why we must go to Los Angeles as quickly as we can. Could you get us
three horses?"

"I could get them from the priest--"

"No! no!"

"Why, what's the row with the priest? Got in his black books? I
shouldn't like to do that myself."

"You said just now that you would do anything for us. Would you even
hide us from the priest if he came here?"

"I would. And I ain't the one to ask questions. If you don't want to see
the priest, it's not Jim Hill that will assist him to find you. Been
there myself."

"Couldn't you get us three horses from my father's corral--the Rancho
Encarnacion?" asked Rafael.

"I could, if you'd go with me; but horse-stealing is just the one thing
I agreed not to do."

"You might go with him, Rafael," said Roldan. "You would get there after
dark if you started now; and even if the vaqueros were not asleep they
would not call your father."

"And I could send a message to my parents," said Rafael, eagerly. "Then
they would not worry. Yes, I will go. The priest would not dare to harm
me while I was with the Senor Hill."

"Oh, the two of us would be a match for even him, if it came to that,"
said Hill. "Well, we'll start right now, there bein' no call for delay.
We'll have to foot it, as my mustang's laid up. If the priest should
turn up here--which ain't likely--jest run up that ladder inter the
garret and pull it after yer. Well, hasta luego, as they say in these
parts. Make yourselves ter home."

XX

"Now," said Roldan, as Rafael and Hill trudged into the perspective of
the canon, "we must sleep, but by turns. That priest will surely go to
the cave to-day, and when he finds us gone he'll come straight for the
mountains; and not through the tunnel either; he'll come on that big
brown horse of his. You sleep first, for two hours, and I'll watch--"

"You first, my friend--" Suppressing a mighty yawn.

"It is easier for me to keep awake. Lie down on that horrible bed. I do
not so much mind waiting a little longer."

Adan lifted his nose at the bunk covered with a bearskin, then flung
himself upon it, and was asleep in three minutes. Roldan sat with his
eyes applied to a rift between the hide-door and the wall. It commanded
a view of the opposite wall of the canon, over which wound a zig-zag
horse trail.

The sun, which had hung directly above the canon when Hill and Rafael
departed, had slid toward the west, leaving the canon cold and dark
again, and Roldan was about to call Adan, when he sprang to his feet,
and stood rigid, cold with fear.

On the brow of the wall opposite, three hundred feet above his head,
stood a powerful brown horse. On him was a huge figure clad in a brown
cassock, the hood drawn well over the face. It was impossible to
distinguish features at that distance, but Roldan fancied that those
terrible eyes were holding his own. He recovered himself and dragged
Adan out of bed.

"The priest!" he said. "Help me to wash these dishes--quick. It will
take him some time to get down."

Adan stumbled across the room, plunged the dishes into a pail of
drinking water, then handed them to Roldan, who dried them hastily and
piled them on the shelf. Then he flung the water across the clay floor
of the hut.

"Get up the ladder," he commanded. Adan scrambled up. Roldan followed,
and pulled the ladder after him. The garret was very low, and half full
of skins. They could not stand upright. It was also bitterly cold. Each
hastily wrapped a skin about his body, and lay full length, Roldan on
his face, his eyes applied to a chink in the rough floor.

A few moments later the door was flung aside and the priest strode in.

Roldan shuddered, but not with personal fear. The priest looked like a
man who had just left the rack of his native Spain. His hair--the hood
had fallen back--stood on end, his face and tightened lips were livid,
his eyes rolled wildly.

"Jim!" he said hoarsely. "Jim!"

He left the hut as abruptly as he had entered it.

"He has gone to look at the mouth of the tunnel," whispered Roldan.
"What fools we were not to cover it up again. Then he would have walked
its length to find us, and the horses might have come before he
returned. Well, he cannot get us until he pulls the roof down."

"He could do it," whispered Adan, grimly. "Those hands! Dios de mi
alma!"

"He will think we have gone somewhere with Don Jim."

The priest returned in less than half an hour. His face, if anything,
was still more terrible to look upon. There was a touch of foam on his
lips. His great hands were clinched. He strode over to the bunk and
lifted the heaped-up bearskin. Suddenly he pressed his face into the
fur.

"Perfume--Dona Martina's," he exclaimed. "They have been here."

He raised his face to the ceiling, and the boys held their mouths open
that their teeth might not clack together. They closed their eyes:
instinct bade them give heed to visual magnetism. Roldan immediately
wanted to cough, Adan to scratch his nose. The next few moments were the
most agonised of their lives. They felt the priest lift his hands and
pass them slowly along the ceiling, they felt those eyes searching every
crevice. Then they felt him grip the edge of the aperture and lift
himself until his eyes were above the garret floor. But it was pitch
dark. He could not even see the ladder, much less the boys under the
bear skins.

The priest dropped to the floor and seated himself upon a box, dropping
his face into his hands. There he sat, motionless, for hours. The boys
buried their heads in the skins and went to sleep.

They were awakened by the sound of voices. A candle flared below. Hill
had entered. He and the priest were alone.

"They were here, sir, that's true enough. I've just taken them to the
Sennor Carriller's and pointed them fur home. They seemed in a hurry to
vamos these parts."

The priest groaned and struck his fist on the table. "Then they are
leagues away by this."

"They be, for a fact. Their horses was fresh and they was powerful keen.
They was just sweaten' to git home."

"And Rafael Carillo? Did he go with them?"

"He didn't. He allowed to, but his father warnt agreeable. In fact he
was--savin' your grace--cussed disagreeable. He corralled us as we was
corrallen the horses; and although he was mighty mad at such French
leave, he said, speakin' of the other two kids, that they could take the
two horses and git, and the sooner the better, and if they never come
lookin' for adventures in these parts agin the better he'd be pleased."

The priest did not appear to doubt him. He was looking through the
doorway. Roldan could not see his face, but he saw the stare of wonder
on Hill's.

"Very well," said the priest, after a moment, and his voice was hardly
audible. "I shall return now. Can you come down to the Mission to-
morrow--no, the day after. I have a secret to confide to you, and it
will not be to your disadvantage to know it. I had no intention of
telling any one, but I need help, and now more than ever. There is no
time to be lost. Can you come early?"

"I'll be there between dawn and ten o'clock."

"That will do. Good night." And the priest went out.

No one spoke until the sound came up to them of a horse fording the
creek. Then Hill said cautiously,--

"Hi, there, young uns."

"In the name of Mary let us come down, Don Jim," hissed Roldan, through
the crack.

"Well, I guess you kin. He's climbin' the hill, and I don't see as
there's anything to bring him back. I hope the fleas ain't et ye alive."

The boys lowered the ladder as rapidly as their stiff fingers would
permit, and a moment later stood on the floor of the room, shaking
themselves vigorously.

"Where's Rafael?" demanded Roldan.

"Tucked in his little warm bed with a warmer hide, I guess. The old man
caught us in the very act of horse stealin'. Holy smoke, but he did
cuss. I ain't got no pride in Yankee cussin' left."

"What did Rafael tell him?" interrupted Roldan, eagerly.

"He told him as how he had made up his mind to go home with you for a
little paseo--"

"Did he say nothing about the priest?"

"Nothin'. Never opened his head about the priest--"

"When I'm governor I'll reward him," said Roldan, warmly.

"When you're President of the United States you might make him Secretary
of State--"

"But the horses? the horses?"

"They're tethered just over the mountain. I suspicioned the priest might
be here, seein' as you were expectin' him, more or less."

"Did Don Tiburcio say about me--us--what you told the priest?"

"He did, and more of it. He was as mad as a bear with a sore head. You
see, he hadn't had no peace of mind for some hours, and as for the old
lady I believe she's been havin' high strikes regular since breakfast.
Now, I'm hospitable, but my advice to you is to git. Like as not the
priest'll see old Carriller to-morrow, and then the cat'll come out. I
kin git outen it all right enough--I'll say as how the old man didn't
see you, that you were restin' on the other side of the wall. Like as
not he'll believe me, but he thinks you're pointed fur home, and if he
wants you badly, he'll follow. You'd better go South fur a month or so
and go home by barque. I'll fetch the horses down now and put them in my
shed. That'll rest 'em a bit and keep 'em warm, and then you kin start
the minute it's daylight."

"You have been a friend to us in trouble, Don Jim, and I shall never
forget it."

"Don't mention it, Rolly, don't mention it. I kinder like excitement,
when I ain't the hero, so ter speak. There's only one thing I've got to
ask in return: Have you got a grudge agin the priest?"

"I have."

"Be you meditatin' revenge?"

"A Spaniard never forgives an insult."

"Oh, . . . have you got it in yer power to injure Padre Osuna in the
sight o' men?"

"I have, and worse--for him."

"Don't do it, young man," said Hill, solemnly. "Don't do it. It ain't
worth shucks to ruin a man fur personal spite. You'll find that out the
minute you've done it. You'll feel small and mean; and if you want to be
a great man--and I kin see you're ambitious--that ain't the way to go to
work. Padre Osuna has his faults, but he's a big man; there ain't none
bigger in the Californies; and he ain't the man to ruin, without
thinkin' a lot about it aforehand."

"He insulted me horribly," said Roldan, shutting his teeth. "I will
never respect myself until I wipe out the memory of that moment."

"He lost his temper, I suspicion, and whacked ye, like as not. Well,
I'll admit that is hard on a don of your size. But, take my word for it,
you'll feel a sight better if you mount the high horse and forgive him,
treat him with silent contempt. Nothin' makes you feel as good as that.
Tried it myself."

"I must think about it, Don Jim."

"Well, do. And maybe you'll remember that I asked ye as a favour to let
the priest off this time. He's been the best friend I ever had, and he's
been the friend of many, young 'un."

Roldan stepped forward impulsively and grasped Hill's hand. "I will
never speak," he said. "And you can say to Rafael that I wish him never
to speak, either. Only, in return, Don Jim, I insist that you do not
tell him that I promised you this. He shall not think that I fear him."

"Oh, I ain't goin' to have no conversation with him on the subject.
Don't you worry about that. Now, I'll go after the mustangs. You lie
down, and when I come back I'll cook that there rabbit for yer. You kin
git dinner at the Ortegas', but don't stay there too long, for the
priest's mighty sharp."

XXI

The boys were once more adrift in the wilderness. It was with mixed
emotions that they said good-bye to the hospitable American and rode
forth to new experiences and dangers. They were now tried adventurers;
they knew their mettle; they also had a far more definite idea of what
danger and experience meant than when they had fled from home with the
light heart of ignorance. Roldan felt several years older, and Adan had
moments of reflection. Moreover, the fine point of novelty had worn
toward bluntness. Nevertheless, they felt no immediate desire to return
to leading strings, and were glad of an excuse to pursue their way
south. Los Angeles was a famous city, the rival of Monterey,--which
neither had seen,--and a fitting climax to an exciting volume. The exact
arrangement of that climax was compassed by the imagination of neither.

For two miles they kept in line with the foot-hills, then rode rapidly
toward the valley, impatient for its warmth. So far, barring their
sojourn in the Sierras, they had been favoured with fine weather; but
winter was growing older every day, and the sky was thick and grey this
morning.

The Casa Ortega stood on the shores of a large lake. The banks were
thickly wooded. On its southern curve was a high mountain. As the boys
approached, a vaquero sprang upon a mustang and rode toward them
rapidly. Roldan recognised one of the men that had been at the rodeo.

"At your feet, senores," said the vaquero. "The Senor Don is away, and
all the family; but I am mayor domo, and in his absence I place the
house at your disposal."

"My father will reward you," said Roldan, graciously. "We would ask that
you give us dinner, a thick poncho each, for I fear that it will rain
before we reach Los Angeles, and that you will direct us which way to
go. The ponchos shall be replaced with fine new ones as soon as we have
returned home."

"Don Carlos would not hear of the return of the ponchos, senor. But
surely the senores will remain a few days, until the storm is over?"

"We dare not. But we will rest; and we have good appetites."

The mayor domo, still protesting, held the horses while the boys
dismounted, then showed them to two bedrooms and bade them rest while
dinner was preparing. "It will be an hour," he said. "I beg that the
senores will sleep."

The boys did sleep, and it was two hours before they were called. Then
they ate a steaming dinner, and forgot their fear of the priest: the
meagre diet of squirrel and rabbit of the past thirty-six hours had
lowered their spirits' temperature.

When they left the room the mayor domo awaited them with two thick
woollen ponchos--large squares of cloth with a slit in the middle for
the head.

"These will keep the rain out," he said, as he slipped them over the
boys' heads. "And there is food for two days in the saddle-bags, and
pistols in the holsters. Keep to the right of the lake, and enter the
mountains by the horse trail. It winds over the lower ridges. The
senores cannot lose themselves, for they should be on the other side
before dark--that mountain is the meeting of the two ranges and beyond
there are no more for many leagues. Then the senores must keep straight
on, straight on--never turning to the left, for that way lies the
terrible Mojave desert. By-and-by they will cross a river, and after
that Los Angeles is not far. Between the mountain and the river is an
hacienda, where they will find welcome for the night."

Roldan thanked him profusely, then said: "I have reasons for not wishing
ANY ONE to know that I have not returned to my father's house. I beg
that you will tell no one, not even a priest, that we have been here,
for three days at least."

"The senor's wishes shall be obeyed. The Senor Don returns not for a
week. No one shall know until then of the honour that has been done to
his house."

The boys rode rapidly through the wood over a broad road that had
evidently been traversed many times. The sky was leaden, but no rain
fell. Nor was there any wind. The lake could not have been smoother were
it frozen, although it reflected the grey above. Wild ducks and snipe
broke its monotony at times, now and again a jungle of tules. In less
than an hour the travellers were ascending the mountain by easy grades,
a black forest of pines about them. It was darker here, but the road was
clearly defined, and they talked gaily of adventures past and to come.
In Los Angeles they had many relatives, and they knew that a royal
welcome would be given them. They would see the gay life of which they
had heard so much from their brothers; and they magnanimously resolved
that after a week of it they would return to their anxious parents.

"Ay!" exclaimed Adan, interrupting these pleasant anticipations, "it
rains at last."

A few drops fell; then the rain came with a rush. For some time the wind
had been rising; suddenly it seemed to leap upward to meet the emptying
clouds, then filled the pine-tops with a great roar, rattling the hard
branches, bending the slender trunks. The boys were on the down grade,
and there was no danger of losing the path, although the rain had put
out the sallow flame of the sun. They pricked their horses and made the
descent as rapidly as possible. But it was another hour before they were
on level ground once more. The rain was still falling in torrents; the
wind flung it in their eyes as fast as they dashed it from their lashes.
They could not see a yard ahead. The light of the hacienda was nowhere
visible. If its owner was away from home and his house in darkness, then
was their plight a sorry one indeed.

"There is only one thing to do," said Roldan, putting his hand funnel-
wise to Adan's ear. "We must keep due south until we come to the river.
Then, at least, we cannot go wrong."

"And that river we must cross!" said Adan, with a groan. "Dios de mi
alma!"

Roldan had great faith in his sense of locality, but in a blinding rain
on a black night with a mighty wind roaring inside one's very skull, and
whirling the heavy poncho about one's ears every few moments, it was
difficult to preserve any sense at all. They galloped on, however,
occasionally pausing to shout, straining their eyes into the darkness on
every side. But nothing came back to eye or ear. Apparently they had the
wilderness to themselves. There was no sign of even an Indian pueblo.

It was during one of these halts that the boys ejaculated
simultaneously: "The river!"

"No," shouted Roldan, a moment later "it is only a creek."

"Are we lost?" demanded Adan; and even the loud tone had a note of
pained resignation in it.

"No; I think this must be what he meant. Some of the low people say
river for everything but the ocean. It is shallow, and we cannot turn
back. Come."

They rode along the bank until they came to an easy slope, then crossed,
and cantered on. In a very short time the storm was behind them and the
stars burst out, but there was no sign of habitation. They kept on for
an hour longer, hoping for a welcome twinkle below; but not even a
coyote crossed their path. As far as they could see in the starlight
they were on a plain of illimitable reach, bare but for low shrubs whose
kind they could not determine, although once Adan's coat caught on a
prickly surface. The atmosphere was warm and very dry.

Finally Roldan reined in.

"We must rest," he said, "and build a fire, or we shall be stiff to-
morrow. And it is long past the hour for supper."

"The sooner we eat and sleep and dry, the better for me," said Adan.

The boys dismounted and tied their horses to a palm, then looked about
for firewood. There was not a tree to be seen; they had not passed one
since they left the creek. Nor could they see any sign of flint with
which they might set fire to a clump of palms.

Adan, who had been on his knees, suddenly remarked: "There is not a
blade of grass, Roldan. What will the mustangs do?"

"They are eating the palm, perhaps that will do them until to-morrow.
But the poor things must be as hungry as twenty. Come, let us strip,
hang our things up, and run. The water is in my bones."

The boys peeled off the clinging steaming garments and ran up and down
until hunger sent them to the saddle bags. The mayor domo had provided
them abundantly, and once more they looked upon the world with hopeful
eyes.

"But we must sleep," said Roldan, "and it is not going to be easy for
mind or body--if there are rattlers about--with no fire. We must take
it in turns. It is warm; we do not need our clothes--ah!"--for Adan was
snoring.

Roldan was very tired but not sleepy. His brain, indeed, seemed
unusually alert, and he got up after a time and prowled about, pistol in
hand. He had been in solitudes before, solitude of plain and valley and
mountain; but there was something in his present surroundings that
reminded him of nothing he had heard of or seen. It was not only the
intense stillness, unbroken by so much as the flutter of a leaf, nor
even the vast expanse. The place seemed to possess a character of its
own, and its character was sinister and forbidding. Once or twice he had
been in the cemetery of the Mission near his father's rancho, and the
ugly feeling that he stood too close to death came back to him; why, he
could not define. There was no sign of a cross anywhere; but he felt
that he stood in a dead world, nevertheless. Once the ground quivered
beneath his feet, and the horrible idea occurred to him that Southern
California had been swallowed by an earthquake, and that only this
desolation was left.

He went back to his comrade, who slept soundly beside the horses, also
extended and breathing deeply. It was nearly morning when he woke Adan,
so little aptitude had his brain for sleep. But when Adan sat up he fell
asleep almost immediately, and when he awoke the sun was high.

XXII

Roldan raised himself on his elbow and looked about him. Adan was some
quarter of a mile away, approaching him, leading the mustangs. Cleaving
the horizon on four sides was a vast plain. On it was not a tree, nor
even a hut. Here and there were clumps of palms and cacti, as stark as
if cut from pale green stone. At vast intervals were short, isolated
mountains, known in the vernacular as "buttes." On the ground was not
the withered remnant of a blade of grass; but there were many fissures,
and some of them were deep and wide. Of the things that crawl and
scamper and fly there was no sign, not even a hole in the ground; for
even reptiles must have food to eat, and there was nothing here to
sustain man nor beast. The fleckless sky was a deep, hot blue; a blood-
red sun toiled heavily toward the zenith.

"Adan!" shouted Roldan; he was suddenly mad for sound of any sort. A
discouraged "Halloa!" came promptly back.

Roldan dressed himself rapidly. His clothes were quite dry; indeed the
very atmosphere of this strange beautiful place was so dry that it
seemed to crumble in the nostrils. As he finished dressing Adan reached
him. The horses' heads were hanging listlessly. Adan's face had lost its
ruddy colour.

"Roldan," he said, "where are we?"

"I know not," said Roldan, setting his lips.

"I left you to look for water, and there are not even tarantulas in this
accursed place. There is no water, not a drop. Nor a handful of stubble
for the horses."

"We must go back the way we came, and start once more from the foot of
the mountain."

"Can you remember from which point we entered this place? This soil
might be rock; there is not a hoof-print anywhere."

"We should have gone south and we came east. On the northwestern horizon
is something which looks like mountains--a long range--almost buried in
mist. There is no sign of a range anywhere else; so the only thing to do
is to go back to them; they are our mountains; I feel sure of that."

"If the horses do not give out. They are empty and choking, poor things.
Well, there is no reason we should not eat, and, thanks be to that good
mayor domo, we still have a bottle of wine. But I would give something
for a gourd of water. However, we have not been girls yet, and we will
not begin now, my friend."

The boys ate their breakfast, but their spirits felt little lighter,
even after a long draught of wine. The awful quiet of the place, broken
only by an occasional whinny from the mustangs, seemed to press hard
about them, thickening the blood in their veins. Roldan was filled with
forebodings he could not analyse, and strove to coax forth from its
remote brain-cell something that had wandered in, he could not recall
when nor where.

They saddled the mustangs, mounted, and were about to make for the
northwest when Adan gave a hoarse gurgle, caught Roldan's arm, pulled
him about, and pointed with shaking hand to the south.

"Dios de mi alma!" exclaimed Roldan. "It is Los Angeles. We were right,
after all. But why were we never told that it was so beautiful?"

On the southern horizon, half veiled in pale blue mist, showed a stately
city, with domes and turrets and spires and many lofty cathedrals. It
was a white city; there were no red tiles to break those pure and lovely
lines, to blotch that radiant whiteness; even the red sun withheld its
angry shafts.

Roldan gazed, his lips parting, his breath coming quickly. If his
imagination had ever attempted to picture heaven, its wildest flight
would have resembled but fallen short of that living beauty before him.
It was mystifying, exalting. It was worth the dangers and discomforts of
the past month multiplied by twelve, just to have one moment's glimpse
of such perfection. And it was Los Angeles! A city of the Californias,
built by Indian hands! No wonder his family had been careful to leave
its wonders out of the table talk; had he known, he would have been at
its feet long since.

"It isn't the wine?" asked Adan, feebly.

"No. There must have been a fog before; Los Angeles is near the sea."

"Shall we start?"

"Yes, but slowly. The poor mustangs! But it will not be long now. We
cannot be more than two leagues from there. See, it grows plainer every
moment; the fog must have been very heavy."

They cantered on slowly, the mustangs responding automatically to the
light prick of the spur. The beautiful alluring city looked to be
floating in cloud; it smiled and beckoned, inciting even the weary
famished brutes to effort. But at the end of an hour Roldan reined in
with a puzzled expression. "I do not understand," he said.  "It seemed
not two leagues away when we started, and we have come that far and
more, and still it seems exactly the same distance beyond."

"The atmosphere is so clear," suggested Adan. "But I wish we were there.
My mouth is parched, my tongue is dry--and the horses, Roldan. Soon they
will be as limp as sails in a calm."

"True, but we could easily walk the distance now. We could return for
them at once with water and food." But he was beginning to feel vaguely
uneasy once more. The odd sensation of death, of a buried world, had
returned. Could it be that that fair city beyond was heaven? Surely, he
thought with unconscious humour, it was very un-Californian.

They passed the lonely buttes, the parched beds of lakes, salt-coated.
Still they saw not a living thing; still the city seemed to recede with
the horizon, its sharp beautiful outlines unchanged. For some time the
horses had been trotting unevenly. Gradually they relaxed into a dogged
amble, their heads down, their tongues out. Every now and again they
half paused, with quivering knees.

Adan's was the first to collapse; it fell to its knees, then rolled
over, Adan scrambling from under, unhurt.

Roldan also dismounted, and both boys, without a word, unsaddled the
poor brutes, thrust the pistols into their belts and what was left of
the provisions into their pockets. They cast off their ponchos, then
once more turned their faces to the south. But they did not advance.
They stood with distended eyes and suspended breath. The city had
disappeared.

Adan was the first to find speech. "A fog?" he asked. "A rain storm?"

"There is neither. The horizon is as blue and clear as it is on the
north and east and west. It is a miracle. Let me think a moment."

He sat down and took his head between his hands. After a while he looked
up. "For hours I have been trying to remember something," he said. "Do
you remember what that mayor domo said to us?--Keep straight on,
straight on, never turning to the left, for that way lies the terrible
Mojave desert, I barely heard his last words at the time; that is the
reason I have had such a time remembering. We are in the Mojave desert,
my friend."

Adan, whose mouth was still wide open, sat down and rolled his eyes from
east to west. "Caramba!" he ejaculated finally.

"I could say a good deal more than Caramba. All that I have heard of
this Mojave comes back to me. There is no water on it, no living thing
but half choked cacti and stunted palms. Men who are lost on it go mad
and die of thirst--"

"Ay, yi, yi!"

"Si, senor. However, it might be much worse. It is winter, not summer,--
when the heat kills in a day; we have food and a little wine; we are
young and very strong; we have not come so many leagues that we cannot
walk back. And we have each other. Think, were we alone!"

"Yes, it might be worse," said Adan, "but all the same it might be six
or eight leagues to the northwest better. And that city? What was it?
Where has it gone?"

"I do not know." Privately he believed that it had been a glimpse of
heaven, and was disturbed lest it might have been a portent of death.
But his mind was too active, his nature too independent to sit down
under superstition. If he died on the desert, it would not be through
lack of effort to get out of it.

He stood up, setting his lips. "Come," he said. "We gain nothing by
sitting here, and we are both fresh; we can walk many leagues before
night."

"Do you know which way to go?" asked Adan.

Roldan swept the horizon with his eyes. The buttes they had passed had
displaced the solitary landmark of the morning. There was not a hoof-
beat on the hard split ground. Roldan shrugged his shoulders.

"We can at least follow the sun. Los Angeles must be due west. Come."

The sun was past the zenith and sloping to the west. The boys turned
their backs upon it and trudged on, only pausing once for a half-hour to
divide the meagre remains of their store. Evening came; the sun leaned
his elbows on the horizon in front of them, leered at the contracted
visages and blinking eyes resolutely facing him, then slid leisurely
down; and night came suddenly. The boys flung themselves on the ground
and slept.

They awoke consumed with hunger and thirst. Their mouths and nostrils
were coated with the fine irritating dust of the desert, scarcely
visible but always felt. But their smarting eyes were greeted by a
refreshing sight: not a half-league before them, directly in their
course, was a lake, a lake as blue as the metallic sky above, and
lightly fringed with palms and orange-trees. Beyond was a forest of
silver leaves--an olive orchard.

"A Mission!" exclaimed Roldan, and even Adan sprang to his feet and
marched westward with some enthusiasm. But alas! although they trudged
with dogged persistence for fully a league, striving to forget the
gnawing at their vitals in the exquisite prospect filling the eye, the
lake seemed to march ahead of them, in perfect time with their weary
feet. Suddenly the two boys paused and faced each other.

"This accursed desert is bewitched," said Roldan. His face was white,
but more with anger than fear; for the first time in his life he
realised the helplessness of man when at the mercy of nature, and he did
not like the sensation. He had a strong, and by this time, well
developed instinct to govern, to bend others to his will, and he swore
now that he would walk out of this desert unharmed if only for the
pleasure of cheating a force mightier than himself. He turned and looked
at the sun.

"We have been going in a wrong direction," he said. "That lake has been
shifting gradually toward the southwest, and taken us nearly a league
out of our course. The first thing we know we will be in Baja
California, where there is nothing but deserts, and they are all on
mountain tops. We must strike north again. I am sure that last night we
were due west of Los Angeles."

"But the lake? the Mission?"

"I do not believe there is any lake. There are things you and I do not
understand in this world--although we are learning--and I believe that
this strange desert has the power to make scenes like the theatres they
who have travelled tell us of. Be sure that lake will disappear like the
city."

They turned north in order to get in line with the sun; and out of the
tail of their eyes they saw the lake march with them. When they finally
turned to the west again it faced them once more. They linked arms
suddenly and trudged on, hungry, parched, beset by superstitious fears,
but not forgetting to turn every half hour and glance at the sun until
he passed the meridian and pointed for the west. And suddenly the lake
seemed to slip behind a wall.

"There is really something there this time," said Roldan, closing one
eye and curving his hand about the other. "It is ugly enough to be real.
It is no use to say how far anything is in this place, but I should
think we would reach it before long."

And long before they did reach it they knew what it was--a thicket of
cacti some two miles long and of unknown depth. The plants were eight or
ten feet high, and the broad thick leaves, spiked, as only the leaves of
the cactus are, looked to be welded together. But that was from a
distance. When the boys reached the thicket they saw that the plants in
reality were some feet apart, although there appeared to be no end to
them. The boys sat down suddenly, their strength deserting them. They
threw their arms forward on their knees and dropped their heads. For a
half hour or more they sat motionless, then Roldan looked up and fixed
his glassy eyes on the forbidding wall, which at close proximity seemed
to girt* the horizon.

"If we tried to go round it," he said, "there is no knowing where we
should find ourselves. We had better go straight ahead, if possible. If
it is too thick we can turn back."

"At least we could not see this horrible desert for a while," said Adan.
"I am willing."

"And, who knows? Los Angeles may be just on the other side."

Their utterance was thick. Their veins felt as if packed with lead, not
so much from need of food as need of drink. But they stumbled to their
feet and entered the cactus forest. They were obliged to pursue their
way in single file; the spikes were long, and many of the larger leaves
abutted so obstructively that they were obliged to go down on their
hands and knees and crawl. Nor could they maintain a straight course,
but zig-zagged among the great plants as nature permitted. More than
once they heard the rip of silk, more than once blood sprang through
their skin. Their progress was slow and fraught with peril, their only
consolation that the end must come sooner or later.

Night came suddenly. They were near an open a few feet in circumference.
They lay down side by side, knowing that a step at night might mean
instant blindness.

The cactus never moves, not even in a storm. There was not a breath of
wind to-night. The thick dull green plant-trees looked as solid as
stone, a petrified forest. The sky had never seemed so high above, the
stars so hard and bright.

Adan moistened his lips with his tongue. "Do you feel that you can last
another day?" he asked.

"I expect to die of old age."

"Well, if you do, it won't be the fault of the Mojave desert. You have
courage, and so have I; but this is worse than all--Do you feel that?"

"I have felt it many times before, to-day. It is said that parts of the
Mojave shake all the time."

"We can swear to that. Supposing a great shake came, how could we get
out of this?"

"We are as well here as anywhere. Let us sleep, and rise with the sun."

But although he spoke confidently, almost contemptuously, he was
possessed with a wild desire to spring to his feet and fight his way out
of this terrible prison. He had seen a huge fish flounder in a net, and
looked on callously. He should never witness such another sight without
a responsive thrill of horror. Were he paralysed from crown to heel he
could not be more helpless in this thicket of needles. The vast
unpeopled desert had been bad enough, but it had been intoxicating
liberty to this. Tired as he was, he moved his hands and feet
constantly; supineness was impossible. He wondered how men felt when in
prison, and vowed that when he held the law in his hands he would invent
some other way of punishment. For his part he would rather be shot at
once.

Being young and healthy, he fell asleep after a time. When he awoke the
sky was grey, the stars had gone. He shook Adan.

"There is no sunrise to be seen from this place," he said, "but I am
sure of the direction now. I took note of that big cactus ahead, last
night--Hist!"

"Dios de mi alma!" whispered Adan, his tongue rolling out. "In this
place! It is worse than earthquake."

Nothing was to be seen from where they stood, but from no great distance
came the faint hollow rattle which strikes terror to man in the
wilderness. The volume of sound was suddenly augmented: there appeared
to be a duet. Immediately it was supplemented by a loud furious hissing;
a moment later by a whirr and impact.

"There are two, and they are fighting," whispered Adan, his eyes
bulging.

Roldan advanced softly to an aperture between two leaves of a cactus,
then lifted his finger to his shoulder and beckoned. Adan turned
mechanically in the opposite direction; but curiosity overcame him, and
he joined Roldan.

Between two plants not three feet apart two rattlesnakes were engaged in
mortal combat. They coiled with incredible rapidity, flew at each other
with burning eyes and darting tongues, burying a fang somewhere in the
tense bristling armours. The lashing tails struck the spiked surface of
the cactus and augmented their fury; occasionally they whipped about,
hissing deliriously, then returning as swiftly to the only enemy in
sight. They had coiled and struck some four or five times, whipping all
over their narrow arena, when as if by common consent, they retreated to
extreme opposite points, coiled as lightning strikes, and leapt at each
other. Even Roldan gave a hoarse cry of surprise, and as for Adan, he
fell into vocabulary: one serpent had darted straight down the throat of
the other. For a moment there was a fearful lashing. The choking
serpent, with protruding eyes, like small green coals, and jaws
distended in agony, strove to dislodge his suffocating enemy, and the
other humped his back and leapt backward in frantic efforts to reach the
air again. But suddenly their struggles ceased; they flattened to the
ground, only the tails moving automatically. What was left looked like a
monster of some unknown species; a creature with no head, a huge belly,
and two tails.

"Caramba!" exclaimed Adan, "I could not eat that even if we had anything
to cook it with. It looks like a mass of poison."

"I should like to know where that poison was last night. It may be a
good sign, however: as they are the first living things we have seen, we
may be near to the edge of the desert."

Adan crossed himself.

"Come," continued Roldan, "let us move on, before hunger tempts us too
far."

Once more they started on their tortuous way. They walked very slowly,
both from necessity and inclination: the excitement of the fight over,
their physical necessities pressed heavily; they kept as close together
as they could, but rarely spoke: they were too hungry. Both were
oppressed by the fear that at any minute they would come upon a solid
wall of cacti and be obliged to retrace their steps, and both knew that
might mean a stunning blow to courage. At times the constant zig-
zagging, the unalterable, smooth, grey-green surface of the cacti, made
them halt dizzily, for both brain and body were sick for want of food.
But by degrees the wood grew thinner and thinner; and when the sun was
half way between the zenith and the western horizon, they left behind
the last straggling outpost and found themselves on the edge of a creek,
the same doubtless that they had crossed three nights before. They gave
each other a feeble simultaneous slap on the back, gathered their
energies, ran down the bank, and took a long draught of the running
water.

"I feel better," said Roldan, finally, "but hungrier than ever. There
are quail in that chaparral over there. I'll go after them, and do you
hunt for flint and build a fire."

He crossed the creek and entered the brush beyond. Almost simultaneously
there was a loud whirr of wings, and a large flock of quail rose from
the chaparral a few feet ahead of him. He had only his pistols, but he
was a good shot, and he decapitated two of the birds in rapid
succession. Then he reloaded and killed a squirrel. When he returned,
Adan was on his knees, with his large cheeks distended, coaxing a
handful of dried leaves and twigs into flame. It was a half hour before
the pyre was large enough for the sacrifice, but after that the birds
and squirrel, which meanwhile had been skinned and washed in the creek,
were but a short time singeing. It was an ill-cooked meal, but when it
was over Roldan said solemnly,--

"I have eaten of all the delicious dishes of the Californias, including
many dulces, but nothing ever tasted as good as this; no, not even the
first breakfast at Casa Encarnacion."

"Nor to me," said Adan, emphatically, and he crossed himself.

XXIII

"Hallo!" shouted a peremptory voice. "Hallo! Hallo!"

"It's the Senor Jim," gasped Adan.

Roldan sprang to his feet. "Hallo!" he cried.

There was a heavy trampling in the chaparral, and a moment later Hill
rode into view. He took off his sombrero and waved it at the boys, but
did not speak until he had crossed the creek and dismounted. Then he
turned and regarded them with his keen hard eyes.

"Well!" he exclaimed, "I never calkilated to see you alive agin, and
that's a fact. Hed some more adventures, I presume. Look as if ye'd hed
more adventures than grub."

"Indeed we have, Don Jim," said Roldan, solemnly. "Should you like to
hear them?"

"Should I? Well, I guess. You and your adventures have kinder made me
feel young once more."

Roldan told the painful story.

"Holy smoke!" exclaimed Hill, in conclusion, "you are tough! And two
mirages in the bargain. I was lost on Mojave once, and to my mind the
mirages was the wust part of the hull game."

"What do you mean?" asked Roldan. "What are mirages?"

"Mirages, Rolly, are what ought to be and ain't, what you want and can't
git, and they bear a hell-fired resemblance to life. I see you don't
quite understand. Well, that there beautiful city and that there
beautiful lake was what we call mirage for want of better name!" And he
explained to them the meaning of the phenomenon, as far as he understood
it.

"We have certainly learned a good deal since we left home," said Roldan,
thoughtfully.

"There's room for more. There's room for more. Now, I suppose you'd like
to know how I come here. Wall, I've got a confession to make fust, and
seein' as you've been so nigh to death in the last few days, p'r'aps
you'll furgive me. The day after you left I went down to see the priest,
as agreed. I found him--well, I don't know as I'll tell everything, not
even to excuse myself. It's enough to say that he was half luny between
fear and remorse. He told me--I suppose he'd got to that state where he
had to tell somebody or bust--about leavin' you in the tunnel to die,
and bein' willin' after to kill you with his own hands--he was that mad.
But he felt terrible sorry, and said that if you told on him it would
serve him right; only that would mean ruin--ruin--ruin--a terrible
word, young man. And he's not a day over forty and calkilates to git out
of Californy with that there gold and be a big-bug in his native land. I
hesitated some time, fur I ain't no slouch at keepin' a promise; but in
the end I had to tell him. Why, a man's a criminal if he don't put
another man out of misery when he kin--"

"You did quite right," interrupted Roldan. "I am glad that he was
punished, but I would not have any one punished for ever."

"Well, I'm glad you feel that way. He felt good, I kin tell you that. He
looked ten years younger in five minutes, for he said as how he knew
you'd keep your word. I went straight off and managed to have a word
with young Carrillo. It warnt no trouble to make him promise to keep his
mouth shet; he's more afraid of the priest than he is of his father's
green-hide lariat, and that's sayin' a heap. When I went back to the
Mission I told the priest that I thought as how I'd go on to Ortega's,
and see if you got there all right. When I got there and heard as how
you hed crossed the mountains in a terrible storm I just hed to go on. I
made straight for old Sanchez', who has a hacienda and raises grapes
just this side of the river. He was drunk as usual, but his servants
hedn't seen nothin' of you, and then I was seriously alarmed. That was
at night, and I couldn't do nothin' until daylight, so I got a good
sleep and the next mornin' I started for Mojave. I know it pretty well,
and there was no danger of gittin' lost. At nightfall I found your
horses and ponchos--the horses was dead, poor things. I slept on the
desert that night, and the next mornin' rode back as hard as I could
put, suspicionin' that you would have sense enough to strike west. I
went round the corner of that there cactus wood, never thinkin' ye were
in it, and I expect I got well to this side before you was out. When I
got to this creek I rode up and down it, then crossed over, thinkin' ye
might hev gone on. It was only when I saw smoke that I said to myself
for the fust time: 'There they be.' And you bet it did me good, for I
was powerful worried."

"Don Jim," said Roldan, "you are a kind and good man. I love you, and I
will always be your friend."

"So. Well, I'm powerful glad to hear that. You ain't much like 'Merican
kids, but you're pretty clever all the same, and I like ye better 'n any
boy I ever know'd, hanged if I don't. Don't be jealous, sonny"--to
Adan--"I like ye too--but Rolly--well!"

"You would not like Roldan half so well if it were not for me," said
Adan, whose face expressed nothing.

"So. Well. Now, be ye rested? We want to git to old Sanchez' fur a good
supper and a soft bed to-night."

The boys rose with alacrity. Hill bade them mount his powerful horse,
and walked beside them.

Sanchez' house was only three miles away, but the road lay through
chaparral which sprang across in many places. It was heavy dusk when
they emerged. For some time past they had heard wild eccentric cries,
and their three pistols were cocked. As they rode through a grove of
trees beyond the chaparral, they saw a dark something rolling toward
them. In an instant Hill had snatched the boys from the horse and swung
them to the limb of a tree.

"Hide yourselves among the leaves," he said, "and don't even breathe
mor' 'n you kin help."

He gave the horse a sharp cut with his switch and it galloped on; then
he climbed a neighbouring tree with the agility of a wildcat, and
crouched.

The boys gazed into the dusk with distended eyes. The cloud came on with
inconceivable rapidity. In a moment it outlined itself. Those were
living creatures, fleeing. A stampede? No, men. . . . What? Indians?

They were within a hundred yards now, and their lithe naked forms, the
tomahawks and bows and arrows gripped in their clenched hands, could
plainly be seen; a moment later, their evil faces, distorted with fear.
In the middle distance behind them was a huge column of fire. A strange
figure seemed leaping among the flames. It was from this scarlet column
that the strange noises came. The Indians made no sound beyond their
impact with the atmosphere.

They deflected suddenly and passed to the right of the grove; a moment
later the three in ambush heard them crashing through the brush. Hill
waited until the sound had grown faint in the distance before he swung
himself down and helped the boys to the ground.

"That was a close shave," he said. "Them was murderin' savages, no weak-
kneed Mission variety. I'd give two cents to know what scared 'em and
what's goin' on over yonder. They were on the rampage, which same means
thievin' and killin', or my name ain't Jim Hill."

"We're used to Indians," said Adan, with gentle pride.

"Oh, be ye? Well, if them Indians had caught you fryin' your supper,
you'd have got as well acquainted with the next world in just about
three quarters of an hour. Well, we've all got to foot it now; but it
ain't far. I'm powerful anxious to know what's goin' on over to
Sanchez'! Mebbe two tribes met and them's the victors offerin' up the
tail end of that there valiant army. Golly Moroo, but they did look
scared."

They walked on rapidly, but without further conversation; they were all
hungry, and the boys were still very fagged. As they approached the
blazing mass, the figure seemed to leap more wildly still among the
flames, the cries to grow hoarser and more grotesque. All about was
heavy blackness. The slender branches of the burning pine writhed and
hissed; they might have been a pyramid of rattlesnakes caught in
spouting flame. Overhead the stars had disappeared beyond a heavy cloud
of smoke. It was a sight to strike terror to the heart of civilised man;
small wonder that the superstitious children of the mountain and desert
had fled in panic.

They had advanced a few yards farther when suddenly Hill flung himself
on the ground and gave vent to a series of hysterical yells, at the same
time rolling over and over, clutching at the grass. Roldan, seriously
alarmed, and wondering if any other boys in the history of the
Californias had ever had so much to try their nerves, ran to his
assistance; he caught him by his lean shoulders, and shook him soundly.

"Don Jim! Don Jim!" he exclaimed. "Are you ill, my friend? You have some
whisky in your flask, no?"

At this Hill burst into a loud guffaw. Roldan and Adan looked at each
other helplessly. The Spanish do not laugh often, and although the boys
dimly realised that Hill's explosion resembled--remotely--the dignified
concession of their race to the ridiculous, yet they feared that this
was a diseased and possibly fatal variety.

But in a moment Hill sat up. He wiped his eyes, and with some difficulty
controlled his voice.

"No, I ain't ill, young 'uns," he said. "But them Indians 'ud be pretty
sick if they knowed what they run from. That there object cavortin'
round that there bonfire is old Sanchez, and he's drunk. Oh, Lord!" And
once more Hill gave way to mirth.

"He did more good than harm to get drunk this time," said Roldan,
smiling sympathetically.

"You're right, Rolly. You've got a long head. If old Sanchez had set
down to supper sober to-night, there'd be a war-dance round another
bonfire this minute, and his scalp 'ud be bobbin' bravely. I don't
approve of liquor," he added cautiously, remembering the young ideas
shooting before him. "I only said that there be exceptions to all rules,
and this is one of them."

"I understand," said Roldan, drily. "I am not thinking of following the
Senor Sanchez' example. But do you suppose that was really what
frightened the Indians?"

"Just. Well, I guess! They've probably got some idee of the devil, and
they thought that was him, sure 's fate."

He sprang to his feet, ran forward, caught the bacchanalian about the
shoulders, and rushed him in the direction of the dimly-looming house,
throwing one of his own long legs into the air every now and again. The
boys ran after. When they reached the house its master was extended on a
settee in the living-room, and Hill was telling the tale of their narrow
escape to the frightened household.

"I don't think they'll come back," he said in conclusion. "But it's jest
as well to have your guns ready, and for one or two of ye to set up all
night. We three'd like grub and beds as quick as you kin git 'em ready."

Never had beds felt so sweet as they did that night. The boys awoke
refreshed, themselves again; and no Indians had returned to disturb
their slumbers.

XXIV

Hill met them as they entered the living-room. His eyes were full of
news.

"Well, boys," he said, "I don't know that you're in fur another
adventure, but ye kin call it by that name when you git home if you
like; leastways there ain't no doubt about it's bein' an experience."

The boys forgot the waiting breakfast. "What is it?" they demanded
simultaneously. "Quick! quick!"

"It's this. I don't suppose you know more about the history of your
country 'n most kids do. Well, Alvarado and General Castro are your two
big men--"

"We know that," interrupted Roldan, scornfully.

"Oh, you do? Then mebbe you know who'se* govenor* at the present
moment."

"Micheltorena. He was sent from Mexico. People don't like him, and they
despise the men he brought with him, still more."

"So. Well, I allus did say you was a remarkable kid, Rolly. However,
this is the way the case stands now. Alvarado's mad as hops to be ousted
for a furriner, so to speak, and Castro's been bilin' fur some time,
because General Vallejo's been promoted ahead of him. So the two on 'em
determined on a revolution. They had a skirmish on Salinas plains that
didn't decide much, and then Alvarado and Castro marched south, from
ranch to ranch,--you just levanted in time,--persuadin' the rancheros to
uphold their cause and give 'em their sons. As they have a way with 'em,
of course they got all the recruits they wanted, to say nothin' of the
finest horses in stock--caponara after caponara. They say the sight when
they marched into Los Angeles was somethin' to go hungry for. Of course
all Los Angeles went over to such triumphant lookin' rebels, and to-day
or to-morrow there's goin' to be a big battle. I only heard this
mornin'. Old Sanchez' brother come post haste about two hours ago fur
his gun and as many men and horses as he could drum up. Of course
Alvarado marched down the coast valleys, so old Carillo and his
neighbours are eatin' their breakfast in blissful ignorance."

"And shall we really see a great battle?" demanded Roldan, faintly. He
was pale, his nostrils were twitching, "Alvarado! Castro! Micheltorena!"

"Well, you kin, if you bolt that there breakfast. The horses'll be here
in about twenty minutes, and a battle's somethin' I'm pinin' to see,
too."

The boys ate their breakfast rapidly and in silence. A half hour later
they were galloping furiously for Los Angeles, escorted by the equally
enthusiastic Hill. The river was low and quiet. The horses swam it
without let from tide or snag. Even Adan forgot to cross himself. Beyond
was the high hill that lies directly to the north of Los Angeles. Its
surface seemed in motion; it looked like a huge ant-hill.

"Them's women," said Hill, a few moments after they had left the river
behind them. "Women and children. The fight must be on. Hist! Do you
hear that?"

All three reined in. The sound of cannonading, distant but distinct,
came to their ears. Without a word they lashed their mustangs and made
for the city. They entered it in a few moments. It looked like a
necropolis. Not a human being was to be seen. They spurred back to the
hill and began the ascent, then paused for a few moments. It was a wild
and tragic scene. Hundreds of women and children, their hair streaming
in the high wind, were kneeling with uplifted crosses, praying aloud,
when they were not weeping. A few men, Americans, were passing to and
fro among them, administering encouragement; but their gaze also was
directed anxiously to the north.

Hill dismounted and approached one of the Americans, conferred with him
a moment, then returned to the impatient boys.

"They are fightin' in the San Fernando valley, three leagues to the
north," he said. "We've got no time to lose."

They were less than an hour reaching the battlefield. During that hour
Roldan scarcely knew how he felt. When he left the hacienda he was
possessed by an intense curiosity only; but with that first dull boom
something new and fierce had leapt to life within him. Every few moments
his fingers moved round to the hip-pocket that held his pistols. The
weeping women and children had made him quiver from head to foot. As
they approached the battlefield, and powder-smoke mingled with the green
fragrance of winter, he thought that his nostrils would burst. His ear-
drums were splitting with the thunder of cannon. Suddenly Hill caught
him by the arm.

"Look!" he cried. "There be Alvarado and Castro over there, and
Micheltorena on t' other side. Ain't they magnificent specimens? Why,
what's the matter?"

"Let me go!" said Roldan. His face was deeply flushed, his eyes blazed.
"Come, Adan! come, Adan!" he shouted. "An Alvarado! an Alvarado!"

"Holy smoke!" cried Hill. "You don't say you're meanin' to fight after
sweatin' fur a month to git clear of the hull business?"

But Roldan, grasping the bridle of the less enthusiastic Adan, was
already far ahead. The boys rode straight into the melee, firing through
the smoke until their ammunition was exhausted. Even Adan after the
first few moments lost all sense of fear, and following Roldan's
example, snatched the gun from a fallen soldier and fired and reloaded
until his hands were blistered, and his eyes half sightless with smoke.

Roldan, obeying his dominant instinct, pushed his way rapidly to the
front, attracting much attention. Some one recognised him, and during
one of the many pauses of this not very systematic and furious battle
some one cheered the little don. The cheer was taken up vociferously. It
boomed across the battlefield. A moment later a man came dashing across
with a flag of truce: the cheering was supposed by the enemy to herald
the advance of reinforcements. The truce was accepted without
explanations, and Roldan was hurried into the presence of Alvarado. That
famous governor was sitting on a magnificent charger, caparisoned with
carved leather, red velvet, silver, and gold. His black eyes were
smiling, although the rest of his pale stern face was composed.

"So this is the runaway," he said. "I demanded you from your father, and
he was much embarrassed to confess that you had fled to escape the
conscription. Well, I am glad you did, for you have saved the day for
me. But it is time you were in Monterey, for you've got the face of the
leader of men, and the sooner your education begins the better. Will you
come with me? Your father will not refuse."

The blood was pounding in Roldan's ears, but he managed to reply calmly
that he would go.

He was then presented to General Castro, a man of fine military bearing,
with classic features, but dark and stern. His eyes were as sombre as
Alvarado's: doubtless both knew that their day would be short, their
great gifts wasted in this far-away land, as remote from the great
civilisations where lasting reputations are made as had it been on
another planet.

He shook Roldan warmly by the hand, but he did not smile.

"Yes," he said, "it will be a pleasure to train you; and as you are
young and malleable you will adapt yourself to the new order of things
when it comes. Both Alvarado and I will write to your father; I am sure
he will send you to us in Monterey."

And then they graciously dismissed him.

As the boys left the battlefield they came upon Hill, who was sitting on
a hillock eating a sandwich. When Roldan had told his story the American
replied:

"Shake! Rolly, you've got a heap o' genius, but you've got a durned
sight more luck. You'll git there--one way or nother--if the skies fall.
And I wish ye luck, I do for a fact."

"Don Jim," said Roldan, gravely, "have you another sandwich? We are
very hungry."








Scanned and proofed by R.W. Jones <rwj@freeshell.org>.

Note: With the use of a text-to-speech player and the hard copies
      of the original editions themselves, this revised electronic
      edition has been specifically conformed as regards spelling,
      punctuation and content to the 1853, 1854 and 1857 first
      editions (save frontispiece and the c1923 edition introductory
      remarks and page headings, which have been retained here. The
      first editions' frontispiece have the quotation: ' "A college
      joke to cure the dumps" -Swift.').
      The first editions differ in minor respects not only from the
      popular c1923 Herbert Jenkins edition from which version 1.0
      was prepared but also as between themselves; e.g. "number"
      in the second sentence of Part I., Chapter One of the first
      edition becomes "name" in the corresponding part of the 1853
      third edition;  minor inconsistencies in spelling occur
      (e.g. "shew" in Part I is spelt "show" later in the work;
      "Gig-lamps" in Part I becomes "Giglamps" in Parts II and III;
      etc). Where the first editions contain clear typographical
      errors which have been corrected in the Herbert Jenkins or
      other editions, these corrections (very few in number) are
      indicated in the narrative below by brackets.

      Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See etext03/verda11h.zip:
      http://www.gutenberg.net/etext03/verda11h.zip





THE ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN

BY CUTHBERT BEDE




[NB this e-text contains corrections to the Herbert Jenkins edition
made by reference to the consolidated version held by The British
Library which combines the first editions of each of the three parts
originally published 1853-7.
Greek letters in the original are rendered in Roman script and
designated: "{ }".
Italics are indicated: "~".
The illustrations are designated "<VG0**.JPG>".
The introductory remarks below appear only in the Herbert Jenkins
edition, not in the several originals.]



[1      ]

                                        THE ADVENTURES OF
                                        MR. VERDANT GREEN










[2      ]


                                WHAT THIS BOOK IS ABOUT

"Let the poker be heated" were the fearful words which greeted Mr.
Verdant Green on his initiation into a spoof Lodge of Freemasonry at
Oxford.  This was one of the many "rags" of which he was the butt
during his days at the university.

In this humorous classic there is told the story of a very raw
youth's introduction to university life, of fights between "town and
gown," escapes from proctors, wiles of bed-makers, days on the river,
or on and off horseback, and nights when "he kept his spirits up by
pouring spirits down."

These amusing experiences and diverting mishaps of an Oxford Freshman
need no introduction to a public that has already read and laughed
over them many times before.

The great feature of the volume is that it contains the whole 188
illustrations originally contributed by the Author.




[3      ]
                                THE ADVENTURES OF
                                MR. VERDANT GREEN

                                        BY

                                CUTHBERT BEDE



                                WITH 188 ILLUSTRATIONS
                                BY THE AUTHOR

                                <VG003.JPG>






                                HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED
                                3 YORK STREET LONDON S.W.1





[4      ]
                                A HERBERT JENKINS' BOOK






        ~Printed in Great Britain by~ Garden City Press, Letchworth.


[5      ]
                                        CONTENTS

                                        PART I


CHAP.
                PAGE

I       MR. VERDANT GREEN'S RELATIVES AND ANTECEDENTS ........7

II      MR. VERDANT GREEN IS TO BE AN OXFORD FRESHMAN ........14

III     MR. VERDANT GREEN LEAVES THE HOME OF HIS ANCESTORS ...21

IV      MR. VERDANT GREEN BECOMES AN OXFORD UNDERGRADUATE ....33

V       MR. VERDANT  GREEN  MATRICULATES,  AND  MAKES  A
        SENSATION  ...........................................41

VI      MR. VERDANT GREEN DINES, BREAKFASTS, AND GOES TO
        CHAPEL ...............................................51

VII     MR. VERDANT GREEN CALLS ON A GENTLEMAN WHO "IS
        LICENSED TO SELL"  ...................................6l

VIII    MR. VERDANT GREEN'S MORNING REFLECTIONS ARE NOT
        SO PLEASANT AS HIS EVENING DIVERSIONS  ...............72

IX      MR. VERDANT GREEN ATTENDS LECTURES, AND, IN DESPITE
        OF SERMONS, HAS DEALINGS WITH FILTHY LUCRE  ..........83

X       MR. VERDANT GREEN REFORMS HIS TAILOR'S BILLS AND
        RUNS UP OTHERS. HE ALSO APPEARS IN A RAPID ACT
        OF HORSEMANSHIP, AND FINDS ISIS COOL IN SUMMER  ......92

XI      MR. VERDANT GREEN'S SPORTS AND PASTIMES  .............103

XII     MR. VERDANT GREEN TERMINATES HIS EXISTENCE AS AN
        OXFORD FRESHMAN  .....................................114

                                        PART  II

I       MR. VERDANT GREEN RECOMMENCES HIS EXISTENCE AS
        AN OXFORD UNDERGRADUATE  .............................123

II      MR. VERDANT GREEN DOES AS HE HAS BEEN DONE BY  .......126

III     MR. VERDANT GREEN ENDEAVOURS TO KEEP HIS SPIRITS
        UP BY POURING SPIRITS DOWN  ..........................134

IV      MR. VERDANT GREEN DISCOVERS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
        TOWN AND GOWN ........................................145


[6      CONTENTS]

CHAP.
                                PAGE

V       MR. VERDANT GREEN IS FAVOURED WITH MR  BOUNCER'S
        OPINIONS REGARDING AN UNDER-GRADUATE'S
        EPISTOLARY COMMUNICATIONS TO HIS MATERNAL RELATIVE  ..157

VI      MR. VERDANT GREEN FEATHERS HIS OARS WITH SKILL
        AND DEXTERITY  .......................................167

VII     MR. VERDANT GREEN PARTAKES OF A DOVE-TART AND
        A SPREAD-EAGLE .......................................176

VIII    MR. VERDANT GREEN SPENDS A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND
        A HAPPY NEW YEAR  ....................................184

IX      MR. VERDANT GREEN MAKES HIS FIRST APPEARANCE ON
        ANY BOARDS ...........................................191

X       MR. VERDANT GREEN ENJOYS A REAL CIGAR  ...............202

XI      MR. VERDANT GREEN GETS THROUGH HIS SMALLS  ...........209

XII     MR. VERDANT GREEN AND HIS FRIENDS ENJOY THE
        COMMEMORATION  .......................................2l8


                                        PART  III

I       MR. VERDANT GREEN TRAVELS NORTH  .....................222

II      MR. VERDANT GREEN DELIVERS MISS PATTY HONEYWOOD
        FROM THE HORNS OF A DILEMMA  .........................227

III     MR. VERDANT GREEN STUDIES YE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
        OF YE NATYVES  .......................................238

IV      MR. VERDANT GREEN ENDEAVOURS TO SAY SNIP TO
        SOME ONE'S SNAP .......................................243

V       MR. VERDANT GREEN MEETS WITH THE GREEN-EYED
        MONSTER  .............................................251

VI      MR. VERDANT GREEN JOINS A NORTHUMBERLAND
        PIC-NIC  .............................................258

VII     MR. VERDANT GREEN HAS AN INKLING OF THE FUTURE  ......265

VIII    MR. VERDANT GREEN CROSSES THE RUBICON  ...............271

IX      MR. VERDANT GREEN ASKS PAPA  .........................280

X       MR. VERDANT GREEN IS MADE A MASON  ...................288

XI      MR. VERDANT GREEN BREAKFASTS WITH MR. BOUNCER,
        AND  ENTERS FOR A GRIND  .............................297

XII     MR. VERDANT GREEN TAKES HIS DEGREE  ..................302

XIII    MR. VERDANT GREEN IS MARRIED AND DONE FOR  ...........309


[7      ]
                        THE ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN.


                                        CHAPTER I.

                MR. VERDANT GREEN'S RELATIVES AND ANTECEDENTS.

IF you will refer to the unpublished volume of "Burke's Landed
Gentry", and turn to letter G, article "GREEN," you will see that the
Verdant Greens are a family of some respectability and of
considerable antiquity.  We meet with them as early as 1096, flocking
to the Crusades among the followers of Peter the Hermit, when one of
their number, Greene surnamed the Witless, mortgaged his lands in order
to supply his poorer companions with the sinews of war.  The family
estate, however, appears to have been redeemed and greatly increased
by his great-grandson, Hugo de Greene, but was again jeoparded in the
year 1456, when Basil Greene, being commissioned by Henry the Sixth
to enrich his sovereign by discovering the philosopher's stone,
squandered the greater part of his fortune in unavailing experiments;
while his son, who was also infected with the spirit of the age, was
blown up in his laboratory when just on the point of discovering the
elixir of life.  It seems to have been about this time that the
Greenes became connected by marriage with the equally old family of
the Verdants; and, in the year 1510, we find a Verdant Greene as
justice of the peace for the county of Warwick, presiding at the
trial of three decrepid old women, who, being found guilty of
transforming themselves into cats, and in that shape attending the
nightly assemblies of evil spirits, were very properly pronounced by
him to be witches, and were burnt with all due solemnity.

In tracing the records of the family, we do not find that any of its
members attained to great eminence in the state, either in the
counsels of the senate or the active services of the field; or that
they amassed any unusual amount of wealth or landed property.  But we
may perhaps ascribe these circumstances to the fact of finding the
Greens, generation after generation, made the dupes of more astute
minds, and when the hour of


[8 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

danger came, left to manage their own affairs in the best way they
could, - a way that commonly ended in their mismanagement and total
confusion.  Indeed, the idiosyncrasy of the family appears to have
been so well known, that we continually meet with them performing the
character of catspaw to some monkey who had seen and understood much
more of the world than they had, - putting their hands to the fire,
and only finding out their mistake when they had burned their fingers.

In this way the family of the Verdant Greens never got beyond a
certain point either in wealth or station, but were always the same
unsuspicious, credulous, respectable, easy-going people in one
century as another, with the same boundless confidence in their
fellow-creatures, and the same readiness to oblige society by putting
their names to little bills, merely for form's and friendship's sake.
 The Vavasour Verdant Green, with the slashed velvet doublet and
point-lace fall, who (having a well-stocked purse) was among the
favoured courtiers of the Merry Monarch, and who allowed that monarch
in his merriness to borrow his purse, with the simple I.O.U. of
"Odd's fish! you shall take mine to-morrow!" and who never (of
course) saw the sun rise on the day of repayment, was but the
prototype of the Verdant Greens in the full-bottomed wigs, and
buckles and shorts of George I.'s day, who were nearly beggared by the
bursting of the Mississippi Scheme and South-Sea Bubble; and these,
in their turn, were duly represented by their successors.  And thus
the family character was handed down with the family nose, until they
both re-appeared (according to the veracious chronicle of Burke, to
which we have referred) in
"VERDANT GREEN, of the Manor Green, Co. Warwick, Gent., who married
Mary, only surviving child of Samuel Sappey, Esq., of Sapcot Hall,
Co. Salop; by whom he has issue, one son, and three daughters:
Mary,-VERDANT,-Helen,-Fanny."

Mr. Burke is unfeeling enough to give the dates when this bunch of
Greens first made their appearance in the world; but these dates we
withhold, from a delicate regard to personal feelings, which will be
duly appreciated by those who have felt the sacredness of their
domestic hearth to be tampered with by the obtrusive impertinences of
a census-paper.

It is sufficient for our purpose to say, that our hero, Mr. Verdant
Green, junior, was born much in the same way as other folk.  And
although pronounced by Mrs. Toosypegs his nurse, when yet in the
first crimson blush of his existence, to be "a perfect progidy, mum,
which I ought to be able to pronounce, 'avin nuss'd a many parties
through their trouble, and being aweer of what is doo to a Hinfant,"
- yet we are not aware that his ~debut~ on the stage of life,
although thus applauded


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     9]

by such a ~clacqueur~ as the indiscriminating Toosypegs, was
announced to the world at large by any other means than the notices
in the county papers, and the six-shilling advertisement in the
~Times~.

"Progidy" though he was, even as a baby, yet Mr. Verdant Green's
nativity seems to have been chronicled merely in this everyday
manner, and does not appear to have been accompanied by any of those
more monstrous phenomena, which in earlier ages attended the
production of a ~genuine~ prodigy.  We are not aware that Mrs.
Green's favourite Alderney spoke on that occasion, or conducted
itself otherwise than as unaccustomed to public speaking as usual.
Neither can we verify the assertion of the intelligent Mr. Mole the
gardener, that the plaster Apollo in the Long Walk was observed to be
bathed in a profuse perspiration, either from its feeling compelled
to keep up the good old classical custom, or because the weather was
damp.  Neither are we bold enough to entertain an opinion that the
chickens in the poultry-yard refused their customary food; or that
the horses in the stable shook with trembling fear; or that any
thing, or any body, saving and excepting Mrs. Toosypegs, betrayed any
consciousness that a real and genuine prodigy had been given to the
world.

However, during the first two years of his life, which were passed
chiefly in drinking, crying, and sleeping, Mr. Verdant Green met with
as much attention, and received as fair a share of approbation, as
usually falls to the lot of the most favoured of infants.  Then Mrs.
Toosypegs again took up her position in the house, and his reign was
over.  Faithful to her mission, she pronounced the new baby to be
~the~ "progidy," and she was believed.  But thus it is all through
life; the new baby displaces the old; the second love supplants the
first; we find fresh friends to shut out the memories of former ones;
and in nearly everything we discover that there is a Number 2 which
can put out of joint the nose of Number 1.

Once more the shadow of Mrs. Toosypegs fell upon the walls of Manor
Green; and then, her mission being accomplished, she passed away for
ever; and our hero was left to be the sole son and heir, and the prop
and pride of the house of Green.

And if it be true that the external forms of nature exert a hidden
but powerful sway over the dawning perceptions of the mind, and shape
its thoughts to harmony with the things around, then most certainly
ought Mr. Verdant Green to have been born a poet; for he grew up amid
those scenes whose immortality is, that they inspired the soul of
Shakespeare with his deathless fancies!

The Manor Green was situated in one of the loveliest spots in all
Warwickshire; a county so rich in all that constitutes the


[10 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

picturesqueness of a true English landscape.  Looking from the
drawing-room windows of the house, you saw in the near foreground the
pretty French garden, with its fantastic parti-coloured beds, and its
broad gravelled walks and terrace; proudly promenading which, or
perched on the stone balustrade might be seen perchance a peacock
flaunting his beauties in the sun.  Then came the carefully kept
gardens, bounded on the one side by the Long Walk and a grove of
shrubs and oaks; and on the other side by a double avenue of stately
elms, that led, through velvet turf of brightest green, down past a
little rustic lodge, to a gently sloping valley, where were white
walls and rose-clustered gables of cottages peeping out from the
embosoming trees, that betrayed the village beauties they seemed loth
to hide.  Then came the grey church-tower, dark with shrouding ivy;
then another clump of stately elms, tenanted by cawing rooks; then a
yellow stretch of bright meadow-land, dappled over with browsing kine
knee-deep in grass and flowers; then a deep pool that mirrored all,
and shone like silver; then more trees with floating shade, and
homesteads rich in wheat-stacks; then a willowy brook that sparkled
on merrily to an old mill-wheel, whose slippery stairs it lazily got
down, and sank to quiet rest in the stream below; then came, crowding
in rich profusion, wide-spreading woods and antlered oaks; and golden
gorse and purple heather; and sunny orchards, with their dark-green
waves that in Spring foamed white with blossoms; and then gently
swelling hills that rose to close the scene and frame the picture.

Such was the view from the Manor Green.  And full of inspiration as
such a scene was, yet Mr. Verdant Green never accomplished (as far as
poetical inspiration was concerned) more than an "Address to the
Moon," which he could just as well have written in any other part of
the country, and which, commencing with the noble aspiration,

                "O moon, that shinest in the heaven so blue,
                I only wish that I could shine like you!"

and terminating with one of those fine touches of nature which rise
superior to the trammels of ordinary versification,

                "But I to bed must be going soon,
                So I will not address thee more, O moon!"

will no doubt go down to posterity in the Album of his sister Mary.

For the first fourteen years of his life, the education of Mr.
Verdant Green was conducted wholly under the shadow of his paternal
roof, upon principles fondly imagined to be the soundest and purest
for the formation of his character.  Mrs. Green, who was as good and
motherly a soul as ever lived,


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     11]

was yet (as we have shown) one of the Sappeys of Sapcot, a family
that were not renowned either for common sense or worldly wisdom, and
her notions of a boy's education were of that kind laid down by her
favourite poet, Cowper, in his "Tirocinium" that we are

                "Well-tutor'd ~only~ while we share
                A mother's lectures and a nurse's care;"

and in her horror of all other kind of instruction (not that she
admitted Mrs. Toosypegs to her counsels), she fondly kept Master
Verdant at her own apron-strings.  The task of teaching his young
idea how to shoot was committed chiefly to his sisters' governess,
and he regularly took his place with them in the school-room.  These
daily exercises and mental drillings were subject to the inspection
of their maiden-aunt, Miss Virginia Verdant, a first cousin of Mr.
Green's, who had come to visit at the Manor during Master Verdant's
infancy, and had remained there ever since; and this generalship was
crowned with such success, that her nephew grew up the girlish
companion of his sisters, with no knowledge of boyish sports, and no
desire for them.

The motherly and spinsterial views regarding his education were
favoured by the fact that he had no playmates of his own sex and age;
and since his father was an only child, and his mother's brothers had
died in their infancy, there were no cousins to initiate him into the
mysteries of boyish games and feelings. Mr. Green was a man who only
cared to live a quiet, easy-going life, and would have troubled
himself but little about his neighbours, if he had had any; but the
Manor Green lay in an agricultural district, and, saving the Rectory,
there was no other large house for miles around.  The rector's wife,
Mrs. Larkyns, had died shortly after the birth of her first child, a
son, who was being educated at a public school; and this was enough,
in Mrs. Green's eyes, to make a too intimate acquaintance between her
boy and Master Larkyns a thing by no means to be desired.  With her
favourite poet she would say,

                "For public schools, 'tis public folly feeds;"

and, regarding them as the very hotbeds of all that is wrong, she
would turn a deaf, though polite, ear to the rector whenever he said,
"Why don't you let your Verdant go with my Charley? Charley is three
years older than Verdant, and would take him under his wing." Mrs.
Green would as soon think of putting one of her chickens under the
wing of a hawk, as intrusting the innocent Verdant to the care of the
scape-grace Charley; so she still persisted in her own system of
education, despite all that the rector could advise to the contrary.


[12 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

As for Master Verdant, he was only too glad at his mother's decision,
for he partook of all her alarm about public schools, though from a
different cause.  It was not very often that he visited at the
Rectory during Master Charley's holidays; but when he did, that young
gentleman favoured him with such accounts of the peculiar knack the
second master possessed of finding out all your tenderest places when
he "licked a feller" for a false quantity, "that, by Jove! you couldn't
sit down for a fortnight without squeaking;" and of the jolly mills
they used to have with the town cads, who would lie in wait for you,
and half kill you if they caught you alone; and of the fun it was to
make a junior form fag for you, and do all your dirty work; - that
Master Verdant's hair would almost stand on end at such horrors, and
he would gasp for very dread lest such should ever be ~his~ dreadful
doom.

And then Master Charley would take a malicious pleasure in consoling
him, by saying, "Of course, you know, you'll only have to fag for the
first two or three years; then - if you get into the fourth form -
you'll be able to have a fag for yourself.  And it's awful fun, I can
tell you, to see the way some of the fags get riled at cricket! You
get a feller to give you a few balls, just for practice, and you hit
the ball into another feller's ground; and then you tell your fag to
go and pick it up.  So he goes to do it, when the other feller sings
out, 'Don't touch that ball, or I'll lick you!' So you tell the fag
to come to you, and you say, 'Why don't you do as I tell you?' And he
says, 'Please, sir!' and then the little beggar blubbers.  So you say
to him, 'None of that, sir! Touch your toes!' We always make 'em wear
straps on purpose.  And then his trousers go tight and beautiful, and
you take out your strap and warm him! And then he goes to get the
ball, and the other feller sings out, 'I told you to let that ball
alone! Come here, sir! Touch your toes!' So he warms him too; and
then we go on all jolly.  It's awful fun, I can tell you!"

Master Verdant would think it awful indeed; and, by his own fireside,
would recount the deeds of horror to his trembling mother and
sisters, whose imagination shuddered at the scenes from which they
hoped their darling would be preserved.

Perhaps Master Charley had his own reasons for making matters worse
than they really were; but, as long as the information he derived
concerning public schools was of this description, so long did Master
Verdant Green feel thankful at being kept away from them.  He had a
secret dread, too, of his friend's superior age and knowledge; and in
his presence felt a bashful awe that made him glad to get back from
the Rectory to his own sisters; while Master Charley, on the other
hand, entertained a lad's contempt for one that could not fire


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     13]

off a gun, or drive a cricket-ball, or jump a ditch without falling
into it.  So the Rectory and the Manor Green lads saw but very little
of each other; and, while the one went through his public-school
course, the other was brought up at the women's apron-string.

But though thus put under petticoat government, Mr. Verdant Green
was not altogether freed from those tyrants of youth, - the dead
languages.  His aunt Virginia was as learned a Blue as her esteemed
ancestress in the court of Elizabeth, the very Virgin Queen of Blues;
and under her guidance Master Verdant was dragged with painful
diligence through the first steps of the road that was to take him to
Parnassus.  It was a great sight to see her sitting stiff and
straight, - with her wonderfully undeceptive "false front" of
(somebody else's) black hair, graced on either side by four
sausage-looking curls, - as, with spectacles on nose and dictionary in
hand, she instructed her nephew in those ingenuous arts which should
soften his manners, and not permit him to be brutal.  And, when they
together entered upon the romantic page of Virgil (which was the
extent of her classical reading), nothing would delight her more than
to declaim their sonorous Arma-virumque-cano lines, where the
intrinsic qualities of the verse surpassed the quantities that she
gave to them.

Fain would Miss Virginia have made Virgil the end and aim of an
educational existence, and so have kept her pupil entirely under her
own care; but, alas! she knew nothing further; she had no
acquaintance with Greek, and she had never flirted with Euclid; and
the rector persuaded Mr. Green that these were indispensable to a
boy's education.  So, when Mr. Verdant Green was (in stable language)
"rising" sixteen, he went thrice a week to the Rectory, where Mr.
Larkyns bestowed upon him a couple of hours, and taught him to
conjugate {tupto}, and get over the ~Pons Asinorum~.  Mr. Larkyns
found his pupil not a particularly brilliant scholar, but he was a
plodding one; and though he learned slowly, yet the little he did
learn was learned well.

Thus the Rectory and the home studies went hand and hand, and
continued so, with but little interruption, for more than two years;
and Mr. Verdant Green had for some time assumed the ~toga virilis~ of
stick-up collars and swallow-tail coats, that so effectually cut us
off from the age of innocence; and the small family festival that
annually celebrated his birthday had just been held for the
eighteenth time, when

                "A change came o'er the spirit of ~his~ dream."


[14 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

                                        CHAPTER II

                        MR. VERDANT GREEN IS TO BE AN OXFORD-MAN.

ONE day when the family at the Manor Green had assembled for
luncheon, the rector was announced.  He came in and joined them,
saying,with his usual friendly ~bonhomie~, "A very well-timed visit,
I think!  Your bell rang out its summons as I came up the avenue.
Mrs. Green, I've gone through the formality of looking over the
accounts of your clothing-club, and, as usual, I find them
correctness itself; and here is my subscription for the next year.
Miss Green, I hope that you have not forgotten the lesson in logic
that Tommy Jones gave you yesterday afternoon?"

"Oh, what was that?" cried her two sisters; who took it in turns with
her to go for a short time in every day to the village-school which
their father and the rector had established: "Pray tell us, Mr.
Larkyns! Mary has said nothing about it."  "Then," replied the
rector, "I am tongue-tied, until I have my fair friend's permission
to reveal how the teacher was taught."

Mary shook her sunny ringlets, and laughingly gave him the required
permission.

"You must know, then," said Mr. Larkyns, "that Miss Mary was giving
one of those delightful object-lessons, wherein she blends so much
instructive-"

"I'll trouble you for the butter, Mr. Larkyns," interrupted Mary,
rather maliciously.

The rector was grey-headed, and a privileged friend.  "My dear," he
said, "I was just giving it you.  However, the object-lesson was
going on; the subject being ~Quadrupeds~, which Miss Mary very
properly explained to be 'things with four legs.' Presently, she said
to her class, 'Tell me the names of some quadrupeds?' when Tommy
Jones, thrusting out his hand with the full conviction that he was
making an important suggestion, exclaimed, 'Chairs and tables!' That
was turning the tables upon Miss Mary with a vengeance!"

During luncheon the conversation glided into a favourite theme with
Mrs. Green and Miss Virginia, - Verdant's studies: when Mr. Larkyns,
after some good-natured praise of his diligence, said, "By the way,
Green, he's now quite old enough, and prepared enough for
matriculation: and I suppose you are thinking of it."

Mr. Green was thinking of no such thing.  He had never been at
college himself, and had never heard of his father having been there;
and having the old-fashioned,
what-was-good-enough-for-my-father-is-good-enough-for-me sort of feel-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     15]

ing, it had never occurred to him that his son should be brought up
otherwise than he himself had been.  The setting-out of Charles
Larkyns for college, two years before, had suggested no other thought
to Mr. Green's mind, than that a university was the natural sequence
of a public school; and since Verdant had not been through the career
of the one, he deemed him to be exempt from the other.

The motherly ears of Mrs. Green had been caught by the word
"matriculation," a phrase quite unknown to her; and she said, "If
it's vaccination that you mean, Mr. Larkyns, my dear Verdant was done
only last year, when we thought the small-pox was about; so I think
he's quite safe."

Mr. Larkyns' politeness was sorely tried to restrain himself from
giving vent to his feelings in a loud burst of laughter; but Mary
gallantly came to his relief by saying, "Matriculation means, being
entered at a university.  Don't you remember, dearest mamma, when Mr.
Charles Larkyns went up to Oxford to be matriculated last January two
years?"

"Ah, yes! I do now.  But I wish I had your memory, my dear."

And Mary blushed, and flattered herself that she succeeded in looking
as though Mr. Charles Larkyns and his movements were objects of
perfect indifference to her.

So, after luncheon, Mr. Green and the rector paced up and down the
long-walk, and talked the matter over.  The burden of Mr. Green's
discourse was this: "You see, sir, I don't intend my boy to go into
the Church, like yours; but, when anything happens to me, he'll come
into the estate, and have to settle down as the squire of the parish.
 So I don't exactly see what would be the use of sending him to a
university, where, I dare say, he'd spend a good deal of money, - not
that I should grudge that, though; - and perhaps not be quite such a
good lad as he's always been to me, sir.  And, by George! (I beg your
pardon,) I think his mother would break her heart to lose him; and I
don't know what we should do without him, as he's never been away
from us a day, and his sisters would miss him.  And he's not a lad,
like your Charley, that could fight his way in the world, and I don't
think he'd be altogether happy.  And as he's not got to depend upon
his talents for his bread and cheese, the knowledge he's got at home,
and from you, sir, seems to me quite enough to carry him through
life.  So, altogether, I think Verdant will do very well as he is,
and perhaps we'd better say no more about the matriculation."

But the rector ~would~ say more; and he expressed his mind thus: "It
is not so much from what Verdant would learn in Latin and Greek, and
such things as make up a part of the education, that I advise your
sending him to a university;


[16 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

but more from what he would gain by mixing with a large body of young
men of his own age, who represent the best classes of a mixed
society, and who may justly be taken as fair samples of its feelings
and talents.  It is formation of character that I regard as one of
the greatest of the many great ends of a university system; and if
for this reason alone, I should advise you to send your future
country squire to college.  Where else will he be able to meet with
so great a number of those of his own class, with whom he will have
to mix in the after changes of life, and for whose feelings and tone
a college-course will give him the proper key-note? Where else can he
learn so quickly in three years, what other men will perhaps be
striving for through life, without attaining, - that self-reliance
which will enable him to mix at ease in any society, and to feel the
equal of its members? And, besides all this, - and each of these
points in the education of a young man is, to my mind, a strong one, -
where else could he be more completely 'under tutors and governors,'
and more thoroughly under ~surveillance~, than in a place where
college-laws are no respecters of persons, and seek to keep the wild
blood of youth within its due bounds? There is something in the very
atmosphere of a university that seems to engender refined thoughts
and noble feelings; and lamentable indeed must be the state of any
young man who can pass through the three years of his college
residence, and bring away no higher aims, no worthier purposes, no
better thoughts, from all the holy associations which have been
crowded around him.  Such advantages as these are not to be regarded
with indifference; and though they come in secondary ways, and
possess the mind almost imperceptibly, yet they are of primary
importance in the formation of character, and may mould it into the
more perfect man.  And as long as I had the power, I would no more
think of depriving a child of mine of such good means towards a good
end, than I would of keeping him from any thing else that was likely
to improve his mind or affect his heart."

Mr. Larkyns put matters in a new light; and Mr. Green began to think
that a university career might be looked at from more than one point
of view.  But as old prejudices are not so easily overthrown as the
lath-and-plaster erections of mere newly-formed opinion, Mr. Green was
not yet won over by Mr. Larkyns' arguments.  "There was my father,"
he said, "who was one of the worthiest and kindest men living; and I
believe he never went to college, nor did he think it necessary that
I should go; and I trust I'm no worse a man than my father."

"Ah! Green," replied the rector; "the old argument! But you must not
judge the present age by the past; nor measure out to ~your~ son the
same degree of education that


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     17]

your father might think sufficient for ~you~.  When you and I were
boys, Green, these things were thought of very differently to what
they are in the present day; and when your father gave you a
respectable education at a classical school, he did all that he
thought was requisite to form you into a country gentleman, and fit
you for that station in life you were destined to fill. But consider
what a progressive age it is that we live in; and you will see that
the standard of education has been considerably raised since the days
when you and I did the 'propria quae maribus' together; and that when
he comes to mix in society, more will be demanded of the son than was
expected from the father.  And besides this, think in how many ways
it will benefit Verdant to send him to college.  By mixing more in
the world, and being called upon to act and think for himself, he
will gradually gain that experience, without which a man cannot arm
himself to meet the difficulties that beset all of us, more or less,
in the battle of life.  He is just of an age, when some change from
the narrowed circle of home is necessary.  God forbid that I should
ever speak in any but the highest terms of the moral good it must do
every young man to live under his mother's watchful eye, and be ever
in the company of pure-minded sisters. Indeed I feel this more
perhaps than many other parents would, because my lad, from his
earliest years, has been deprived of such tender training, and cut
off from such sweet society. But yet, with all this high regard for
such home influences, I put it to you, if there will not grow up in
the boy's mind, when he begins to draw near to man's estate, a very
weariness of all this, from its very sameness; a surfeiting, as it
were, of all these delicacies, and a longing for something to break
the monotony of what will gradually become to him a humdrum
horse-in-the-mill kind of country life? And it is just at this
critical time that college life steps in to his aid.  With his new
life a new light bursts upon his mind; he finds that he is not the
little household-god he had fancied himself to be; his word is no
longer the law of the Medes and Persians, as it was at home; he meets
with none of those little flatteries from partial relatives, or
fawning servants, that were growing into a part of his existence; but
he has to bear contradiction and reproof, to find himself only an
equal with others, when he can gain that equality by his own deserts;
and, in short, he daily progresses in that knowledge of himself,
which, from the ~gnothiseauton~ days down to our own, has been found
to be about the most useful of all knowledge; for it gives a man
stability of character, and braces up his mental energies to a
healthy enjoyment of the business of life.  And so, Green, I would
advise you, above all things, to let Verdant go to college."


[18 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

Much more did the rector say, not only on this occasion, but on
others; and the more frequently he returned to the charge, the less
resistance were his arguments met with; and the result was, that Mr.
Green was fully persuaded that a university was the proper sphere for
his son to move in.  But it was not without many a pang and much
secret misgiving that Mrs. Green would consent to suffer her beloved
Verdant to run the risk of those dreadful contaminations which she
imagined would inevitably accompany every college career.  Indeed,
she thought it an act of the greatest heroism (or, if you object to
the word, heroineism) to be won over to say "yes" to the proposal;
and it was not until Miss Virginia had recited to her the deeds of
all the mothers of Greece and Rome who had suffered for their
children's sake, that Mrs. Green would consent to sacrifice her
maternal feelings at the sacred altar of duty.

When the point had been duly settled, that Mr. Verdant Green was to
receive a university education, the next question to be decided was,
to which of the three Universities should he go? To Oxford,
Cambridge, or Durham? But this was a matter which was soon determined
upon.  Mr. Green at once put Durham aside, on account of its infancy,
and its wanting the ~prestige~ that attaches to the names of the two
great Universities.  Cambridge was treated quite as summarily,
because Mr. Green had conceived the notion that nothing but
mathematics were ever thought or talked of there; and as he himself
had always had an abhorrence of them from his youth up, when he was
hebdomadally flogged for not getting-up his weekly propositions, he
thought that his son should be spared some of the personal
disagreeables that he himself had encountered; for Mr. Green
remembered to have heard that the great Newton was horsed during the
time that he was a Cambridge undergraduate, and he had a hazy idea
that the same indignities were still practised there.

But the circumstance that chiefly decided Mr. Green to choose Oxford
as the arena for Verdant's performances was, that he would have a
companion, and, as he hoped, a mentor, in the rector's son, Mr.
Charles Larkyns, who would not only be able to cheer him on his first
entrance, but also would introduce him to select and quiet friends,
put him in the way of lectures, and initiate him into all the
mysteries of the place; all which the rector professed his son would
be glad to do, and would be delighted to see his old friend and
playfellow within the classic walls of Alma Mater.

Oxford having been selected for the university, the next point to be
decided was the college.

"You cannot," said the rector, "find a much better college


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     19]

than Brazenface, where my lad is.  It always stands well in the
class-list, and keeps a good name with its tutors.  There are a nice
gentlemanly set of men there; and I am proud to say, that my lad would
be able to introduce Verdant to some of the best.  This will of
course be much to his advantage.  And besides this, I am on very
intimate terms with Dr. Portman, the master of the college; and, if
they should not happen to be very full, no doubt I could get Verdant
admitted at once.  This too will be of advantage to him; for I can
tell you that there are secrets in all these matters, and that at
many colleges that I could name, unless you knew the principal, or
had some introduction or other potent spell to work with, your son's
name would have to remain on the books two or three years before he
could be entered; and this, at Verdant's age, would be a serious
objection.  At one or two of the colleges indeed this is almost
necessary, under any circumstances, on account of the great number of
applicants; but at Brazenface there is not this over-crowding; and I
have no doubt, if I write to Dr. Portman, but what I can get rooms
for Verdant without much loss of time."

"Brazenface be it then!" said Mr. Green, "and I am sure that Verdant
will enter there with very many advantages; and the sooner the
better, so that he may be the longer with Mr. Charles. But when must
his - his what-d'ye-call-it, come off?"

"His matriculation?" replied the rector;  "why although it is not
usual for men to commence residence at the time of their
matriculation, still it is sometimes done.  And as my lad will, if
all goes on well, be leaving Oxford next year, perhaps it would be
better, on that account, that Verdant should enter upon his residence
as soon as he has matriculated."  Mr. Green thought so too; and
Verdant, upon being appealed to, had no objection to this course, or,
indeed, to any other that was decided to be necessary for him;
though it must be confessed, that he secretly shared somewhat of his
mother's feelings as he looked forward into the blank and uncertain
prospect of his college life.  Like a good and dutiful son, however,
his father's wishes were law; and he no more thought of opposing
them, than he did of discovering the north pole, or paying off the
national debt.

So all this being duly settled, and Mrs. Green being entirely won
over to the proceeding, the rector at once wrote to Dr. Portman, and
in due time received a reply to the effect, that they were very full
at Brazenface, but that luckily there was one set of rooms which
would be vacant at the commencement of the Easter term; at which time
he should be very glad to see the gentleman his friend spoke of.


[20     ]

                                Portraits of
                MR. VERDANT GREEN AND HIS FAMILY.
<VG020.JPG>

1. Mr. Green, senior.

2. Miss Virginia Verdant.

3. Mrs. Green.

4. Mr. Verdant Green.

5. Miss Helen Green.

6. Miss Fanny Green.

7. Miss Mary Green.



[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     21]

                                        CHAPTER III.

                MR. VERDANT GREEN LEAVES THE HOME OF HIS ANCESTORS.

THE time till Easter passed very quickly, for much had to be done in
it.  Verdant read up most desperately for his matriculation,
associating that initiatory examination with the most dismal visions
of plucking, and other college tortures.

His mother was laying in for him a new stock of linen, sufficient in
quantity to provide him for years of emigration; while his father was
busying himself about the plate that it was requisite to take, buying
it bran-new, and of the most solid silver, and having it splendidly
engraved with the family crest, and the motto "Semper virens."

Infatuated Mr. Green! If you could have foreseen that those spoons
and forks would have soon passed, - by a mysterious system of loss
which undergraduate powers can never fathom, - into the property of
Mr. Robert Filcher, the excellent, though occasionally erratic, scout
of your beloved son, and from thence have melted, not "into thin
air," but into a residuum whose mass might be expressed by the
equivalent of coins of a thin and golden description, - if you could
but have foreseen this, then, infatuated but affectionate parent, you
would have been content to have let your son and heir represent the
ancestral wealth by mere electro-plate, albata, or any sham that
would equally well have served his purpose!

As for Miss Virginia Verdant, and the other woman portion of the
Green community, they fully occupied their time until the day of
separation came, by elaborating articles of feminine workmanship, as
~souvenirs~, by which dear Verdant might, in the land of the strangers,
recall visions of home.  These were presented to him with all due
state on the morning of the day previous to that on which he was to
leave the home of his ancestors.

All the articles were useful as well as ornamental.  There was a
purse from Helen, which, besides being a triumph of art in the way of
bead decoration, was also, it must be allowed, a very useful present,
unless one happened to carry one's riches in a ~porte-monnaie~.
There was a pair of braces from Mary, worked with an ecclesiastical
pattern of a severe character - very appropriate for academical wear,
and extremely effective for all occasions when the coat had to be
taken off in public.  And there was a watch-pocket from Fanny, to
hang over Verdant's night-capped head, and serve as a depository for
the golden mechanical turnip that had been handed down in the family,
as a watch, for the last three generations.  And


[22 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

there was a pair of woollen comforters knit by Miss Virginia's own
fair hands; and there were other woollen articles of domestic use,
which were contributed by Mrs. Green for her son's personal comfort.
To these, Miss Virginia thoughtfully added an infallible recipe for
the toothache, - an infliction to which she was a martyr, and for the
general relief of which in others, she constituted herself a species
of toothache missionary; for, as she said, "You might, my dear
Verdant, be seized with that painful disease, and not have me by your
side to cure <VG022.JPG> it": which it was very probable he would
not, if college rules were strictly carried out at Brazenface.

All these articles were presented to Mr. Verdant Green with many
speeches and great ceremony; while Mr. Green stood by, and smiled
benignantly upon the scene, and his son beamed through his glasses
(which his defective sight obliged him constantly to wear) with the
most serene aspect.

It was altogether a great day of preparation, and one which it was
well for the constitution of the household did not happen very often;
for the house was reduced to that summerset condition usually known
in domestic parlance as "upside down."  Mr. Verdant Green personally
superintended the packing of his goods; a performance which was only
effected by the united strength of the establishment.  Butler,
Footman, Coachman, Lady's-maid, Housemaid, and Buttons were all
pressed into the service; and the coachman, being a man of


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     23]

some weight, was found to be of great use in effecting a junction of
the locks and hasps of over-filled book-boxes.  It was astonishing to
see all the amount of literature that Mr. Verdant Green was about to
convey to the seat of learning: there was enough to stock a small
Bodleian. As the owner stood, with his hands behind him, placidly
surveying the scene of preparation, a meditative spectator might have
possibly compared him to the hero of the engraving "Moses going to
the fair," that was then hanging just over his head; for no one could
have set out for the great Oxford booth of this Vanity Fair with more
simplicity and trusting confidence than Mr. Verdant Green.

When the trunks had at last been packed, they were then, by the
thoughtful suggestion of Miss Virginia, provided each with a canvas
covering, after the manner of the luggage of <VG023.JPG> females, and
labelled with large direction-cards filled with the most ample
particulars concerning their owner and his destination.

It had been decided that Mr. Verdant Green, instead of reaching
Oxford by rail, should make his ~entree~ behind the four horses that
drew the Birmingham and Oxford coach; - one of the few four-horse
coaches that still ran for any distance*; and which, as the more
pleasant means of conveyance, was generally patronized by Mr. Charles
Larkyns in preference to the rail; for the coach passed within three
miles of the Manor Green, whereas the nearest railway was at a much
greater distance, and could not be so conveniently reached.  Mr.
Green had determined upon accompanying Verdant to Oxford, that he
might have the satisfaction of seeing him safely landed there, and
might also himself form an acquaintance with a city of which he had
heard so much, and which would be doubly interesting to him now that
his son was enrolled a member of its University.  Their seats had
been secured a fortnight previous; for the rector had told Mr. Green
that so many men went up by the coach, that unless he made an early
application,

---
* This well-known coach ceased to run between Birmingham and Oxford
in the last week of August 1852, on the opening of the Birmingham
and Oxford Railway.
-=-


[24 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

he would altogether fail in obtaining places; so a letter had been
dispatched to "the Swan" coach-office at Birmingham, from which place
the coach started, and two outside seats had been put at Mr. Green's
disposal.

The day at length arrived, when Mr. Verdant Green for the first time
in his life (on any important occasion) was to leave the paternal
roof; and it must be confessed that it was a proceeding which caused
him some anxiety, and that he was not <VG024.JPG> sorry when the
carriage was at the door to bear him away, before (shall it be
confessed?) his tears had got the mastery over him.  As it was, by
the judicious help of his sisters, he passed the Rubicon in
courageous style, and went through the form of breakfast with the
greatest hilarity, although with several narrow escapes of
suffocation from choking.  The thought that he was going to be an
Oxford MAN fortunately assisted him in the preservation of that
tranquil dignity and careless ease which he considered to be the
necessary adjuncts of the manly character, more especially as
developed in that peculiar biped he was about to be transformed into;
and Mr. Verdant Green was enabled to say "Good-by" with a firm voice
and undimmed spectacles.

All crowded to the door to have a last shake of the hand;


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     25]

the maid-servants peeped from the upper windows; and Miss Virginia
sobbed out a blessing, which was rendered of a striking and original
character by being mixed up with instructions never to forget what
she had taught him in his Latin grammar, and always to be careful to
guard against the toothache.  And amid the good-byes and write-oftens
that usually accompany a departure, the carriage rolled down the
avenue to the lodge, where was Mr. Mole the gardener, and also Mrs.
Mole, and, moreover, the Mole olive-branches, all gathered at the
open gate to say farewell to the young master.  And just as they were
about to mount the hill leading out of the village, who should be
there but the rector lying in wait for them and ready to walk up the
hill by their side, and say a few kindly words at parting.  Well
might Mr. Verdant Green begin to regard himself as the topic of the
village, and think that going to Oxford was really an affair of some
importance.

They were in good time for the coach; and the ringing notes of the
guard's bugle made them aware of its approach some time before they
saw it rattling merrily along in its cloud of dust.  What a sight it
was when it did come near! The cloud that had enveloped it was
discovered to be not dust only, but smoke from the cigars,
meerschaums, and short clay pipes of a full complement of gentlemen
passengers, scarcely one of whom seemed to have passed his twentieth
year.  No bonnet betokening a female traveller could be seen either
inside or out; and that lady was indeed lucky who escaped being an
inside passenger on the following day.  Nothing but a lapse of time,
or the complete re-lining of the coach, could purify it from the
attacks of the four gentlemen who were now doing their best to
convert it into a divan; and the consumption of tobacco on that day
between Birmingham and Oxford must have materially benefited the
revenue.  The passengers were not limited to the two-legged ones,
there were four-footed ones also.  Sporting dogs, fancy dogs, ugly
dogs, rat-killing dogs, short-haired dogs, long-haired dogs, dogs
like muffs, dogs like mops, dogs of all colours and of all breeds and
sizes, appeared thrusting out their black noses from all parts of the
coach.  Portmanteaus were piled upon the roof; gun-boxes peeped out
suspiciously here and there; bundles of sticks, canes, foils,
fishing-rods, and whips, appeared strapped together in every
direction; while all round about the coach,

                "Like a swarth Indian with his belt of beads,"

hat-boxes dangled in leathery profusion.  The Oxford coach on an
occasion like this was a sight to be remembered.

A "Wo-ho-ho, my beauties!" brought the smoking wheelers upon their
haunches; and Jehu, saluting with his elbow and


[26 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

whip finger, called out in the husky voice peculiar to a
dram-drinker, "Are you the two houtside gents for Hoxfut?"  To which
Mr. Green replied in the affirmative; and while the luggage (the
canvas-covered, ladylike look of which was such a contrast to that of
the other passengers) was being quickly transferred to the coach-top,
he and Verdant ascended to the places reserved for them behind the
coachman.  Mr. Green saw at a glance that all the passengers were
Oxford men, dressed in every variety of Oxford fashion, and
exhibiting a pleasing diversity of Oxford manners.  Their private
remarks on the two new-comers were, like stage "asides," perfectly
audible.

"Decided case of governor!" said one.

"Undoubted ditto of freshman!" observed another.

"Looks ferociously mild in his gig-lamps!" remarked a third, alluding
to Mr. Verdant Green's spectacles.

"And jolly green all over!" wound up a fourth.

Mr. Green, hearing his name (as he thought) mentioned, turned to the
small young gentleman who had spoken, and politely said, "Yes, my
name is Green; but you have the advantage of me, sir."

"Oh! have I?" replied the young gentleman in the most affable manner,
and not in the least disconcerted; "my name's Bouncer: I remember
seeing you when I was a babby.  How's the old woman?" And without
waiting to hear Mr. Green loftily reply, "Mrs. Green - my WIFE, sir -
is quite well - and I do NOT remember to have seen you, or ever heard
your name, sir!" - little Mr. Bouncer made some most unearthly noises
on a post-horn as tall as himself, which he had brought for the
delectation of himself and his friends, and the alarm of every
village they passed through.

"Never mind the dog, sir," said the gentleman who sat between Mr.
Bouncer and Mr. Green; "he won't hurt you.  It's only his play; he
always takes notice of strangers."

"But he is tearing my trousers," expostulated Mr. Green, who was by
no means partial to the "play" of a thoroughbred terrier.

"Ah! he's an uncommon sensible dog," observed his master; "he's
always on the look-out for rats everywhere.  It's the Wellington
boots that does it; he's accustomed to have a rat put into a boot,
and he worries it out how he can.  I daresay he thinks you've got one
in yours."

"But I've got nothing of the sort, sir; I must request you to keep
your dog--" A violent fit of coughing, caused by a well-directed
volley of smoke from his neighbour's lips, put a stop to Mr. Green's
expostulations.

"I hope my weed is no annoyance?" said the gentleman; "if it is, I
will throw it away."


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     27]

To which piece of politeness Mr. Green could, of course, only reply,
between fits of coughing, "Not in the least I - assure you, - I am
very fond - of tobacco - in the open air."

"Then I daresay you'll do as we are doing, and smoke a weed
yourself," said the gentleman, as he offered Mr. Green a plethoric
cigar-case.  But Mr. Green's expression of approbation regarding
tobacco was simply theoretical; so he treated his neighbour's offer
as magazine editors do the MSS. of unknown contributors - it was
"declined with thanks."

Mr. Verdant Green had already had to make a similar reply to a like
proposal on the part of his left-hand neighbour, who was now
expressing violent admiration for our hero's top-coat.

"Ain't that a good style of coat, Charley?" he observed to his
neighbour.  "I wish I'd seen it before I got this over-coat! There's
something sensible about a real, unadulterated top-coat; and there's a
style in the way in which they've let down the skirts, and put on the
velvet collar and cuffs regardless of expense, that really quite goes
to one's heart.  Now I daresay the man that built that," he said,
more particularly addressing the owner of the coat, "condescends to
live in a village, and waste his sweetness on the desert air, while a
noble field might be found for his talent in a University town.  That
coat will make quite a sensation in Oxford.  Won't it, Charley?"

And when Charley, quoting a popular actor (totally unknown to our
hero), said, "I believe you, my bo-oy!"  Mr. Verdant Green began to
feel quite proud of the abilities of their village tailor, and
thought what two delightful companions he had met with.  The rest of
the journey further cemented (as he thought) their friendship; so
that he was fairly astonished, when on meeting them the next day
they stared him full in the face, and passed on without taking any
more notice of him.  But freshmen cannot learn the mysteries of
college etiquette in a day.

However, we are anticipating.  They had not yet got to Oxford,
though, from the pace at which they were going, it appeared as if
they would soon reach there; for the coachman had given up his seat
and the reins to the box-passenger, who appeared to be as used to the
business as the coachman himself; and he was now driving them, not
only in a most scientific manner, but also at a great pace.  Mr.
Green was not particularly pleased with the change in the
four-wheeled government; but when they went down a hill at a quick
trot, the heavy luggage making the coach rock to and fro with the
speed, his fears increased painfully.  They culminated, as the trot
increased into a canter, and then broke into a gallop as they swept
along the level road at the bottom of the hill, and rattled up the
rise of another.  As the horses walked over the brow


[28 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

of the hill, with smoking flanks and jingling harness, Mr. Green
recovered sufficient breath to expostulate with the coachman for
suffering - "a mere lad," he was about to say <VG028.JPG>
but fortunately checked himself in time, - for suffering any one else
than the regular driver to have the charge of the coach.  "You never
fret yourself about that, sir," replied the man; "I knows my
bis'ness, as well as my dooties to self and purprietors, and I'd
never go for to give up the ribbins to any party but wot had showed
hisself fitted to 'andle 'em.  And I think I may say this for the
genelman as has got 'em now, that


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     29]

he's fit to be fust vip to the Queen herself; and I'm proud to call
him my poople.  Why, sir, - if his honour here will pardon me for
makin' so free, - this 'ere gent is Four-in-hand Fosbrooke, of which
you ~must~ have heerd on."

Mr. Green replied that he had not had that pleasure.

"Ah! a pleasure you ~may~ call it, sir, with parfect truth," replied
the coachman; "but, lor bless me, sir, weer ~can~ you have lived?"

The "poople" who had listened to this, highly amused, slightly turned
his head, and said to Mr. Green, "Pray don't feel any alarm, sir; I
believe you are quite safe under my guidance.  This is not the first
time by many that I have driven this coach, - not to mention others;
and you may conclude that I should not have gained the ~sobriquet~ to
which my worthy friend has alluded without having ~some~ pretensions
to a knowledge of the art of driving."

Mr. Green murmured his apologies for his mistrust, - expressed perfect
faith in Mr. Fosbrooke's skill - and then lapsed into silent
meditation on the various arts and sciences in which the gentlemen of
the University of Oxford seemed to be most proficient, and pictured
to himself what would be his feelings if he ever came to see Verdant
driving a coach! There certainly did not appear to be much
probability of such an event; but can any ~pater familias~ say what
even the most carefully brought up young Hopeful will do when he has
arrived at years of indiscretion?

Altogether, Mr. Green did not particularly enjoy the journey.
Besides the dogs and cigars, which to him were equal nuisances,
little Mr. Bouncer was perpetually producing unpleasant post-horn
effects, - which he called "sounding his octaves," - and destroying the
effect of the airs on the guard's key-bugle, by joining in them at
improper times and with discordant measures.  Mr. Green, too, could
not but perceive that the majority of the conversation that was
addressed to himself and his son (though more particularly to the
latter), although couched in politest form, was yet of a tendency
calculated to "draw them out" for the amusement of their
fellow-passengers.  He also observed that the young gentlemen
severally exhibited great capacity for the beer of Bass and the
porter of Guinness, and were not averse even to liquids of a more
spirituous description.  Moreover, Mr. Green remarked that the
ministering Hebes were invariably addressed by their Christian names,
and were familiarly conversed with as old acquaintances; most of them
receiving direct offers of marriage or the option of putting up the
banns on any Sunday in the middle of the week; while the inquiries
after their grandmothers and the various members of their family
circles were both numerous and gratifying.  In


[30 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

all these verbal encounters little Mr. Bouncer particularly
distinguished himself.

Woodstock was reached: "Four-in-hand Fosbrooke" gave up the reins to
the professional Jehu; and at last the towers, spires, and domes of
Oxford appeared in sight.  The first view of the City of Colleges is
always one that will be long remembered.  Even the railway traveller,
who enters by the least imposing approach, and can scarcely see that
he is in Oxford before he has reached Folly Bridge, must yet regard
the city with mingled feelings of delight and surprise as he looks
across the Christ Church meadows and rolls past the Tom Tower.  But
he who approaches Oxford from the Henley Road, and looks upon that
unsurpassed prospect from Magdalen Bridge, - or he who enters the
city, as Mr. Green did, from the Woodstock Road, and rolls down the
shady avenue of St. Giles', between St. John's College and the Taylor
Buildings, and past the graceful Martyrs' Memorial, will receive
impressions such as probably no other city in the world could
convey.

As the coach clattered down the Corn-market, and turned the corner by
Carfax into High Street, Mr. Bouncer, having been compelled in
deference to University scruples to lay aside his post-horn, was
consoling himself by chanting the following words, selected probably
in compliment to Mr. Verdant Green.

                        "To Oxford, a Freshman so modest,
                        I enter'd one morning in March;
                        And the figure I cut was the oddest,
                        All spectacles, choker, and starch.
                                Whack fol lol, lol iddity, &c.

                        From the top of 'the Royal Defiance,'
                        Jack Adams, who coaches so well,
                        Set me down in these regions of science,
                        In front of the Mitre Hotel.
                                Whack fol lol, lol iddity, &c.

                        'Sure never man's prospects were brighter,'
                        I said, as I jumped from my perch;
                        'So quickly arrived at the Mitre,
                        Oh, I'm sure, to get on in the Church!'
                                Whack fol lol, lol iddity, &c."

By the time Mr. Bouncer finished these words, the coach appropriately
drew up at the "Mitre," and the passengers tumbled off amid a knot of
gownsmen collected on the pavement to receive them.  But no sooner
were Mr. Green and our hero set down, than they were attacked by a
horde of the aborigines of Oxford, who, knowing by vulture-like
sagacity the aspect of a freshman and his governor, swooped down upon
them in the guise of impromptu porters, and made an indiscriminate
attack upon the luggage.  It was only by the display of the greatest
presence of mind that Mr. Verdant Green recovered his effects, and
prevented his canvas-covered boxes from being


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     31]

<VG031-1.JPG>
carried off in the wheel-barrows that were trundling off in all
directions to the various colleges. <VG031-2.JPG>


[32 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

But at last all were safely secured.  And soon, when a snug dinner
had been discussed in a quiet room, and a bottle of the famous
(though I have heard some call it "in-famous") Oxford port had been
produced, Mr. Green, under its kindly influence, opened his heart to
his son, and gave him much advice as to his forthcoming University
career; being, of course, well calculated to do this from his
intimate acquaintance with the subject.

Whether it was the extra glass of port, or whether it was the
<VG032.JPG> nature of his father's discourse, or whether it was the
novelty of his situation, or whether it was all these circumstances
combined, yet certain it was that Mr. Verdant Green's first night in
Oxford was distinguished by a series, or rather confusion, of most
remarkable dreams, in which bishops, archbishops, and hobgoblins
elbowed one another for precedence; a beneficent female crowned him
with laurel, while Fame lustily proclaimed the honours he had
received, and unrolled the class-list in which his name had first
rank.

Sweet land of visions, that will with such ease confer even a
~treble~ first upon the weary sleeper, why must he awake from thy
gentle thraldom, to find the class-list a stern reality, and
Graduateship too often but an empty dream!


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     33]

                                        CHAPTER IV.

                MR. VERDANT GREEN BECOMES AN OXFORD UNDERGRADUATE.

MR. VERDANT GREEN arose in the morning more or less refreshed; and
after breakfast proceeded with his father to Brazenface College to
call upon the Master; the porter directed them where to go, and they
sent up their cards.  Dr. Portman was at home, and they were soon
introduced to his presence.

Instead of the stern, imposing-looking personage that Mr. Verdant
Green had expected to see in the ruler among dons, and the terror of
offending undergraduates, the master of Brazenface was a mild-looking
old gentleman, with an inoffensive amiability of expression and a
shy, retiring manner that seemed to intimate that he was more alarmed
at the strangers than they had need to be at him.  Dr. Portman seemed
to be quite a part of his college, for he had passed the greatest
portion of his life there.  He had graduated there, he had taken
Scholarships there, he had even gained a prize-poem there; he had
been elected a Fellow there, he had become a Tutor there, he had been
Proctor and College Dean there; there, during the long vacation, he
had written his celebrated "Disquisition on the Greek Particles,"
afterwards published in eight octavo volumes; and finally, there he
had been elected Master of his college, in which office, honoured and
respected, he appeared likely to end his days.  He was unmarried;
perhaps he had never found time to think of a wife; perhaps he had
never had the courage to propose for one; perhaps he had met with
early crosses and disappointments, and had shrined in his heart a
fair image that should never be displaced.  Who knows? for dons are
mortals, and have been undergraduates once.

The little hair he had was of a silvery white, although his eye-brows
retained their black hue; and to judge from the fine fresh-coloured
features and the dark eyes that were now nervously twinkling upon Mr.
Green, Dr. Portman must, in his more youthful days, have had an ample
share of good looks.  He was dressed in an old-fashioned reverend
suit of black, with knee-breeches and gaiters, and a massive
watch-seal dangling from under his waistcoat, and was deep in the
study of his favourite particles.  He received our hero and his
father both nervously and graciously, and bade them be seated.

"I shall al-ways," he said, in monosyllabic tones, as though he were
reading out of a child's primer, - "I shall al-ways be glad to see any
of the young friends of my old col-lege friend Lar-kyns; and I do
re-joice to be a-ble to serve you, Mis-ter Green; and I hope your
son, Mis-ter, Mis-ter Vir---Vir-gin-ius,--"


[34 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

"Verdant, Dr. Portman," interrupted Mr. Green, suggestively,
"Verdant."

"Oh! true, true, true! and I do hope that he will be a ve-ry good
young man, and try to do hon-our to his col-lege."

"I trust he will, indeed, sir," replied Mr. Green; "it is the great
wish of my heart.  And I am sure that you will find my son both quiet
and orderly in his conduct, regular in his duties, and always in bed
by ten o'clock."

"Well, I hope so too, Mis-ter Green," said Dr. Portman,
monosyllabically; "but all the young gen-tle-men do pro-mise to be
regu-lar and or-der-ly when they first come up, but a <VG034.JPG>
term makes a great dif-fer-ence.  But I dare say my young friend
Mis-ter Vir-gin-ius,---"

"Verdant," smilingly suggested Mr. Green.

"I beg your par-don," apologized Dr. Portman; "but I dare say that he
will do as you say, for in-deed, my friend Lar-kyns speaks well of
him."

"I am delighted - proud!" murmured Mr. Green, while Verdant felt
himself blushing up to his spectacles.

"We are ve-ry full," Dr. Portman went on to say, "but as I do ex-pect
great things from Mis-ter Vir-gin --- Verdant, Verdant, I have put some
rooms at his ser-vice; and if you would like to see them, my ser-vant
shall shew you the way."  The servant was accordingly summoned, and
received orders to that effect; while the Master told Verdant that he
must,


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     35]

at two o'clock, present himself to Mr. Slowcoach, his tutor, who
would examine him for his matriculation.

"I am sor-ry, Mis-ter Green," said Dr. Portman, "that my
en-gage-ments will pre-vent me from ask-ing you and Mis-ter Virg--
Ver-dant, to dine with me to-day; but I do hope that the next time
you come to Ox-ford I shall be more for-tu-nate."

Old John, the Common-room man, who had heard this speech made to
hundreds of "governors" through many generations of freshmen, could
not repress a few pantomimic asides, that <VG035.JPG> were suggestive
of anything but full credence in his master's words.  But Mr. Green
was delighted with Dr. Portman's affability, and perceiving that the
interview was at an end, made his ~conge~, and left the Master of
Brazenface to his Greek particles.

They had just got outside, when the servant said, "Oh, there is the
scout! ~Your~ scout, sir!" at which our hero blushed from the
consciousness of his new dignity; and, by way of appearing at his
ease, inquired the scout's name.

"Robert Filcher, sir," replied the servant; "but the gentlemen always
call 'em by their Christian names."  And beckoning the scout to him,
he bade him shew the gentlemen


[36 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

to the rooms kept for Mr. Verdant Green; and then took himself back
to the Master.

Mr. Robert Filcher might perhaps have been forty years of age,
perhaps fifty; there was cunning enough in his face to fill even a
century of wily years; and there was a depth of expression in his
look, as he asked our hero if ~he~ was Mr. Verdant Green, that
proclaimed his custom of reading a freshman at a glance.  Mr. Filcher
was laden with coats and boots that had just been brushed and blacked
for their respective masters; and he was bearing a jug of Buttery ale
(they are renowned for their ale at Brazenface) to the gentleman who
owned the pair of "tops" that were now flashing in the sun as they
dangled from the scout's hand.

"Please to follow me, gentlemen," he said; "it's only just across the
quad.  Third floor, No. 4 staircase, fust quad; that's about the
mark, ~I~ think, sir."

Mr. Verdant Green glanced curiously round the Quadrangle, with its
picturesque irregularity of outline, its towers and turrets and
battlements, its grey time-eaten walls, its rows of mullioned
heavy-headed windows, and the quiet cloistered air that spoke of
study and reflection; and perceiving on one side a row of large
windows, with great buttresses between, and a species of steeple on
the high-pitched roof, he made bold (just to try the effect) to
address Mr. Filcher by the name assigned to him at an early period of
his life by his godfathers and godmothers, and inquired if that
building was the chapel.

"No, sir," replied Robert, "that there's the 'All, sir, ~that~ is, -
where you dines, sir, leastways when you ain't 'AEger,' or elseweer.
That at the top is the lantern, sir, ~that~ is; called so because it
never has no candle in it.  The chapel's the hopposite side, sir.
-Please not to walk on the grass, sir; there's a fine agen it, unless
you're a Master.  This way if ~you~ please, gentlemen!"  Thus the
scout beguiled them, as he led them to an open doorway with a large 4
painted over it; inside was a door on either hand, while a coal-bin
displayed its black face from under a staircase that rose immediately
before them.  Up this they went, following the scout (who had
vanished for a moment with the boots and beer), and when they had
passed the first floor they found the ascent by no means easy to the
body, or pleasant to the sight.  The once white-washed walls were
coated with the uncleansed dust of the three past terms; and where
the plaster had not been chipped off by flying porter-bottles, or the
heels of Wellington boots, its surface had afforded an irresistible
temptation to those imaginative undergraduates who displayed their
artistic genius in candle-smoke cartoons of the heads of the
University, and other popular and unpopular characters.  All Mr.
Green's caution, as he crept up the


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     37]

dark, twisting staircase, could not prevent him from crushing his hat
against the low, cobwebbed ceiling, and he gave vent to a very strong
but quiet anathema, which glided quietly and audibly into the remark,
"Confounded awkward staircase, I think!"

"Just what Mr. Bouncer says," replied the scout, "although he don't
reach so high as you, sir; but he ~do~ say, sir, when he, comes home
pleasant at night from some wine-party, that it ~is~ the aukardest
staircase as was ever put before a gentleman's <VG037.JPG> legs.  And
he ~did~ go so far, sir, as to ask the Master, if it wouldn't be
better to have a staircase as would go up of hisself, and take the
gentlemen up with it, like one as they has at some public show in
London - the Call-and-see-em, I think he said."

"The Colosseum, probably," suggested Mr. Green.  "And what did Dr.
Portman say to that, pray?"

"Why he said, sir, - leastways so Mr. Bouncer reported, - that it
worn't by no means a bad idea, and that p'raps Mr. Bouncer'd find
it done in six months' time, when he come back again from the
country.  For you see, sir, Mr. Bouncer had made hisself so pleasant,
that he'd been and got the porter out o' bed, and corked his face
dreadful; and then, sir, he'd been and got a Hinn-board from
somewhere out of the town, and hung it on the Master's private door;
so that when they went to early chapel in the morning, they read as
how the Master was 'licensed to sell beer by retail,' and 'to be drunk


[38 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

on the premises'.  So when the Master came to know who it was as did
it, which in course the porter told him, he said as how Mr. Bouncer
had better go down into the country for a year, for change of hair,
and to visit his friends."

"Very kind, indeed, of Dr. Portman," said our hero, who missed the
moral of the story, and took the rustication for a kind forgiveness
of injuries.

"Just what Mr. Bouncer said, sir," replied the scout, "he said it
~were~ pertickler kind and thoughtful.  This is his room, sir, he
come up on'y yesterday."  And he pointed to a door, above which was
painted in white letters on a black ground, "BOUNCER."

"Why," said Mr. Green to his son, "now I think of it, Bouncer was the
name of that short young gentleman who came with us on the coach
yesterday, and made himself so - so unpleasant with a tin horn."

"That's the gent, sir," observed the scout; "that's Mr. Bouncer,
agoing the complete unicorn, as he calls it.  I dare say you'll find
him a pleasant neighbour, sir.  Your rooms is next to his."

With some doubts of these prospective pleasures, the Mr. Greens,
~pere et fils~, entered through a double door painted over the
outside, with the name of "SMALLS"; to which Mr. Filcher directed our
hero's attention by saying, "You can have that name took out, sir,
and your own name painted in.  Mr. Smalls has just moved hisself to
the other quad, and that's why the rooms is vacant, sir."

Mr. Filcher then went on to point out the properties and capabilities
of the rooms, and also their mechanical contrivances.

"This is the hoak, this 'ere outer door is, sir, which the gentlemen
sports, that is to say, shuts, sir, when they're a readin'.  Not as
Mr. Smalls ever hinterfered with his constitootion by too much 'ard
study, sir; he only sported his hoak when people used to get
troublesome about their little bills.  Here's a place for coals, sir,
though Mr. Smalls, he kept his bull-terrier there, which was agin the
regulations, as ~you~ know, sir."  (Verdant nodded his head, as though
he were perfectly aware of the fact.) "This ere's your bed-room, sir.
 Very small, did you say, sir? Oh, no, sir; not by no means!  ~We~
thinks that in college reether a biggish bed-room, sir.  Mr. Smalls
thought so, sir, and he's in his second year, ~he~ is."  (Mr. Filcher
thoroughly understood the science of "flooring" a freshman.)

"This is ~my~ room, sir, this is, for keepin' your cups and saucers,
and wine-glasses and tumblers, and them sort o' things, and washin'
'em up when you wants 'em.  If you likes to keep


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     39]

your wine and sperrits here, sir - Mr. Smalls always did - you'll
find it a nice cool place, sir: or else here's this 'ere winder-seat;
you see, sir, it opens with a lid, 'andy for the purpose."

"If you act upon that suggestion, Verdant," remarked Mr. Green aside
to his son, "I trust that a lock will be added."

There was not a superfluity of furniture in the room; and Mr. Smalls
having conveyed away the luxurious part of it, that which was left
had more of the useful than the ornamental character; but as Mr.
Verdant Green was no Sybarite, this <VG039.JPG> point was but of
little consequence.  The window looked with a sunny aspect down upon
the quad, and over the opposite buildings were seen the spires of
churches, the dome of the Radcliffe, and the gables, pinnacles, and
turrets of other colleges.  This was pleasant enough: pleasanter than
the stale odours of the Virginian weed that rose from the faded green
window-curtains, and from the old Kidderminster carpet that had been
charred and burnt into holes with the fag-ends of cigars.

"Well, Verdant," said Mr. Green, when they had completed their
inspection, "the rooms are not so very bad, and I think you may be
able to make yourself comfortable in them.  But I wish they were not
so high up.  I don't see how you can escape if a fire was to break
out, and I am afraid collegians must be very careless on these
points.  Indeed, your mother made me promise that I would speak to
Dr. Portman about it, and ask

[40 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

him to please to allow your tutor, or somebody, to see that your fire
was safely raked out at night; and I had intended to have done so,
but somehow it quite escaped me.  How your mother and all at home
would like to see you in your own college room!" And the thoughts of
father and son flew back to the Manor Green and its occupants, who
were doubtless at the same time thinking of them.

Mr. Filcher then explained the system of thirds, by which the
furniture of the room was to be paid for; and, having accompanied his
future master and Mr. Green downstairs, <VG040.JPG> the latter
accomplishing the descent not without difficulty and contusions, and
having pointed out the way to Mr. Slowcoach's rooms, Mr. Robert
Filcher relieved his feelings by indulging in a ballet of action, or
~pas d'extase~; in which poetry of motion he declared his joy at the
last valuable addition to Brazenface, and his own perquisites.

Mr. Slowcoach was within, and would see Mr. Verdant Green.  So that
young gentleman, trembling with agitation, and feeling as though he
would have given pounds for the staircase to have been as high as
that of Babel, followed the servant upstairs, and left his father, in
almost as great a state of nervousness, pacing the quad below.  But
it was not the formidable affair, nor was Mr. Slowcoach the
formidable man, that Mr. Verdant Green had anticipated; and by the
time that he had turned a piece of ~Spectator~ into Latin, our hero
had somewhat recovered his usual equanimity of mind and serenity of
expression: and the construing of half a dozen lines of Livy and
Homer, and the answering of a few questions, was a mere form; for Mr.
Slowcoach's long practice enabled him to see in a very few minutes if
the freshman before him (however nervous he might be) had the usual
average of abilities, and was up to the business of lectures.  So Mr.
Verdant Green was soon dismissed, and returned to his father radiant
and happy.


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     41]

                                        CHAPTER V.

        MR. VERDANT GREEN MATRICULATES, AND MAKES A SENSATION.

AS they went out at the gate, they inquired of the porter for Mr.
Charles Larkyns, but they found that he had not yet returned from the
friend's house where he had been during the vacation; whereupon Mr.
Green said that they <VG041.JPG> would go and look at the Oxford
lions, so that he might be able to answer any of the questions that
should be put to him on his return.  They soon found a guide, one of
those wonderful people to which show-places give birth, and of whom
Oxford can boast a very goodly average; and under this gentleman's
guidance Mr. Verdant Green made his first acquaintance with the fair
outside of his Alma Mater.

The short, thick stick of the guide served to direct attention to the
various objects he enumerated in his rapid career: "This here's
Christ Church College," he said, as he trotted them down St Aldate's,
"built by Card'nal Hoolsy four underd feet long and the famous Tom
Tower as tolls wun underd and wun hevery night that being the number
of stoodents on the

[42 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

foundation;" and thus the guide went on, perfectly independent of the
artificial trammels of punctuation, and not particular whether his
hearers understood him or not: that was not ~his~ business.  And as
it was that gentleman's boast that he "could do the alls, collidges,
and principal hedifices in a nour and a naff," it could not be
expected but that Mr. Green should take back to Warwickshire
otherwise than a slightly confused impression of Oxford.

When he unrolled that rich panorama before his "mind's eye," all its
component parts were strangely out of place.  The rich spire of St.
Mary's claimed acquaintance with her <VG042.JPG> poorer sister at the
cathedral.  The cupola of the Tom Tower got into close quarters with
the huge dome of the Radcliffe, that shrugged up its great round
shoulders at the intrusion of the cross-bred Graeco-Gothic tower of
All Saints.  The theatre had walked up to St. Giles's to see how the
Taylor Buildings agreed with the University galleries; while the
Martyrs' Memorial had stepped down to Magdalen Bridge, in time to see
the college taking a walk in the Botanic Gardens.  The Schools and
the Bodleian had set their back against the stately portico of the
Clarendon Press; while the antiquated Ashmolean had given place to
the more modern Townhall.  The time-honoured, black-looking front of
University College had changed into the cold cleanliness of the
"classic" ~facade~ of Queen's.  The two towers of All Souls', - whose
several stages seem to be pulled out of each other like the parts of
a telescope, - had, somehow, removed themselves from the rest of the
building, which had gone, nevertheless, on a tour to Broad Street;
behind which, as every one knows, are the Broad Walk and the Christ
Church meadows.  Merton Chapel had got into ~New~ quarters; and
Wadham had gone to Worcester for change of


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     43]

air.  Lincoln had migrated from near Exeter to Pembroke; and
Brasenose had its nose quite put out of joint by St. John's.  In
short, if the maps of Oxford are to be trusted, there had been a
general ~pousset~ movement among its public buildings.

But if such a shrewd and practised observer as Sir Walter Scott,
after a week's hard and systematic sight-seeing, could only say of
Oxford, "The time has been much too short to convey to me separate
and distinct ideas of all the variety of wonders that I saw: my
memory only at present furnishes a grand but indistinct picture of
towers, and chapels, and oriels, and vaulted halls, and libraries,
and paintings;" - if Sir Walter Scott could say this after a week's
work, it is not to be wondered at that Mr. Green, after so brief and
rapid a survey of the city at the heels of an unintelligent guide,
should feel himself slightly confused when, on his return to the
Manor Green, he attempted to give a slight description of the
wonderful sights of Oxford.

There was ~one~ lion of Oxford, however, whose individuality of
expression was too striking either to be forgotten or confused with
the many other lions around.  Although (as in Byron's ~Dream~)

                                        "A mass of many images
                                Crowded like waves upon"

Mr. Green, yet clear and distinct through all there ran

                "The stream-like windings of that glorious street,"*

to which one of the first critics of the age+ has given this high
testimony of praise: "The High Street of Oxford has not its equal in
the whole world."

Mr. Green could not, of course, leave Oxford until he had seen his
beloved son in that elegant cap and preposterous gown which
constitute the present academical dress of the Oxford undergraduate;
and to assume which, with a legal right to the same, matriculation is
first necessary.  As that amusing and instructive book, the
University Statutes, says in its own delightful and unrivalled
canine Latin, "~Statutum est, quod nemo pro Studente, seu Scholari,
habeatur, nec ullis Universitatis privilegiis, aut beneficiis~" (the
cap and gown, of course, being among these), "~gaudeat, nisi qui in
aliquod Collegium vel Aulam admissus fuerit, et intra quindenam post
talem admissionem in matriculam Universitatis fuerit relatus.~"  So
our hero put on the required white tie, and then went forth to
complete his proper costume.

There were so many persons purporting to be "Academical robe-makers,"
that Mr. Green was some little time in deciding who should be the
tradesman favoured with the order for

---
* Wordsworth, Miscellaneous Sonnets.
+ Dr. Waagen, Art and Artists in England.
-=-


[44 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

his son's adornment.  At last he fixed upon a shop, the window of
which contained a more imposing display than its neighbours of gowns,
hoods, surplices, and robes of all shapes and colours, from the black
velvet-sleeved proctor's to the blushing gorgeousness of the scarlet
robe and crimson silk sleeves of the D.C.L.

"I wish you," said Mr. Green, advancing towards a smirking
individual, who was in his shirt-sleeves and slippers, but in all
other respects was attired with great magnificence, - "I wish you to
measure this gentleman for his academical robes, and also to allow
him the use of some to be matriculated in."

"Certainly, sir," said the robe-maker, who stood bowing and smirking
before them, - as Hood expressively says,

        "Washing his hands with invisible soap,
        In imperceptible water;"-

"certainly, sir, if you wish it: but it will scarcely be necessary,
sir; as our custom is so extensive, that we keep a large ready-made
stock constantly on hand."

"Oh, that will do just as well," said Mr. Green; "better, indeed.
Let us see some."

"What description of robe would be required?" said the smirking
gentleman, again making use of the invisible soap; "a scholar's?"

"A scholar's!" repeated Mr. Green, very much wondering at the
question, and imagining that all students must of necessity be also
scholars; "yes, a scholar's, of course."

A scholar's gown was accordingly produced: and its deep, wide
sleeves, and ample length and breadth, were soon displayed to some
advantage on Mr. Verdant Green's tall figure.  Reflected in a large
mirror, its charms were seen in their full perfection; and when the
delighted Mr. Green exclaimed, "Why, Verdant, I never saw you look so
well as you do now!" our hero was inclined to think that his father's
words were the words of truth, and that a scholar's gown was indeed
becoming.
The ~tout ensemble~ was complete when the cap had been added to the
gown; more especially as Verdant put it on in such a manner that the
polite robe-maker was obliged to say, "The hother way, if you please,
sir.  Immaterial perhaps, but generally preferred.  In fact, the
shallow part is ~always~ the forehead, - at least, in Oxford, sir."

While Mr. Green was paying for the cap and gown (N.B. the money of
governors is never refused), the robe-maker smirked, and said,
"Hexcuse the question; but may I hask, sir, if this is the gentleman
that has just gained the Scotland Scholarship?"

"No," replied Mr. Green. "My son has just gained his matriculation,
and, I believe, very creditably; but nothing more, as we only came
here yesterday."

[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     45]

"Then I think, sir," said the robe-maker, with redoubled smirks, - "I
think, sir, there is a leetle mistake here.  The gentleman will be
hinfringing the University statues, if he wears a scholar's gown and
hasn't got a scholarship; and these robes'll be of no use to the
gentleman, yet awhile at least.  It <VG045.JPG> will be an
undergraduate's gown that he requires, sir."

It was fortunate for our hero that the mistake was discovered so
soon, and could be rectified without any of those unpleasant
consequences of iconoclasm to which the robe-maker's infringement of
the "statues" seemed to point; but as that gentleman put the
scholar's gown on one side, and brought out a commoner's, he might
have been heard to mutter, "I don't know which is the freshest, - the
freshman or his guv'nor."

When Mr. Verdant Green once more looked in the glass, and saw hanging
straight from his shoulders a yard of blueish-black stuff, garnished
with a little lappet, and two streamers whose upper parts were
gathered into double plaits, he regretted that he was not indeed a
scholar, if it were only for the privilege of wearing so elegant a
gown.  However, his father smiled approvingly, the robe-maker smirked
judiciously; so he came to the gratifying conclusion that the
commoner's gown was by no means ugly, and would be thought a great
deal of at the Manor Green when he took it home at the end of the
term.

Leaving his hat with the robe-maker, who, with many more smirks and
imaginary washings of the hands, hoped to be favoured with the
gentleman's patronage on future occasions, and begged further to
trouble him with a card of his establishment, - our hero proceeded
with his father along the High Street, and turned round by St.
Mary's, and so up Cat Street to the Schools, where they made their
way to the classic


[46 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

"Pig-market,"* to await the arrival of the Vice-Chancellor.  When he
came, our freshman and two other white-tied fellow-freshmen were
summoned to the great man's presence; and there, in the ante-chamber
of the Convocation House,+ the edifying and imposing spectacle of
Matriculation was enacted.  In the first place, Mr. Verdant Green
took divers oaths, and sincerely promised and swore that he would be
faithful and bear true allegiance to her Majesty Queen Victoria.  He
also professed (very much to his own astonishment) that he did "from
his heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, that
damnable doctrine and position, that princes excommunicated or
deprived by the pope, or any authority of the see of Rome, may be
deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever." And,
having almost lost his breath at this novel "position," Mr. Verdant
Green could only gasp his declaration, "that no foreign prince,
person, prelate, state, or potentate, hath, or ought to have, any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority,
ecclesiastical or spiritual, within this realm."  When he had
sufficiently recovered his presence of mind, Mr. Verdant Green
inserted his name in the University books as "Generosi filius natu
maximus"; and then signed his name to the Thirty-nine Articles, -
though he did not endanger his matriculation, as Theodore Hook did,
by professing his readiness to sign forty if they wished it! Then the
Vice-Chancellor concluded the performance by presenting to the three
freshmen (in the most liberal manner) three brown-looking volumes,
with these words: "Scitote vos in Matriculam Universitatis hodie
relatos esse, sub hac conditione, nempe ut omnia Statuta hoc libro
comprehensa pro virili observetis."  And the ceremony was at an end,
and Mr. Verdant Green was a matriculated member of the University of
Oxford.  He was far too nervous, - from the weakening effect of the
popes, and the excommunicate princes, and their murderous subjects, -
to be able to translate and understand what the Vice-Chancellor had
said to him, but he

---
* The reason why such a name has been given to the Schools'
quadrangle may be found in the following extract from ~Ingram's
Memorials:~ "The schools built by Abbot Hokenorton being inadequate
to the increasing wants of the University, they applied to the Abbot
of Reading for stone to rebuild them; and in the year 1532 it appears
that considerable sums of money were expended on them; but they went
to decay in the latter part of the reign of Henry VIII, and during
the whole reign of Edward VI.  The change of religion having
occasioned a suspension of the usual exercises and scholastic acts in
the University, in the year 1540 only two of these schools were used
by determiners, and within two years after none at all.  The whole
area between these schools and the divinity school was subsequently
converted into a garden and ~pig-market~; and the schools themselves,
being completely abandoned by the masters and scholars, were used by
glovers and laundresses."
+ "In apodyterio domui congregationis."
-=-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     47]

thought his present to be particularly kind; and he found it a copy
of the University Statutes, which he determined forthwith to read and
obey.

Though if he had known that he had sworn to observe statutes which
required him, among other things, to wear garments only of a black or
"subfusk" hue; to abstain from that absurd and proud custom of
walking in public ~in boots~, and the ridiculous one of wearing the
hair long;* - statutes, moreover, which demanded of him to refrain
from all taverns, wine-shops, and houses in which they sold wine or
any other <VG047.JPG> drink, and the herb called nicotiana or
"tobacco"; not to hunt wild beasts with dogs or snares or nets; not
to carry cross-bows or other "bombarding" weapons, or keep hawks for
fowling; not to frequent theatres or the strifes of gladiators; and
only to carry a bow and arrows for the sake of honest recreation;+ -
if Mr. Verdant Green had known that he had covenanted to do this, he
would, perhaps, have felt some scruples in taking the oaths of
matriculation. But this by the way.

Now that Mr. Green had seen all that he wished to see, nothing
remained for him but to discharge his hotel bill.  It was accordingly
called for, and produced by the waiter, whose face - by a visitation
of that complaint against which vaccination is usually considered a
safeguard - had been reduced to a

---
* See the Oxford Statutes, tit. xiv, "De vestitu et habitu
scholastico."
+ Ditto, tit. xv, "De moribus conformandis."
-=-


[48 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

state resembling the interior half of a sliced muffin.  To judge from
the expression of Mr. Green's features as he regarded the document
that had been put into his hand, it is probable that he had not been
much accustomed to Oxford hotels; for he ran over the several items
of the bill with a look in which surprise contended with indignation
for the mastery, while the muffin-faced waiter handled his plated
salver, and looked fixedly at nothing.

Mr. Green, however, refraining from observations, paid the bill; and,
muffling himself in greatcoat and travelling-cap, he prepared himself
to take a comfortable journey back to Warwickshire, inside the
Birmingham and Oxford coach.  It was not loaded in the same way that
it had been when he came up by it, and his fellow-passengers were of
a very different description; and it must be confessed that, in the
absence of Mr. Bouncer's tin horn, the attacks of intrusive terriers,
and the involuntary fumigation of himself with tobacco (although its
presence was still perceptible within the coach), Mr. Green found his
journey ~from~ Oxford much more agreeable than it had been ~to~ that
place.  He took an affectionate farewell of his son, somewhat after
the manner of the "heavy fathers" of the stage; and then the coach
bore him away from the last lingering look of our hero, who felt any
thing but heroic <VG048.JPG> at being left for the first time in his
life to shift for himself.  His luggage had been sent up to
Brazenface, so thither he turned his steps, and with some little
difficulty found his room.  Mr. Filcher had partly unpacked his
master's things, and had left everything uncomfortable and in "the
most admired disorder"; and Mr. Verdant Green sat himself down upon
the "practicable" window-seat, and resigned himself to his thoughts.
If they had not already flown to the Manor Green, they would soon
have been carried there; for a German band, just outside the
college-gates, began to play "Home, sweet home," with that truth and
delicacy of expression which the wandering minstrels of Germany seem
to acquire intuitively.  The sweet melancholy


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     49]

of the simple air, as it came subdued by distance into softer tones,
would have powerfully affected most people who had just been torn
from the bosom of their homes, to fight, all inexperienced, the
battle of life; but it had such an effect on Mr. Verdant Green, that
- but it little matters saying ~what~ he did; many people will give
way to feelings in private that they would stifle in company; and if
Mr. Filcher on his return found his master wiping his spectacles, why
that was only a simple proceeding which all glasses frequently
require.

To divert his thoughts, and to impress upon himself and others the
fact that he was an Oxford MAN, our freshman set out for a stroll;
and as the unaccustomed feeling of the gown <VG049.JPG> about his
shoulders made him feel somewhat embarrassed as to the carriage of
his arms, he stepped into a shop on the way and purchased a light
cane, which he considered would greatly add to the effect of the cap
and gown.  Armed with this weapon, he proceeded to disport himself in
the Christ Church meadows, and promenaded up and down the Broad Walk.

The beautiful meadows lay green and bright in the sun; the arching
trees threw a softened light, and made a chequered pavement of the
great Broad Walk; "witch-elms ~did~ counter-change the floor" of the
gravel-walks that wound with the windings of the Cherwell; the
drooping willows were mirrored in its stream; through openings in the
trees there were glimpses of grey, old college-buildings; then came
the walk along the banks, the Isis shining like molten silver, and
fringed around with barges and boats; then another stretch of green
meadows; then a cloud of steam from the railway-station; and a
background of gently-rising hills.  It was a cheerful scene, and the
variety of figures gave life and animation to the whole.

Young ladies and unprotected females were found in abundance, dressed
in all the engaging variety of light spring dresses; and, as may be
supposed, our hero attracted a great deal of their attention, and
afforded them no small amusement.  But the unusual and terrific
appearance of a spectacled


[50 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

<VG050-1.JPG> gownsman with a cane produced the greatest alarm among
the juveniles, who imagined our freshman to be a new description
<VG050-2.JPG>


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     51]

of beadle or Bogy, summoned up by the exigencies of the times to
preserve a rigorous discipline among the young people; and, regarding
his cane as the symbol of his stern sway, they harassed their
nursemaids by unceasingly charging at their petticoats for protection.

Altogether, Mr. Verdant Green made quite a sensation.


                                        CHAPTER VI.

        MR. VERDANT GREEN DINES, BREAKFASTS, AND GOES TO CHAPEL.

OUR hero dressed himself with great care, that he might make his
first appearance in Hall with proper ~eclat~ - and, having made his
way towards the lantern-surmounted building, he walked up the steps
and under the groined archway with a crowd of hungry undergraduates
who were hurrying in to dinner.  The clatter of plates would have
alone been sufficient to guide his steps; and, passing through one
of the doors in the elaborately carved screen that shut off the
passage and the buttery, he found himself within the hall of
Brazenface.  It was of noble size, lighted by lofty windows, and
carried up to a great height by an open roof, dark (save where it
opened to the lantern) with great oak beams, and rich with carved
pendants and gilded bosses. The ample fire-places displayed the
capaciousness of those collegiate mouths of "the wind-pipes of
hospitality," and gave an idea of the dimensions of the kitchen
ranges.  In the centre of the hall was a huge plate-warmer,
elaborately worked in brass with the college arms.  Founders and
benefactors were seen, or suggested, on all sides; their arms gleamed
from the windows in all the glories of stained glass; and their faces
peered out from the massive gilt frames on the walls, as though their
shadows loved to linger about the spot that had been benefited by
their substance.  At the further end of the hall a deep bay-window
threw its painted light upon a dais, along which stretched the table
for the Dons; Masters and Bachelors occupied side-tables; and the
other tables were filled up by the undergraduates; every one, from
the Don downwards, being in his gown.

Our hero was considerably impressed with the (to him) singular
character of the scene; and from the "Benedictus benedicat"
grace-before-meat to the "Benedicto benedicamur" after-meat, he gazed
curiously around him in silent wonderment.  So much indeed was he
wrapped up in the novelty of the scene, that he ran a great risk of
losing his dinner.  The scouts fled about in all directions with
plates, and glasses, and pewter dishes, and massive silver mugs that
had gone round the tables


[52 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

for the last two centuries, and still no one waited upon Mr. Verdant
Green. He twice ventured to timidly say, "Waiter!" but as no one
answered to his call, and as he was too bashful and occupied with his
own thoughts to make another attempt, it is probable that he would
have risen from dinner as unsatisfied as when he sat down, had not
his right-hand companion (having partly relieved his own wants)
perceived his neighbour to be a freshman, and kindly said to him, "I
think you'd better begin your dinner, because we don't stay here
long. <VG052.JPG>
What is your scout's name?" And when he had been told it, he turned
to Mr. Filcher and asked him, "What the doose he meant by not waiting
on his master?" which, with the addition of a few gratuitous threats,
had the effect of bringing that gentleman to his master's side, and
reducing Mr. Verdant Green to a state of mind in which gratitude to
his companion and a desire to beg his scout's pardon were confusedly
blended.  Not seeing any dishes upon the table to select from, he
referred to the list, and fell back on the standard roast beef.

"I am sure I am very much obliged to you," said Verdant, turning to
his friendly neighbour.  "My rooms are next to yours, and I had the
pleasure of being driven by you on the coach the other day."


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     53]

"Oh!" said Mr. Fosbrooke, for it was he; "ah, I remember you now!  I
suppose the old bird was your governor.  ~He~ seemed to think it
any thing but a pleasure, being driven by Four-in-hand Fosbrooke."

"Why, pap - my father - is rather nervous on a coach," replied
Verdant: "he was bringing me to college for the first time."  "Then
you are the man that has just come into Smalls' old rooms?  Oh, I
see.  Don't you ever drink with your dinner?  If you don't holler for
your rascal, he'll never half wait upon you.  Always bully them well
at first, and then they learn manners."

So, by way of commencing the bullying system without loss of time,
our hero called out very fiercely "Robert!" and then, as Mr. Filcher
glided to his side, he timidly dropped his tone into a mild "Glass of
water, if you please, Robert."

He felt rather relieved when dinner was over, and retired at once to
his own rooms; where, making a rather quiet and sudden entrance, he
found them tenanted by an old woman, who wore a huge bonnet tilted on
the top of her head, and was busily and dubiously engaged at one of
his open boxes.  "Ahem!" he coughed, at which note of warning the old
lady jumped round very quickly, and said, - dabbing curtseys where
there were stops, like the beats of a conductor's ~baton~, - "Law
bless me, sir.  It's beggin' your parding that I am.  Not seein' you
a comin' in. Bein' 'ard of hearin' from a hinfant.  And havin' my
back turned.  I was just a puttin' your things to rights, sir.  If
you please, sir, I'm Mrs. Tester.  Your bed-maker, sir."

"Oh, thank you," said our freshman, with the shadow of a suspicion that
Mrs. Tester was doing something more than merely "putting to rights"
the pots of jam and marmalade, and the packages of tea and coffee,
which his doting mother had thoughtfully placed in his box as a
provision against immediate distress.  "Thank you."

"I've done my rooms, sir," dabbed Mrs. Tester.  "Which if thought
agreeable, I'd stay and put these things in their places.  Which it
certainly is Robert's place.  But I never minds putting myself out.
As I always perpetually am minded. So long as I can obleege the
gentlemen."

So, as our hero was of a yielding disposition, and could, under
skilful hands, easily be moulded into any form, he allowed Mrs.
Tester to remain, and conclude the unpacking and putting away of his
goods, in which operations she displayed great generalship.

"You've a deal of tea and coffee, sir," she said, keeping time by
curtseys.  "Which it's a great blessin' to have a mother.  And not to
be left dissolute like some gentlemen.  And tea


[54 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

and coffee is what I mostly lives on.  And mortial dear it is to poor
folks. And a package the likes of this, sir, were a blessin' I should
never even dream on."

"Well, then," said Verdant, in a most benevolent mood, "you can take
one of the packages for your trouble."

Upon this, Mrs. Tester appeared to be greatly overcome.  "Which I
once had a son myself," she said.  "And as fine a young man as you
are, sir.  With a strawberry mark in the small of his back.  And
beautiful red whiskers, sir; with a tendency to drink.  Which it were
his rewing, and took him to be enlisted for a sojer.  When he went
across the seas to the West Injies.  And was took with the yaller
fever, and buried there.  Which the remembrance, sir, brings on my
spazzums.  To which I'm an hafflicted martyr, sir.  And can only be
heased with three spots of brandy on a lump of sugar.  Which your
good mother, sir, has put a bottle of brandy.  Along with the jam and
the clean linen, sir.  As though a purpose for my complaint.  Ugh!
oh!"

And Mrs. Tester forthwith began pressing and thumping her sides in
such a terrific manner, and appeared to be undergoing such internal
agony, that Mr. Verdant Green not only gave her brandy there and
then, for her immediate relief - "which it heases the spazzums
deerectly, bless you," observed Mrs. Tester, parenthetically; but
also told her where she could find the bottle, in case she should
again be attacked when in his rooms; attacks which, it is needless to
say, were repeated at every subsequent visit.  Mrs. Tester then
finished putting away the tea and coffee, and entered into further
particulars about her late son; though what connection there was
between him and the packages of tea, our hero could not perceive.
Nevertheless he was much interested with her narrative, and thought
Mrs. Tester a very affectionate, motherly sort of woman; more
especially, when (Robert having placed his tea-things on the table)
she showed him how to make the tea; an apparently simple feat that
the freshman found himself perfectly unable to accomplish.  And then
Mrs. Tester made a final dab, and her exit, and our hero sat over his
tea as long as he could, because it gave an idea of cheerfulness; and
then, after directing Robert to be sure not to forget to call him in
time for morning chapel, he retired to bed.

The bed was very hard, and so small, that, had it not been for the
wall, our hero's legs would have been visible (literally) at the
foot; but despite these novelties, he sank into a sound rest, which
at length passed into the following dream.  He thought that he was
back again at dinner at the Manor Green, but that the room was
curiously like the hall of Brazenface, and that Mrs. Tester and Dr.
Portman were on either side of


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     55]

him, with Mr. Fosbrooke and Robert talking to his sisters; and that
he was reaching his hand to help Mrs. Tester to a packet of tea,
which her son had sent them from the West Indies, when he threw over
a wax-light, and set every thing on fire; and that the parish engine
came up; and that there was a great noise, and a loud hammering; and,
"Eh? yes! oh! the half-hour is it?  Oh, yes! thank you!"  And Mr.
Verdant Green sprang out of bed much relieved in mind to find
<VG055.JPG> that the alarm of fire was nothing more than his scout
knocking vigorously at his door, and that it was chapel-time.

"Want any warm water, sir?" asked Mr. Filcher, putting his head in at
the door.

"No, thank you," replied our hero; "I - I -"

"Shave with cold.  Ah! I see, sir.  It's much 'ealthier, and makes the
'air grow.  But any thing as you ~does~ want, sir, you've only to
call."

"If there is any thing that I want, Robert," said Verdant, "I will
ring."

"Bless you, sir," observed Mr. Filcher, "there ain't no bells never
in colleges! They'd be rung off their wires in no time.  Mr. Bouncer,
sir, he uses a trumpet like they does on board ship.  By the same
token, that's it, sir!"  And Mr. Filcher vanished, just in time to
prevent little Mr. Bouncer from finishing a furious solo, from an
entirely new version of ~Robert le Diable~, which he was giving with
novel effects through the medium of a speaking-trumpet.

Verdant found his bed-room inconveniently small; so


[56 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

contracted, indeed, in its dimensions, that his toilette was not
completed without his elbows having first suffered severe abrasions.
His mechanical turnip showed him that he had no time to lose, and the
furious ringing of a bell, whose noise was echoed by the bells of
other colleges, made him dress with a rapidity quite unusual, and
hurry down stairs and across quad. to the chapel steps, up which a
throng of students were hastening.  Nearly all betrayed symptoms of
having been aroused from their sleep without having had any spare
time <VG056.JPG> for an elaborate toilette, and many, indeed, were
completing it, by thrusting themselves into surplices and gowns as
they hurried up the steps.

Mr. Fosbrooke was one of these; and when he saw Verdant close to him,
he benevolently recognized him, and said, "Let me put you up to a
wrinkle.  When they ring you up sharp for chapel, don't you lose any
time about your absolutions, - washing, you know; but just jump into a
pair of bags and Wellingtons; clap a top-coat on you, and button it
up to the chin, and there you are, ready dressed in the twinkling of
a bed-post."

Before Mr. Verdant Green could at all comprehend why a person should
jump into two bags, instead of dressing himself in the normal manner,
they went through the ante-chapel, or "Court of the Gentiles," as Mr.
Fosbrooke termed it, and entered the choir of the chapel through a
screen elaborately decorated in the Jacobean style, with pillars and
arches, and festoons of fruit and flowers, and bells and
pomegranates.  On either side of the door were two men, who quickly
glanced


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     57]

at each one who passed, and as quickly pricked a mark against his
name on the chapel lists.  As the freshman went by, they made a
careful study of his person, and took mental daguerreotypes of his
features.  Seeing no beadle, or pew-opener (or, for the matter of
that, any pews), or any one to direct him to a place, Mr. Verdant
Green quietly took a seat in the first place that he found empty,
which happened to be the stall on the <VG057.JPG> right hand of the
door.  Unconscious of the trespass he was committing, he at once put
his cap to his face and knelt down; but he had no sooner risen from
his knees, than he found an imposing-looking Don, as large as life
and quite as natural, who was staring at him with the greatest
astonishment, and motioning him to immediately "come out of that!"
This our hero did with the greatest speed and confusion, and sank
breathless on the end of the nearest bench; when, just as in his
agitation, he had again said his prayer, the service fortunately
commenced, and somewhat relieved him of his embarrassment.

Although he had the glories of Magdalen, Merton, and New


[58 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

College chapels fresh in his mind, yet Verdant was considerably
impressed with the solemn beauties of his own college chapel.  He
admired its harmonious proportions, and the elaborate carving of its
decorated tracery.  He noted every thing: the great eagle that seemed
to be spreading its wings for an upward flight, - the pavement of
black and white marble, - the dark canopied stalls, rich with the
later work of Grinling Gibbons, - the elegant tracery of the windows;
and he lost himself in <VG058.JPG> a solemn reverie as he looked up
at the saintly forms through which the rays of the morning sun
streamed in rainbow tints.

But the lesson had just begun; and the man on Verdant's right
appeared to be attentively following it.  Our freshman, however,
could not help seeing the book, and, much to his astonishment, he
found it to be a Livy, out of which his neighbour was getting up his
morning's lecture.  He was still more astonished, when the lesson had
come to an end, by being suddenly pulled back when he attempted to
rise, and finding the streamers of his gown had been put to a use
never intended for them, by being tied round the finial of the stall
behind him, - the silly work of a boyish gentleman, who, in his desire
to play off a practical joke on a freshman, forgot the sacredness of
the place where college rules compelled him to shew himself on
morning parade.


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     59]

Chapel over, our hero hurried back to his rooms, and there, to his
great joy, found a budget of letters from home; and surely the little
items of intelligence that made up the news of the Manor Green had
never seemed to possess such interest as now!  The reading and
re-reading of these occupied him during the whole of breakfast-time;
and Mr. Filcher found him still engaged in perusing them when he came
to clear away the things.  Then it was that Verdant discovered the
extended meaning that the word "perquisites" possesses in the eyes of
<VG059.JPG> a scout, for, to a remark that he had made, Robert
replied in a tone of surprise, "Put away these bits o' things as is
left, sir!" and then added, with an air of mild correction, "you see,
sir, you's fresh to the place, and don't know that gentlemen never
likes that sort o' thing done ~here~, sir; but you gets your commons,
sir, fresh and fresh every morning and evening, which must be much
more agreeable to the 'ealth than a heating of stale bread and such
like.  No, sir!" continued Mr. Filcher, with a manner that was truly
parental, "no sir! you trust to me, sir, and I'll take care of your
things, I will."  And from the way that he carried off the eatables,
it seemed probable that he would make good his words.  But our
freshman felt considerable awe of his scout, and murmuring broken
accents, that sounded like "ignorance - customs - University," he


[60 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

endeavoured, by a liberal use of his pocket-handkerchief, to appear
as if he were not blushing.

As Mr. Slowcoach had told him that he would not have to begin
lectures until the following day, and as the Greek play fixed for the
lecture was one with which he had been made well acquainted by Mr.
Larkyns, Verdant began to consider what he could do with himself,
when the thought of Mr. Larkyns suggested the idea that his son
Charles had probably by this time returned to college.  He
determined therefore <VG060.JPG> at once to go in search of him;
and looking out a letter which the rector had commissioned him to
deliver to his son, he inquired of Robert, if he was aware whether Mr.
Charles Larkyns had come back from his holidays.

"'Ollidays, sir?," said Mr. Filcher.  "Oh! I see, sir! Vacation, you
mean, sir.  Young gentlemen as is ~men~, sir, likes to call their
'ollidays by a different name to boys', sir.  Yes, sir, Mr. Charles
Larkyns, he come up last arternoon, sir; but he and Mr. Smalls, the
gent as he's been down with this vacation, the same as had these
rooms, sir, they didn't come to 'All, sir, but went and had their
dinners comfortable at the Star, sir; and very pleasant they made
theirselves; and Thomas, their scout, sir, has had quite a horder for
sober-water this morning, sir."


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     61]

With somewhat of a feeling of wonder how one scout contrived to know
so much of the proceedings of gentlemen who were waited on by another
scout, and wholly ignorant of his allusion to his fellow-servant's
dealings in soda-water, Mr. Verdant Green inquired where he could
find Mr. Larkyns, and as the rooms were but just on the other side of
the quad., he put on his hat, and made his way to them.  The scout
was just going into the room, so our hero gave a tap at the door and
followed him.


                                        CHAPTER VII.

        MR. VERDANT GREEN CALLS ON A GENTLEMAN WHO "IS LICENSED
                                        TO SELL."

MR. VERDANT GREEN found himself in a room that had a pleasant
look-out over the gardens of Brazenface, from which a noble chestnut
tree brought its pyramids of bloom close up to the very windows.  The
walls of the room were decorated with engravings in gilt frames,
their variety of subject denoting the catholic taste of their
proprietor. "The start for the Derby," and other coloured hunting
prints, shewed his taste for the field and horseflesh; Landseer's
"Distinguished Member of the Humane Society," "Dignity and
Impudence," and others, displayed his fondness for dog-flesh; while
Byron beauties, "Amy Robsart," and some extremely ~au naturel~ pets
of the ballet, proclaimed his passion for the fair sex in general.
Over the fire-place was a mirror (for Mr. Charles Larkyns was not
averse to the reflection of his good-looking features, and was rather
glad than otherwise of "an excuse for the glass,") its frame stuck
full of tradesmen's cards and (unpaid) bills, invites, "bits of
pasteboard" pencilled with a mystic "wine," and other odds and ends:
- no private letters though!  Mr. Larkyns was too wary to leave his
"family secrets" for the delectation of his scout.  Over the mirror
was displayed a fox's mask, gazing vacantly from between two brushes;
leaving the spectator to imagine that Mr. Charles Larkyns was a
second Nimrod, and had in some way or other been intimately concerned
in the capture of these trophies of the chase.  This supposition of
the imaginative spectator would be strengthened by the appearance of
a list of hunting appointments (of the past season) pinned up over a
list of lectures, and not quite in character with the tabular views
of prophecies, kings of Israel and Judah, and the Thirty-nine
Articles, which did duty elsewhere on the walls, where they were
presumed to be studied in spare minutes - which were remarkably
spare indeed.


[62 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

The sporting character of the proprietor of the rooms was further
suggested by the huge pair of antlers over the door, bearing on their
tines a collection of sticks, whips, and spurs; while, to prove that
Mr. Larkyns was not wholly taken up by the charms of the chase,
fishing-rods, tandem-whips, cricket-bats, and Joe Mantons, were piled
up in odd corners; and single-sticks, boxing-gloves, and foils,
gracefully arranged upon the walls, shewed that he occasionally
devoted himself to athletic pursuits.  An ingenious wire-rack for
pipes and meerschaums, and the presence of one or two
suspicious-looking boxes, labelled "collorados," "regalia,"
"lukotilla," and with other unknown words, seemed to intimate, that
if Mr. Larkyns was no smoker himself, he at least kept a bountiful
supply of "smoke" for his friends; but the perfumed cloud that was
proceeding from his lips as Verdant entered the room, dispelled all
doubts on the subject.

He was much changed in appearance during the somewhat long interval
since Verdant had last seen him, and his handsome features had
assumed a more manly, though perhaps a more rakish look.  He was
lolling on a couch in the ~neglige~ attire of dressing-gown and
slippers, with his pink striped shirt comfortably open at the neck.
Lounging in an easy chair opposite to him was a gentleman clad in
tartan-plaid, whose face might only be partially discerned through
the glass bottom of a pewter, out of which he was draining the last
draught.  Between them was a table covered with the ordinary
appointments for a breakfast, and the extra-ordinary ones of beer-cup
and soda-water.  Two Skye terriers, hearing a strange footstep,
immediately barked out a challenge of "Who goes there?" and made Mr.
Larkyns aware that an intruder was at hand.

Slightly turning his head, he dimly saw through the smoke a
spectacled figure taking off his hat, and holding out an envelope,
and without looking further, he said, "It's no use coming here, young
man, and stealing a march in this way!  I don't owe ~you~ any thing;
and if I did, it is not convenient to pay it.  I told Spavin not to
send me any more of his confounded reminders; so go back and tell him
that he'll find it all right in the long-run, and that I'm really
going to read this term, and shall stump the examiners at last. And
now, my friend, you'd better make yourself scarce and vanish! You
know where the door lies!"

Our hero was so confounded at this unusual manner of receiving a
friend, that he was some little time before he could gasp out, "Why,
Charles Larkyns - don't you remember me?  Verdant Green!"

Mr. Larkyns, astonished in his turn, jumped up directly, and came to
him with outstretched hands.  "'Pon my word,


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     63]

old fellow," he said, "I really beg you ten thousand pardons for not
recognizing you; but you are so altered - allow me to add, improved, -
since I last saw you; you were not a bashaw of two tails, then, you
know; and, really, wearing your beaver up, like Hamlet's uncle, I
altogether took you for a dun.  For I am a victim of a very
remarkable monomania.  There are in this place wretched beings
calling themselves tradesmen, who labour under the impression that I
owe them what they facetiously term little bills; and though I have
frequently assured <VG063.JPG> their messengers, who are kind enough
to come here to inquire for Mr. Larkyns, that that unfortunate
gentleman has been obliged to hide himself from persecution in a
convent abroad, yet the wretches still hammer at my oak, and disturb
my peace of mind.  But bring yourself to an anchor, old fellow!  This
man is Smalls; a capital fellow, whose chief merit consists in his
devotion to literature; indeed, he reads so hard that he is called a
~fast~ man.  Smalls! let me introduce my friend Verdant Green, a
freshman, - ahem! - and the proprietor, I believe, of your old rooms."

Our hero made a profound bow to Mr. Smalls, who returned it with
great gravity, and said he "had great pleasure in forming the
acquaintance of a freshman like Mr. Verdant Green;" which was
doubtless quite true; and he then evinced his devotion to literature
by continuing the perusal of one of those


[64 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

vivid and refined accounts of "a rattling set-to between Nobby Buffer
and Hammer Sykes," for which ~Tintinnabulum's Life~ is so justly
famous.

"I heard from my governor," said Mr. Larkyns, "that you were coming
up; and in the course of the morning I should have come and looked
you up; but the - the fatigues of travelling yesterday," continued
Mr. Larkyns, as a lively recollection of the preceding evening's
symposium stole over his mind, "made me rather later than usual this
morning.  Have you done any thing in this way?"

Verdant replied that he had breakfasted, although he had not done
any thing in the way of cigars, because he never smoked.

"Never smoked! Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Smalls, violently
interrupting himself in the perusal of ~Tintinnabulum's Life~, while
some private signals were rapidly telegraphed between him and Mr.
Larkyns; "ah! you'll soon get the better of that weakness! Now, as
you're a freshman, you'll perhaps allow me to give you a little
advice.  The Germans, you know, would never be the deep readers that
they are, unless they smoked; and I should advise you to go to the
Vice-Chancellor as soon as possible, and ask him for an order for
some weeds.  He'd be delighted to think you are beginning to set to
work so soon!"  To which our hero replied, that he was much obliged
to Mr. Smalls for his kind advice, and if such were the customs of
the place, he should do his best to fulfil them.

"Perhaps you'll be surprised at our simple repast, Verdant," said Mr.
Larkyns; "but it's our misfortune.  It all comes of hard reading and
late hours: the midnight oil, you know, must be supplied, and ~will~
be paid for; the nervous system gets strained to excess, and you have
to call in the doctor.  Well, what does he do? Why, he prescribes a
regular course of tonics; and I flatter myself that I am a very
docile patient, and take my bitter beer regularly, and without
complaining."  In proof of which Mr. Charles Larkyns took a long pull
at the pewter.

"But you know, Larkyns," observed Mr. Smalls, "that was nothing to my
case, when I got laid up with elephantiasis on the biceps of the
lungs, and had a fur coat in my stomach!"

"Dear me!" said Verdant sympathizingly; "and was that also through
too much study?"

"Why, of course!" replied Mr. Smalls; "it couldn't have been anything
else - from the symptoms, you know!  But then the sweets of learning
surpass the bitters.  Talk of the pleasures of the dead languages,
indeed! why, how many jolly nights have you and I, Larkyns, passed
'down among the dead men!' "

Charles Larkyns had just been looking over the letter which


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     65]

Verdant had brought him, and said, "The governor writes that you'd
like me to put you up to the ways of the place, because they are
fresh to you, and you are fresh (ahem! very!) to them.  Now, I am
going to wine with Smalls to-night, to meet a few nice, quiet,
hard-working men (eh, Smalls?), and I daresay Smalls will do the
civil, and ask you also."

"Certainly!" said Mr. Smalls, who saw a prospect of amusement,
"delighted, I assure you! I hope to see you - after <VG065.JPG> Hall,
you know, - but I hope you don't object to a very quiet party?"

"Oh, dear no!" replied Verdant; "I much prefer a quiet party; indeed,
I have always been used to quiet parties; and I shall be very glad to
come."

"Well, that's settled then," said Charles Larkyns; "and, in the
mean time, Verdant, let us take a prowl about the old place, and I'll
put you up to a thing or two, and shew you some of the freshman's
sights.  But you must go and get your cap and gown, old fellow, and
then by that time I'll be ready for you."

Whether there are really any sights in Oxford that are more
especially devoted, or adapted, to its freshmen, we will not


[66 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

undertake to affirm; but if there are, they could not have had a
better expositor than Mr. Charles Larkyns, or a more credible visitor
than Mr. Verdant Green.

His credibility was rather strongly put to the test as they
<VG066-1.JPG> turned into the High Street, when his companion
directed his attention to an individual on the opposite side of the
street, with a voluminous gown, and enormous cocked hat profusely
adorned with gold lace.  "I suppose you know who that is, Verdant?
No! Why, that's the Bishop of Oxford! Ah, I see, he's a very
different-looking man to what you had expected; but then these
university robes so change the appearance.  That is his official
dress, as the Visitor of the Ashmolean!"

Mr. Verdant Green having "swallowed" this, his friend was thereby
enabled, not only to use up old "sells," but also to draw largely on
his invention for new ones.  Just then, there came along the street,
walking in a sort of young procession, - the Vice-Chancellor, with his
Esquire and Yeoman-bedels.  The silver maces, carried by these latter
gentlemen, made them by far the most showy part of the procession,
and accordingly Mr. Larkyns seized the favourable opportunity to
point out the foremost bedel, and say, "You see that man with the
poker and loose cap?  Well, that's the Vice-Chancellor."
<VG066-2.JPG>

"But what does he walk in procession for?" inquired our freshman.

"Ah, poor man!" said Mr. Larkyns, "he's obliged to do it."  'Uneasy
lies the head that wears a crown,' you know; and he can never go
anywhere, or do anything, without carrying that poker, and having the
other minor pokers to follow him.  They never leave him, not even at
night.  Two of the pokers stand on each side his bed, and relieve
each other every two hours. So, I need hardly say, that he is obliged
to be a bachelor."

"It must be a very wearisome office," remarked our freshman, who
fully believed all that was told to him.

"Wearisome, indeed; and that's the reason why they are obliged to
change the Vice-Chancellors so often.  It would


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN 67]

kill most people, only they are always selected for their strength, -
and height," he added, as a brilliant idea just struck <VG067-1.JPG>
him.  They had turned down Magpie Lane, and so by Oriel College,
where one of the fire-plug notices had caught Mr. Larkyns' eye.  "You
see that," he said; "well, that's one of the plates they put up to
record the Vice's height.  F.P. 7 feet, you see: the initials of his
name, - Frederick Plumptre!"

"He scarcely seemed so tall as that," said our hero, "though
certainly a tall man.  But the gown makes a difference, I suppose."
"His height was a very lucky thing for him, however," continued Mr.
Larkyns;  "I dare say when you have heard that it was only those who
stood high in the University that were elected to rule it, you little
thought of the true meaning of the term?"

"I certainly never did," said the freshman, innocently; "but I knew
that the customs of Oxford must of course be very different from
those of other places."

"Yes, you'll soon find that out," replied Mr. Larkyns, meaningly.
"But here we are at Merton, whose Merton ale is as celebrated as
Burton ale.  You see the man giving in the letters <VG067-2.JPG> to
the porter?  Well, he's one of their principal men.  Each college
does its own postal department; and at Merton there are fourteen
postmasters,* for they get no end of letters there."

"Oh, yes!" said our hero, "I remember Mr. Larkyns, - your father, the
rector, I mean, - telling us that the son of one of his old friends
had been a postmaster of Merton; but I fancied that he had said it
had something to do with a scholarship."

---
* Exhibitioners of Merton College are called "postmasters."
-=-


[68 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

"Ah, you see, it's a long while since the governor was here, and his
memory fails him," remarked Mr. Charles Larkyns, very unfilially.
"Let us turn down the Merton fields, and round into St. Aldate's.  We
may perhaps be in time to see the Vice come down to Christ Church."

"What does he go there for?" asked Mr. Verdant Green.

"To wind up the great clock, and put big Tom in order.  Tom is the
bell that you hear at nine each night; the Vice has to see that he is
in proper condition, and, as you have seen, goes out with his pokers
for that purpose."

On their way, Charles Larkyns pointed out, close to Folly Bridge, a
house profusely decorated with figures and indescribable ornaments,
which he informed our freshman was Blackfriars' Hall, where all the
men who had been once plucked <VG068.JPG> were obliged to migrate to;
and that Folly Bridge received its name from its propinquity to the
Hall.  They were too late to see the Vice-Chancellor wind up the
clock of Christ Church; but as they passed by the college, they met
two gownsmen who recognized Mr. Larkyns by a slight nod.  "Those are
two Christ Church men," he said, "and noblemen.  The one with the
Skye-terrier's coat and eye-glass is the Earl of Whitechapel, the
Duke of Minories' son.  I dare say you know the other man.  No! Why,
he is Lord Thomas Peeper, eldest son of the Lord Godiva who hunts our
county.  I knew him in the field."

"But why do they wear ~gold~ tassels to their caps?" inquired the
freshman.

"Ah," said the ingenious Mr. Larkyns, shaking his head; "I had rather
you'd not have asked me that question, because that's the disgraceful
part of the business.  But these lords, you see, they ~will~ live at
a faster pace than us commoners, who can't stand a champagne
breakfast above once a term or so.  Why, those gold tassels are the
badges of drunkenness!"*

"Of drunkenness! dear me!"

"Yes, it's very sad, isn't it?" pursued Mr. Larkyns; "and I wonder
that Peeper in particular should give way to such

---
* As "Tufts" and "Tuft-hunters" have become "household words," it is
perhaps needless to tell any one that the gold tassel is the
distinguishing mark of a nobleman.
-=-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     69]

things.  But you see how they brazen it out, and walk about as coolly
as though nothing had happened.  It's just the same sort of
punishment," continued Mr. Larkyns, whose inventive powers increased
with the demand that the freshman's gullibility imposed upon them, -
"it is just the same sort of thing that they do with the Greenwich
pensioners.  When ~they~ have been trangressing the laws of sobriety,
you know, they are made marked men by having to wear a yellow coat as
a punishment; and our dons borrowed the idea, and made yellow tassels
the badges of intoxication. But for the credit of the University, I'm
glad to say that you'll not find many men so disgraced."

They now turned down the New Road, and came to a strongly castellated
building, which Mr. Larkyns pointed out (and truly) as Oxford Castle
or the Gaol; and he added (untruly), "if you hear Botany-Bay College*
spoken of, this is the place that's meant.  It's a delicate way of
referring to the temporary sojourn that any undergrad has been forced
to make there, to say that he belongs to Botany-Bay College."

They now turned back, up Queen Street and High Street, when, as they
were passing All Saints, Mr. Larkyns pointed out a pale, intellectual
looking man who passed them, and said, "That man is Cram, the patent
safety.  He's the first coach in Oxford."

"A coach!" said our freshman, in some wonder.

"Oh, I forgot you didn't know college-slang.  I suppose a royal mail
is the only gentleman coach that ~you~ know of.  Why, in Oxford, a
coach means a private tutor, you must know; and those who can't
afford a coach, get a cab, - ~alias~ a crib, - ~alias~ a translation.
You see, Verdant, you are gradually being initiated into Oxford
mysteries."

"I am, indeed," said our hero, to whom a new world was opening.

They had now turned round by the west end of St. Mary's, and were
passing Brasenose; and Mr. Larkyns drew Verdant's attention to the
brazen nose that is such a conspicuous object <VG069.JPG> over the
entrance-gate.  "That," said he, "was modelled from a cast of the
Principal feature of the first Head of the college; and so the
college was named Brazen-nose.+  The nose was formerly used as a
place of punishment for any misbehaving Brazennosian, who had to sit
upon it for two hours, and was

---
* A name given to Worcester College, from its being the most distant
college.
+ Although we have a great respect for Mr. Larkyns, yet we strongly
sus-
[footnote continues next page]
-=-


[70 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

not ~countenanced~ until he had done so.  These punishments were so
frequent that they gradually wore down the nose to its present small
dimensions.

"This round building," continued Mr. Larkyns, pointing to the
Radcliffe, "is the Vice-Chancellor's house.  He has to go each night
up to that balcony on the top, and look round to see if all's safe.
Those heads," he said, as they passed the Ashmolean, "are supposed to
be the twelve Caesars; only there happen, I believe, to be thirteen
of them.  I think that they are the busts of the original Heads of
Houses."

Mr. Larkyns' inventive powers having been now somewhat exhausted, he
proposed that they should go back to Brazenface and have some lunch.
This they did; after which Mr. Verdant Green wrote to his mother a
long account of his friend's kindness, and the trouble he had taken
to explain the most interesting sights that could be seen by a
Freshman.

"Are you writing to your governor, Verdant?" asked the friend, who
had made his way to our hero's rooms, and was now perfuming them with
a little tobacco-smoke.

"No; I am writing to my mama - mother, I mean!"

"Oh! to the missis!" was the reply; "that's just the same.

---
[cont.] pect that he is intentionally deceiving his friend.  He has,
however, the benefit of a doubt, as the authorities differ on the
origin and meaning of the word Brasenose, as may be seen by the
following notices, to the last two of which the editor of ~Notes and
Queries~ has directed our attention:

"This curious appellation, which, whatever was the origin of it, has
been perpetuated by the symbol of a brazen nose here and at Stamford,
occurs with the modern orthography, but in one undivided word, so
early as 1278, in an inquisition now printed in ~The Hundred Rolls~,
though quoted by Wood from the manuscript record." -~Ingram's
Memorials of Oxford~.

"There is a spot in the centre of the city where Alfred is said to
have lived, and which may be called the native place or river-head of
three separate societies still existing, University, Oriel, and
Brasenose.  Brasenose claims his palace, Oriel his church, and
University his school or academy.  Of these, Brasenose College is
still called in its formal style ' the King's Hall,' which is the
name by which Alfred himself, in his laws, calls his palace; and it
has its present singular name from a corruption of ~brasinium~, or
~brasin-huse~, as having been originally located in that part of the
royal mansion which was devoted to the then important accommodation
of a brew house."  -~From a Review of Ingram's Memorials in the
British Critic~, vol. xxiv, p. 139.

"Brasen Nose Hall, as the Oxford antiquary has shewn, may be traced
as far back as the time of Henry III., about the middle of the
thirteenth century; and early in the succeeding reign, 6th Edward I.,
1278, it was known by the name of Brasen Nose Hall, which peculiar
name was undoubtedly owing, as the same author observes, to the
circumstance of a nose of brass affixed to the gate.  It is presumed,
however, that this conspicuous appendage of the portal was not formed
of the mixed metal which the word now denotes, but the genuine
produce of the mine; as is the nose, or rather face, of a lion or
leopard still remaining at Stamford, which also gave name to the
edifice it adorned.  And hence, when Henry VIII. debased the coin by
an alloy of ~copper~, it was a common remark or proverb, that
'Testons were gone to Oxford, to study in ~Brasen~ Nose.' "
-~Churton's Life of Bishop Smyth~, p. 227.
-=-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN 71]

Well, had you not better take the opportunity to ask them to send you
a proper certificate that you have been vaccinated, and had the
measles favourably?"

"But what is that for?" inquired our Freshman, always anxious to
learn.  "Your father sent up the certificate of my baptism, and I
thought that was the only one wanted."

"Oh," said Mr. Charles Larkyns, "they give you no end of trouble at
these places; and they require the vaccination certificate before you
go in for your responsions, - the Little-go, you know.  You need not
mention my name in your letter as having told you this.  It will be
quite enough to say that you understand such a thing is required."

Verdant accordingly penned the request; and Charles Larkyns smoked
on, and thought his friend the very beau-ideal of a Freshman.  "By
the way, Verdant," he said, desirous not to lose any opportunity,
"you are going to wine with Smalls this evening; and, - excuse me
mentioning it, - but I suppose you would go properly dressed, - white
tie, kids, and that sort of thing, eh? Well! ta, ta, till then.  'We
meet again at Philippi!' "

Acting upon the hint thus given, our hero, when Hall was over made
himself uncommonly spruce in a new white tie, and spotless kids; and
as he was dressing, drew a mental picture of the party to which he
was going.  It was to be composed of quiet, steady men, who were such
hard readers as to be called "fast men."  He should therefore hear
some delightful and rational conversation on the literature of
ancient Greece and Rome, the present standard of scholarship in the
University, speculations on the forthcoming prize-poems, comparisons
between various expectant class-men, and delightful topics of
<VG071.JPG> a kindred nature; and the evening would be passed in a
grave and sedate manner; and after a couple of glasses of wine had
been leisurely sipped, they should have a very enjoyable tea, and
would separate for an early rest, mutually gratified and improved.

This was the nature of Mr. Verdant Green's speculations; but whether
they were realized or no, may be judged by transferring the scene a
few hours later to Mr. Smalls' room.


[72 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]


                                        CHAPTER VIII.

                MR. VERDANT GREEN'S MORNING REFLECTIONS ARE NOT SO
                        PLEASANT AS HIS EVENING DIVERSIONS.

MR. SMALLS' room was filled with smoke and noise.  Supper had been
cleared away; the glasses were now sparkling on the board, and the
wine was ruby bright.  The table, moreover, was supplied with
spirituous liquors and mixtures of all descriptions, together with
many varieties of "cup," - a cup which not only cheers, but
occasionally inebriates; and this miscellany of liquids was now being
drunk on the premises by some score and a half of gentlemen, who were
sitting round the table, and standing or lounging about in various
parts of the room.  Heading the table, sat the host, loosely attired
in a neat dressing gown of crimson and blue, in an attitude which
allowed him to swing his legs easily, if not gracefully, over the arm
of his chair, and to converse cheerfully with Charles Larkyns, who
was leaning over the chair-back.  Visible to the naked eye, on Mr.
Smalls' left hand, appeared the white tie and full evening dress
which decorated the person of Mr. Verdant Green.

A great consumption of tobacco was going on, not only through the
medium of cigars, but also of meerschaums, short "dhudheens" of
envied colour, and the genuine yard of clay; and Verdant, while he
was scarcely aware of what he was doing, found himself, to his great
amazement, with a real cigar in his mouth, which he was industriously
sucking, and with great difficulty keeping alight.  Our hero felt
that the unexpected exigencies of the case demanded from him some
sacrifice; while he consoled himself by the reflection, that, on the
homoeopathic principle of "likes cure likes," a cigar was the best
preventive against any ill effects arising from the combination of
the thirty gentlemen who were generating smoke with all the ardour of
lime-kilns or young volcanoes, and filling Mr. Smalls' small room
with an atmosphere that was of the smoke, smoky.  Smoke produces
thirst; and the cup, punch, egg-flip, sherry-cobblers, and other
liquids, which had been so liberally provided, were being consumed by
the members of the party as though it had been their drink from
childhood; while the conversation was of a kind very different to
what our hero had anticipated, being for the most part vapid and
unmeaning, and (must it be confessed?) occasionally too highly
flavoured with improprieties for it to be faithfully recorded in
these pages of most perfect propriety.

The literature of ancient Greece and Rome was not even referred to;
and when Verdant, who, from the unusual com-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     73]

bination of the smoke and liquids, was beginning to feel extremely
amiable and talkative, - made a reflective observation (addressed to
the company generally) which sounded like the words "Nunc vino
pellite curas, Cras ingens,"* - he was immediately interrupted by the
voice of Mr. Bouncer, crying out, "Who's that talking shop about
engines? Holloa, Giglamps!" - Mr. Bouncer, it must be observed, had
facetiously adopted the ~sobriquet~ which had been bestowed on
<VG073.JPG> Verdant and his spectacles on their first appearance
outside the Oxford coach, - "Holloa, Giglamps, is that you
ill-treating the dead languages?  I'm ashamed of you! a venerable
party like you ought to be above such things.  There! don't blush,
old feller, but give us a song! It's the punishment for talking shop,
you know."

There was an immediate hammering of tables and jingling of glasses,
accompanied with loud cries of "Mr. Green for a song! Mr. Green! Mr.
Giglamps' song!" cries which nearly brought our hero to the verge of
idiotcy.

Charles Larkyns saw this, and came to the rescue.  "Gentlemen," he
said, addressing the company, "I know that my friend Verdant ~can~
sing, and that, like a good bird, he ~will~

---
* Horace, car. i od. vii
-=-


[74 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

sing.  But while he is mentally looking over his numerous stock of
songs, and selecting one for our amusement, I beg to fill up our
valuable time, by asking you to fill up a bumper to the health of our
esteemed host Smalls (~vociferous cheers~) - a man whose private
worth is only to be equalled by the purity of his milk-punch and the
excellence of his weeds (~hear hear~).  Bumpers, gentlemen, and no
heel-taps! and though I am sorry to interfere with Mr. Fosbrooke's
private enjoyments, yet I must beg to suggest to him that he has been
so much engaged in drowning his personal cares in the bowl over which
he is so skilfully presiding, that my glass has been allowed to
sparkle on the board empty and useless." And as Charles Larkyns held
out his glass towards Mr. Fosbrooke and the punch-bowl, he trolled
out, in a rich, manly voice, old Cowley's anacreontic:

                        "Fill up the bowl then, fill it high!
                        Fill all the glasses there! For why
                        Should every creature drink but I?
                        Why, man of morals, tell me why?"

By the time that the "man of morals" had ladled out for the company,
and that Mr. Smalls' health had been drunk and responded to amid
uproarious applause, Charles Larkyns' friendly diversion in our
hero's favour had succeeded, and Mr. Verdant Green had regained his
confidence, and had decided upon one of those vocal efforts which, in
the bosom of his own family, and to the pianoforte accompaniment of
his sisters, was accustomed to meet with great applause.  And when he
had hastily tossed off another glass of milk-punch (merely to clear
his throat), he felt bold enough to answer the spirit-rappings which
were again demanding "Mr. Green's song!"  It was given much in the
following manner:

~Mr. Verdant Green (in low plaintive tones, and fresh alarm at
hearing the sounds of his own voice)~.  "I dreamt that I dwe-elt in
mar-arble halls, with" -

~Mr. Bouncer (interrupting)~.  "Spit it out, Giglamps! Dis child
can't hear whether it's Maudlin Hall you're singing about, or what."

~Omnes~. "Order! or-~der~! Shut up, Bouncer!"

~Charles Larkyns (encouragingly)~.  "Try back, Verdant: never mind."

~Mr. Verdant Green (tries back, with increased confusion of ideas,
resulting principally from the milk-punch and tobacco)~.  "I dreamt
that I dwe-elt in mar-arble halls, with vassals and serfs at my
si-hi-hide; and - and -  I beg your pardon, gentlemen, I really
forget - oh, I know! - and I also dre-eamt, which ple-eased me most -
no, that's not it" -

~Mr. Bouncer (who does not particularly care for the words of a


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN 75]

song, but only appreciates the chorus)~ - "That'll do, old feller! We
aint pertickler,-(~rushes with great deliberation and noise to the
chorus~) "That you lo-oved me sti-ill the sa-ha-hame - chorus,
gentlemen!"

~Omnes (in various keys and time)~.  "That you lo-oved me sti-ill the
same."

~Mr. Bouncer (to Mr. Green, alluding remotely to the opera)~.  "Now
my Bohemian gal, can't you come out to-night?  Spit us out a yard or
two more, Giglamps."

~Mr. Verdant Green (who has again taken the opportunity to clear his
throat)~.  "I dreamt that I dwe-elt in mar-arble- no! I beg pardon!
sang that (~desperately~) - that sui-uitors sou-ught my hand, that
knights on their (~hic~) ben-ended kne-e-ee - had (~hic~) riches too
gre-eat to" - (~Mr. Verdant Green smiles benignantly upon the
company~) - "Don't rec'lect anymo."

~Mr. Bouncer (who is not to be defrauded of the chorus)~.  "Chorus,
gentlemen! - That you'll lo-ove me sti-ill the sa-a-hame!"

~Omnes (ad libitum)~.  "That you'll lo-ove me sti-ill the same!"

Though our hero had ceased to sing, he was still continuing to clear
his throat by the aid of the milk-punch, and was again industriously
sucking his cigar, which he had not yet succeeded in getting half
through, although he had re-lighted it about twenty times.  All this
was observed by the watchful eyes of  Mr. Bouncer, who, whispering to
his neighbour, and bestowing a distributive wink on the company
generally, rose and made the following remarks:-

"Mr. Smalls, and gents all: I don't often get on my pins to trouble
you with a neat and appropriate speech; but on an occasion like the
present, when we are honoured with the presence of a party who has
just delighted us with what I may call a flood of harmony (~hear,
hear~), - and has pitched it so uncommon strong in the vocal line, as to
considerably take the shine out of the woodpecker-tapping, that we've
read of in the pages of history (~hear, hear: "Go it again,
Bouncer!"~), - when, gentlemen, I see before me this old original
Little Wobbler, - need I say that I allude to Mr. Verdant Green? -
(~vociferous cheers~)- I feel it a sort of, what you call a
privilege, d'ye see, to stand on my pins, and propose that respected
party's jolly good health (~renewed cheers~).  Mr. Verdant Green,
gentlemen, has but lately come among us, and is, in point of fact,
what you call a freshman; but, gentlemen, we've already seen enough
of him to feel aware that - that Brazenface has gained an
acquisition, which - which - (~cries of "Tally-ho! Yoicks! Hark
forrud!"~) Exactly so, gentlemen: so, as I see you are all anxious to
do honour to our freshman, I beg, without further preface, to give
you the health of Mr. Verdant Green! With all the honours.  Chorus,
gents!


[76 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

                "For he's a jolly good fellow!
                For he's a jolly good fellow!!
                For he's a jolly good f-e-e-ell-ow!!!
                        Which nobody can deny!"

This chorus was taken up and prolonged in the most indefinite manner;
little Mr. Bouncer fairly revelling in it, and only regretting that
he had not his post-horn with him to further contribute to the
harmony of the evening.  It seemed to be a great art in the singers
of the chorus to dwell as long as possible on the third repetition of
the word "fellow," and in the most defiant manner to pounce down on
the bold affirmation by which it is followed; and then to lyrically
proclaim that, not only was it a way they had in the Varsity to drive
dull care away, but that the same practice was also pursued in the
army and navy for the attainment of a similar end.

When the chorus had been sung over three or four times, and Mr.
Verdant Green's name had been proclaimed with equal noise, that
gentleman rose (with great difficulty), to return thanks.  He was
understood to speak as follows: <VG076.JPG>

"Genelum anladies (~cheers~), - I meangenelum. (~"That's about the
ticket, old feller!" from Mr. Bouncer.~) Customd syam plic speakn, I
- I -(~hear, hear~) - feel bliged drinkmyel.  I'm fresman, genelum,
and prowtitle (~loud cheers~).  Myfren Misserboucer, fallowme callm
myfren! (~"In course, Giglamps, you do me proud, old feller."~)
Myfren Misserboucer seszime fresman - prow title, sureyou (~hear,
hear~).  Genelmun, werall jolgoodfles, anwe wogohotillmorrin! (~"We
won't, we won't! not a bit of it!"~) Gelmul, I'm fresmal, an
namesgreel, gelmul (~cheers~).  Fanyul dousmewor,
herescardinpock'lltellm!  Misser Verdalgreel, Braseface, Oxul
fresmal, anprowtitle!  (~Great cheering and rattling of glasses,
during which Mr. Verdant Green's coat-tails are made the receptacles
for empty bottles, lobsters' claws, and other miscellaneous
articles.~) Misserboucer said was fresmal.  If Misserboucer


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     77]

wantsultme (~"No, no!"~), herescardinpocklltellm namesverdalgreel,
Braseface!  Not shameofitgelmul! prowtitle! (~Great applause.~) I
doewaltilsul Misserboucer! thenwhysee sultme? thaswaw Iwaltknow!
(~Loud cheers, and roars of laughter, in which Mr. Verdant Green
suddenly joins to the best of his ability.~) I'm anoxful fresmal,
gelmul, 'fmyfrel Misserboucer loumecallimso.  (~Cheers and laughter,
in which Mr. Verdant Green feebly joins.~) Anweerall jolgoodfles,
anwe wogohotilmorril, an I'm fresmal, gelmul, anfanyul dowsmewor -
an I - doefeel quiwell!"

This was the termination of Mr. Verdant Green's speech, for after
making a few unintelligible sounds, his knees suddenly gave way, and
with a benevolent smile he disappeared beneath the table.

*       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour afterwards two gentlemen might have been seen, bearing
with staggering steps across the moonlit quad the <VG077.JPG> huddled
form of a third gentleman, who was clothed in full evening dress, and
appeared incapable of taking care of himself.  The two first
gentlemen set down their burden under an open doorway, painted over
with a large _4_; and then, by pulling and pushing, assisted it to
guide its steps up a narrow and intricate staircase, until they had
gained the third floor, and stood before a door, over which the
moonlight revealed, in newly-painted white letters, the name of "MR.
VERDANT GREEN."

"Well, old feller," said the first gentleman, "how do you feel now,
after 'Sich a getting up stairs'?"

"Feel much berrer now," said their late burden; "feel quite-comfurble!
Shallgotobed!"

"Well, Giglamps," said the first speaker, "and By-by won't be at all
a bad move for you.  D'ye think you can unrig yourself and get
between the sheets, eh, my beauty?"

"Its allri, allri!" was the reply; "limycandle!"

"No, no," said the second gentleman, as he pulled up the
window-blind, and let in the moonlight; "here's quite as much light
as you want.  It's almost morning."

"Sotis," said the gentleman in the evening costume: "anlittlebirds
beginsingsoon! Ilike littlebirds sing! jollittlebirds!"  The speaker
had suddenly fallen upon his bed, and was lying thereon at full
length, with his feet on the pillow.


[78 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

"He'll be best left in this way," said the second speaker, as he
removed the pillow to the proper place, and raised the prostrate
gentleman's head; "I'll take off his choker and make him easy about
the neck, and then we'll shut him up, and leave him.  Why the beggar's
asleep already!"  And so the two gentlemen went away, and left him
safe and sleeping.

It is conjectured, however, that he must have got up shortly after
this, and finding himself with his clothes on, must have considered
that a lighted candle was indispensably necessary to undress by; for
when Mrs. Tester came at her usual early hour to light the fires and
prepare the sitting-rooms, she discovered him lying on the carpet
embracing the coal-skuttle, <VG078.JPG> with a candle by his side.
The good woman raised him, and did not leave him until she had, in
the most motherly manner, safely tucked him up in bed.

                *               *               *

Clink, clank! clink, clank! tingle, tangle! tingle, tangle! Are
demons smiting ringing hammers into Mr. Verdant Green's brain, or is
the dreadful bell summoning him to rise for morning chapel?

Mr. Filcher puts an end to the doubt by putting his head in at the
bedroom door, and saying, "Time for chapel, sir! Chapel," thought Mr.
Filcher; "here is a chap ill, indeed! - Bain't you well, sir?
Restless you look!"

Oh, the shame and agony that Mr. Verdant Green felt! The desire to
bury his head under the clothes, away from Robert's and everyone
else's sight; the fever that throbbed his brain and parched his lips,
and made him long to drink up Ocean; the eyes that felt like burning
lead; the powerless hands that trembled like a weak old man's; the
voice that came in faltering tones that jarred the brain at every
word! How he despised himself; how he loathed the very idea of wine;
how he resolved never, never to transgress so again! But perhaps Mr.
Verdant Green was not the only Oxford freshman who has made this
resolution.

"Bain't you well, sir?" repeated Mr. Filcher, with a passing thought
that freshmen were sadly degenerating, and could


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     79]

not manage their three bottles as they did when he was first a scout:
"bain't you well, sir?"

"Not very well, Robert, thank you.  I - my head aches, and I'm afraid
I shall not be able to get up for chapel.  Will the Master be very
angry?"

"Well, he ~might~ be, you see, sir," replied Mr. Filcher, who never
lost an opportunity of making anything out of his master's
infirmities; "but if you'll leave it to me, sir, I'll make it all
right for you, ~I~ will.  Of course you'd like to take out an
~aeger~, sir; and I can bring you your Commons just the same.  Will
that do, sir?".

"Oh, thank you; yes, any thing.  You will find five shillings in my
waistcoat-pocket, Robert; please to take it; but I can't eat."

"Thank'ee, sir," said the scout, as he abstracted the five shillings;
"but you'd better have a bit of somethin', sir; - a cup of strong
tea, or somethin'.  Mr. Smalls, sir, when he were pleasant, he always
had beer, sir; but p'raps you ain't been used to bein' pleasant, sir,
and slops might suit you better, sir."

"Oh, any thing, any thing!" groaned our poor, unheroic hero, as he
turned his face to the wall, and endeavoured to recollect in what way
he had been "pleasant" the night before.  But, alas! the wells of his
memory had, for the time, been poisoned, and nothing clear or pure
could be drawn therefrom.  So he got up and looked at himself in the
glass, and scarcely recognized the tangled-haired, sallow-faced
wretch, whose bloodshot eyes gazed heavily at him from the mirror.
So he nervously drained the water-bottle, and buried himself once
more among the tossed and tumbled bed-clothes.

The tea really did him some good, and enabled him to recover
sufficient nerve to go feebly through the operation of dressing;
though it was lucky that nature had not yet brought Mr. Verdant Green
to the necessity of shaving, for the handling of a razor might have
been attended with suicidal results, and have brought these veracious
memoirs and their hero to an untimely end.

He had just sat down to a second edition of tea, and was reading a
letter that the post had brought him from his sister Mary, in which
she said, "I dare say by this time you have found Mr. Charles Larkyns
a very ~delightful~ companion, and I ~am sure~ a very ~valuable~ one;
as, from what the rector says, he appears to be so ~steady~, and has
such ~nice quiet~ companions:" - our hero had read as far as this,
when a great noise just without his door, caused the letter to drop
from his trembling hands; and, between loud ~fanfares~ from a
post-horn, and heavy thumps upon the oak, a voice was heard,
demanding "Entrance in the Proctor's name."


[80 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

Mr. Verdant Green had for the first time "sported his oak."  Under
any circumstances it would have been a mere form, since his bashful
politeness would have induced him to open it to any comer; but, at
the dreaded name of the Proctor, he sprang from his chair, and while
impositions, rustications, and expulsions rushed tumultuously through
his disordered brain, he nervously undid the springlock, and admitted
- not the Proctor, but the "steady" Mr. Charles Larkyns and his "nice
quiet companion," little Mr. Bouncer, who testified his joy at the
success of their ~coup d'etat~, by blowing on his horn loud blasts
that might have been borne by Fontarabian echoes, and which rang
through poor Verdant's head with indescribable jarrings.

"Well, Verdant," said Charles Larkyns, "how do you find yourself this
morning? You look rather shaky."

"He ain't a very lively picter, is he?" remarked little Mr. Bouncer,
with the air of a connoisseur; "peakyish you feel, don't you, now,
with a touch of the mulligrubs in your collywobbles?  Ah, I know what
it is, my boy."

It was more than our hero did; and he could only reply that he did
not feel very well.  "I - I had a glass of claret after some
lobster-salad, and I think it disagreed with me."

"Not a doubt of it, Verdant," said Charles Larkyns very gravely; "it
would have precisely the same effect that the salmon always has at a
public dinner, - bring on great hilarity, succeeded by a pleasing
delirium, and concluding in a horizontal position, and a demand for
soda-water."

"I hope," said our hero, rather faintly, "that I did not conduct
myself in an unbecoming manner last night; for I am sorry to say that
I do not remember all that occurred."

"I should think not, Giglamps, You were as drunk as a besom," said
little Mr. Bouncer, with a side wink to Mr. Larkyns, to prepare that
gentleman for what was to follow.  "Why, you got on pretty well till
old Slowcoach came in, and then you certainly did go it, and no
mistake!"

"Mr. Slowcoach!" groaned the freshman.  "Good gracious! is it
possible that ~he~ saw me? I don't remember it."

"And it would be lucky for you if ~he~ didn't," replied Mr, Bouncer.
"Why his rooms, you know, are in the same angle of the quad as
Smalls'; so, when you came to shy the empty bottles out of Smalls'
window at ~his~ window -"

"Shy empty bottles! Oh!" gasped the freshman.

"Why, of course, you see, he couldn't stand that sort of game, - it
wasn't to be expected; so he puts his head out of the bedroom window,
- and then, don't you remember crying out, as you pointed to the
tassel of his night-cap sticking up straight


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     81]

on end, 'Tally-ho! Unearth'd at last! Look at his brush!' Don't you
remember that, Giglamps?"

"Oh, oh, no!" groaned Mr. Bouncer's victim; "I can't remember, - oh,
what ~could~ have induced me!"

"By Jove, you ~must~ have been screwed!  Then I daresay you don't
remember wanting to have a polka with him, when he came up to Smalls'
rooms?"

"A polka! Oh dear! Oh no! Oh!"

"Or asking him if his mother knew he was out, - and what he'd take for
his cap without the tassel; and telling him that he was the joy of
your heart, - and that you should never be happy unless he'd smile as
he was won't to smile, and would love you then as now, - and saying all
sorts of bosh?  What, not remember it!  'Oh, what a noble mind is
here o'erthrown!' as some cove says in Shakespeare.  But how screwed
you ~must~ have been, Giglamps!"

"And do you think," inquired our hero, after a short but sufficiently
painful reflection, - "do you think that Mr. Slowcoach will - oh! -
expel me?"

"Why, it's rather a shave for it," replied his tormentor; "but the
best thing you can do is to write an apology at once: pitch it pretty
strong in the pathetic line, - say it's your first offence, and that
you'll never be a naughty boy again, and all that sort of thing.  You
just do that, Giglamps, and I'll see that the note goes to - the
proper place."

"Oh, thank you!" said the freshman; and while, with equal difficulty
from agitation both of mind and body, he composed and penned the
note, Mr. Bouncer ordered up some buttery <VG081.JPG> beer, and
Charles Larkyns prepared some soda-water with a dash of brandy, which
he gave Verdant to drink, and which considerably refreshed that
gentleman.  "And I should advise you," he said, "to go out for a
constitutional; for walking-time's come, although you have but just
done your breakfast.  A blow up Headington Hill will do you good, and
set you on your legs again."

So Verdant, after delivering up his note to Mr. Bouncer, took his
friend's advice, and set out for his constitutional in his cap and
gown, feeling afraid to move without them, lest he


[82 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

should thereby trespass some law.  This, of course, gained him some
attention after he had crossed Magdalen Bridge; and he might have
almost been taken for the original of that impossible gownsman who
appears in Turner's well-known "View of Oxford, from Ferry Hincksey,"
as wandering-

                        "Remote, unfriended, solitary, ~slow,~" -

in a corn-field, in the company of an umbrella!
Among the many pedestrians and equestrians that he encountered, our
freshman espied a short and very stout gentleman, whose shovel-hat,
short apron, and general decanical costume, proclaimed him to be a
don of some importance.  <VG082.JPG>

He was riding a pad-nag, who ambled placidly along, without so much
as hinting at an outbreak into a canter; a performance that, as it
seemed, might have been attended with disastrous consequences to his
rider.  Our hero noticed, that the trio of undergraduates who were
walking before him, while they passed others, who were evidently
dons, without the slightest notice (being in mufti), yet not only
raised their hats to the stout gentleman, but also separated for that
purpose, and performed the salute at intervals of about ten yards.
And he further remarked, that while the stout gentleman appeared to
be exceedingly gratified at the notice he received, yet that he had
also very great difficulty in returning the rapid salutations; and
only accomplished them and retained his seat by catching at the
pommel of his saddle, or the mane of his steed, - a proceeding which
the pad-nag seemed perfectly used to.

Mr. Verdant Green returned home from his walk, feeling all the better
for the fresh air and change of scene; but he still


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     83]

looked, as his neighbour, Mr. Bouncer, kindly informed him, "uncommon
seedy, and doosid fishy about the eyes;" and it was some days even
before he had quite recovered from the novel excitement of Mr.
Smalls' "quiet party."


                                        CHAPTER IX.

        MR. VERDANT GREEN ATTENDS LECTURES AND, IN DESPITE OF
        SERMONS, HAS DEALINGS WITH FILTHY LUCRE.

OUR freshman, like all other freshmen, now began to think seriously
of work, and plunged desperately into all the lectures that it was
possible for him to attend, beginning every course with a zealousness
that shewed him to be filled with the idea that such a plan was
eminently necessary for the attainment of his degree; in all this in
every respect deserving the Humane Society's medal for his brave
plunge into the depths of the Pierian spring, to fish up the beauties
that had been immersed therein by the poets of old.  When we say that
our freshman, like other freshmen, "began" this course, we use the
verb advisedly; for, like many other freshmen who start with a burst
in learning's race, he soon got winded, and fell back among the ruck.
 But the course of lectures, like the course of true love, will not
always run smooth, even to those who undertake it with the same
courage as Mr. Verdant Green.

The dryness of the daily routine of lectures, which varied about as
much as the steak-and-chop, chop-and-steak dinners of ancient
taverns, was occasionally relieved by episodes, which, though not
witty in themselves, were yet the cause of wit in others; for it
takes but little to cause amusement in a lecture-room, where a bad
construe; or the imaginative excuses of late-comers; or the confusion
of some young gentleman who has to turn over the leaf of his Greek
play and finds it uncut; or the pounding of the same gentleman in the
middle of the first chorus; or his offensive extrication therefrom
through the medium of some Cumberland barbarian; or the officiousness
of the same barbarian to pursue the lecture when every one else has,
with singular unanimity, "read no further;" - all these circumstances,
although perhaps dull enough in themselves, are nevertheless
productive of some mirth in a lecture-room.

But if there were often late-comers to the lectures, there were
occasionally early-goers from them.  Had Mr. Four-in-hand Fosbrooke
an engagement to ride his horse ~Tearaway~ in the amateur
steeple-chase, and was he constrained, by circumstances over which
(as he protested) he had no control, to put


[84 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

in a regular appearance at Mr. Slowcoach's lectures, what was it
necessary for him to do more than to come to lecture in a long
greatcoat, put his handkerchief to his face as though his nose were
bleeding, look appealingly at Mr. Slowcoach, and, as he made his
exit, pull aside the long greatcoat, and display to his admiring
colleagues the snowy cords and tops that would soon be pressing
against ~Tearaway's~ sides, that gallant animal being then in
waiting, with its trusty groom, in the alley at the back of
Brazenface?  And if little Mr. Bouncer, for astute <VG084.JPG>
reasons of his own, wished Mr. Slowcoach to believe that he (Mr. B.)
was particularly struck with his (Mr. S.'s) remarks on the force of
{kata} in composition, what was to prevent Mr. Bouncer from feigning
to make a note of these remarks by the aid of a cigar instead of an
ordinary pencil?

But besides the regular lectures of Mr. Slowcoach, our hero had also
the privilege of attending those of the Rev. Richard Harmony.  Much
learning, though it had not made Mr. Harmony mad, had, at least in
conjunction with his natural tendencies, contributed to make him
extremely eccentric; while to much perusal of Greek and Hebrew MSS.,
he probably owed his defective vision.  These infirmities, instead of
being regarded with sympathy, as wounds received by Mr. Harmony in
the classical engagements in the various fields of literature, were,
to Mr. Verdant Green's surprise, much imposed upon;


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     85]

for it was a favourite pastime with the gentlemen who attended Mr.
Harmony's lectures, to gradually raise up the lecture-table by a
concerted action, and when Mr. Harmony's book had nearly reached to
the level of his nose, to then suddenly drop the table to its
original level; upon which Mr. Harmony, to the immense gratification
of all concerned, would rub his eyes, wipe his glasses, and murmur,
"Dear me! dear me! how my head swims this morning!"  And then he
would perhaps ring <VG085.JPG> for his servant, and order his usual
remedy, an orange, at which he would suck abstractedly, nor discover
any difference in the flavour even when a lemon was surreptitiously
substituted.  And thus he would go on through the lecture, sucking
his orange (or lemon), explaining and expounding in the most skilful
and lucid manner, and yet, as far as the "table-movement" was
concerned, as unsuspecting and as witless as a little child.

Mr. Verdant Green not only (at first) attended lectures with
exemplary diligence and regularity, but he also duly went to morning
and evening chapel; nor, when Sundays came, did he neglect to turn
his feet towards St. Mary's to hear the University sermons.  Their
effect was as striking to him as it probably is to most persons who
have only been accustomed to the usual services of country churches.
First, there was the peculiar character of the congregation: down
below, the vice-chancellor in his throne, overlooking the other dons
in


[86 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

their stalls (being "a complete realization of stalled Oxon!" as
Charles Larkyns whispered to our hero), who were relieved in colour
by their crimson or scarlet hoods; and then, "upstairs," in the north
and the great west galleries, the black <VG086.JPG> mass of
undergraduates; while a few ladies' bonnets and heads of male
visitors peeped from the pews in the aisles, or looked out from the
curtains of the organ-gallery, where, "by the kind permission of Dr.
Elvey," they were accommodated with seats, and watched with wonder,
while

                        "The wild wizard's fingers,
                        With magical skill,
                        Made music that lingers,
                        In memory still."

Then there was the bidding-prayer, in which Mr. Verdant Green was
somewhat astonished to hear the long list of founders


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     87]

and benefactors, "such as were, Philip Pluckton, Bishop of Iffley;
King Edward the Seventh; Stephen de Henley, Earl of Bagley, and Maud
his wife; Nuneham Courtney, knight," with a long et-cetera; though,
as the preacher happened to be a Brazenface man, our hero found that
he was "most chiefly bound to praise Clement Abingdon, Bishop of
Jericho, and founder of the college of Brazenface; Richard Glover,
Duke of Woodstock; Giles Peckwater, Abbot of Beney; and Binsey
Green, Doctor of Music; - benefactors of the same."

Then there was the sermon itself; the abstrusely learned and
classical character of which, at first, also astonished him, after
having been so long used to the plain and highly practical advice
which the rector, Mr. Larkyns, knew how to convey so well and so
simply to his rustic hearers.  But as soon as he had reflected on the
very different characters of the two congregations, Mr. Verdant Green
at once recognized the appropriateness of each class of sermons to
its peculiar hearers; yet he could not altogether drive away the
thought, how the generality of those who had on previous Sundays been
his fellow-worshippers would open their blue Saxon eyes, and ransack
their rustic brains, as to "what ~could~ ha' come to rector," if he
were to indulge in Greek and Latin quotations, - ~somewhat~ after the
following style. "And though this interpretation may in these days be
disputed, yet we shall find that it was once very generally received.
 For the learned St. Chrysostom is very clear on this point, where he
says, 'Arma virumque cano, rusticus expectat, sub tegmine fagi'; of
which the words of Irenaeus are a confirmation -
{otototoio, papaperax, poluphloisboio thalassaes}."
Our hero, indeed, could not but help wondering what the fairer portion
of the congregation made of these parts of the sermons, to whom,
probably, the sentences just quoted would have sounded as full of
meaning as those they really heard.

*       *       *       *       *       *       *       *

"Hallo, Giglamps!" said the cheery voice of little Mr. Bouncer, as
he looked one morning into Verdant's rooms, followed by his two
bull-terriers; "why don't you sport something in the dog line?
Something in the bloodhound or tarrier way.  Ain't you fond o' dogs?"

"Oh, very!" replied our hero.  "I once had a very nice one, - a King
Charles."

"Oh!" observed Mr. Bouncer, "one of them beggars that you have to
feed with spring chickens, and get up with curling tongs.  Ah!
they're all very well in their way, and do for women and
carriage-exercise; but give ~me~ this sort of thing!" and Mr. Bouncer
patted one of his villainous looking pets, who


[88 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

wagged his corkscrew tail in reply.  "Now, these are beauties, and no
mistake! What you call useful and ornamental; ain't you, Buzzy? The
beggars are brothers; so I call them Huz and Buz:- Huz his
first-born, you know, and Buz his brother."

"I should like a dog," said Verdant; "but where could I keep one?"

"Oh, anywhere!" replied Mr. Bouncer confidently.  "I keep these
beggars in the little shop for coal, just outside the door.  It ain't
the law, I know; but what's the odds as long as they're happy?
~They~ think it no end of a lark.  I once had a Newfunland, and tried
~him~ there; but the obstinate brute considered it too small for him,
and barked himself in such an unnatural manner, that at last he'd got
no wool on the top of his head, - just the place where the wool ought
to grow, you know; so I swopped the beggar to a Skimmery* man for a
regular slap-up set of pets of the ballet, framed and glazed,
petticoats and all, mind you.  But about your dog, Giglamps: -that
cupboard there would be just the ticket; you could put him under the
wine-bottles, and then there'd be wine above and whine below.
~Videsne puer~?  D'ye twig, young 'un?  But if you're squeamish about
that, there are heaps of places in the town where you could keep a
beast."

So, when our hero had been persuaded that the possession of an animal
of the terrier species was absolutely necessary to a University man's
existence, he had not to look about long without having the void
filled up.  Money will in most places procure any thing, from a grant
of arms to a pair of wooden legs; so it is not surprising if, in
Oxford, such an every-day commodity as a dog can be obtained through
the medium of "filthy lucre;" for there was a well-known dog-fancier
and proprietor, whose surname was that of the rich substantive just
mentioned, to which had been prefixed the "filthy" adjective,
probably for the sake of euphony.  As usual, Filthy Lucre was
clumping with his lame leg up and down the pavement just in front of
the Brazenface gate, accompanied by his last "new and extensive
assortment" of terriers of every variety, which he now pulled up for
the inspection of Mr. Verdant Green.

"Is it a long-aird dawg, or a smooth 'un, as you'd most fancy?"
inquired Mr. Lucre. "Har, sir!" he continued, in a flattering tone, as
he saw our hero's eye dwelling on a Skye terrier; "I see you're a
gent as ~does~ know a good style of dawg, when you see 'un! It ain't
often as you see a Skye sich as that, sir! Look at his colour, sir,
and the way he looks out of his 'air! He answers to the name of
~Mop~, sir, in

---
* Oxford slang for "St. Mary's Hall."
-=-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     89]

consekvence of the length of his 'air; and he's cheap as dirt, sir,
at four-ten! It's a throwin' of him away at the price; and I
shouldn't do it, but I've got more dawgs than I've room for; so I'm
obligated to make a sacrifice.  Four-ten, sir! 'Ad the distemper, and
everythink, and a reg'lar good 'un for the varmin."

His merits also being testified to by Mr. Larkyns and Mr. Bouncer
(who was considered a high authority in canine <VG089.JPG> matters),
and Verdant also liking the quaint appearance of the dog, ~Mop~
eventually became his property, for "four-ten" ~minus~ five
shillings, but ~plus~ a pint of buttery beer, which Mr. Lucre always
pronounced to be customary "in all dealins whatsumever atween
gentlemen." Verdant was highly gratified at possessing a real
University dog, and he patted ~Mop~, and said, "Poo dog! poo Mop! poo
fellow then!" and thought what a pet his sisters would make of him
when he took him back home with him for the holi - the Vacation!

~Mop~ was for following Mr. Lucre, who had clumped away up the
street; and his new master had some difficulty in keeping him at his
heels.  By Mr. Bouncer's advice, he at once took him over the river
to the field opposite the Christ Church


[90 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

meadows, in order to test his rat-killing powers.  How this could be
done out in the open country, our hero was at a loss to know; but he
discreetly held his tongue, for he was gradually becoming aware that
a freshman in Oxford must live to learn, and that, as with most men,
~experientia docet~.

They had just been punted over the river, and ~Mop~ had been restored
to ~terra firma~, when Mr. Bouncer's remark of  "There's the cove
that'll do the trick for you!" directed Verdant's <VG090.JPG>
attention to an individual, who, from his general appearance, might
have been first cousin to "Filthy Lucre," only that his live stock
was of a different description.  Slung from his shoulders was a large
but shallow wire cage, in which were about a dozen doomed rats, whose
futile endeavours to make their escape by running up the sides of
their prison were regarded with the most intense earnestness by a
group of terriers, who gave way to various phases of excitement.  In
his hand he carried a small circular cage, containing two or three
rats for immediate use.  On the receipt of sixpence, one of these was
liberated; and a few yards start being (sportsmanlike) allowed, the
speculator's terrier was then let loose, joined gratuitously, after a
short interval, by a perfect pack in full cry, with a human chorus of
"Hoo rat! Too loo! loo dog!"  The rat turned, twisted, doubled,
became confused,


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     91]

was overtaken, and, with one grip and a shake, was dead; while the
excited pack returned to watch and jump at the wire cages until
another doomed prisoner was tossed forth to them.  Gentlemen on their
way for a walk were thus enabled to wile away a few minutes at the
noble sport, and indulge themselves and their dogs with a little
healthy excitement; while the boating costume of other gentlemen
shewed that they had for a while left aquatic pursuits, and had
strolled up from the river to indulge in "the sports of the fancy."

Although his new master invested several sixpences on ~Mop's~ behalf,
yet that ungrateful animal, being of a passive temperament of mind as
regarded rats, and a slow movement of body, in consequence of his
long hair impeding his progress, rather disgraced himself by allowing
the sport to be taken from his very teeth.  But he still further
disgraced himself, when he had been taken back to Brazenface, by
howling all through the night in the cupboard where he had been
placed, thereby setting on Mr. Bouncer's two bull-terriers, Huz and
Buz, to echo the sounds with redoubled fury from their coal-hole
quarters; thus causing loss of sleep and a great outlay of Saxon
expletives to all the dwellers on the staircase.  It was in vain that
our hero got out of bed and opened the cupboard-door, and said, "Poo
Mop! good dog, then!" it was in vain that Mr. Bouncer shied boots at
the coal-hole, and threatened Huz and Buz with loss of life; it was
in vain that the tenant of the attic, Mr. Sloe, who was a
reading-man, and sat up half the night, working for his degree, - it
was in vain that he opened his door, and mildly declared (over the
banisters), that it was impossible to get up Aristotle while such a
noise was being made; it was in vain that Mr. Four-in-hand Fosbrooke,
whose rooms were on the other side of Verdant's, came and
administered to ~Mop~ severe punishment with a tandem-whip (it was a
favourite boast with Mr. Fosbrooke, that he could flick a fly from
his leader's ear); it was in vain to coax ~Mop~ with chicken-bones:
he would neither be bribed nor frightened, and after a deceitful lull
of a few minutes, just when every one was getting to sleep again, his
melancholy howl would be raised with renewed vigour, and Huz and Buz
would join for sympathy.

"I tell you what, Giglamps," said Mr. Bouncer the next morning;
"this game'll never do.  Bark's a very good thing to take in its
proper way, when you're in want of it, and get it with port wine; but
when you get it by itself and in too large doses, it ain't pleasant,
you know.  Huz and Buz are quiet enough, as long as they're let
alone; and I should advise you to keep ~Mop~ down at Spavin's
stables, or somewhere.  But first, just let me give the brute the
hiding he deserves."


[92 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

Poor ~Mop~ underwent his punishment like a martyr; and in the course
of the day an arrangement was made with Mr. Spavin for ~Mop's~ board
and lodging at his stables.  But when Verdant called there the next
day, for the purpose of taking him for a walk, there was no ~Mop~ to
be found; taking advantage of the carelessness of one of Mr. Spavin's
men, he had bolted through the open door, and made his escape.  Mr.
Bouncer, at a subsequent period, declared that he met ~Mop~ in the
company of a well-known Regent-street fancier; but, however that may
be, ~Mop~ was lost to Mr. Verdant Green.


                                        CHAPTER X.

               MR. VERDANT GREEN REFORMS HIS TAILORS' BILLS AND RUNS
                UP OTHERS. HE ALSO APPEARS IN A RAPID ACT OF
                HORSEMANSHIP, AND FINDS ISIS COOL IN SUMMER.

THE state of Mr. Verdant Green's outward man had long offended Mr.
Charles Larkyns' more civilized taste; and he one day took occasion
delicately to hint to his friend, that it would conduce more to his
appearance as an Oxford undergraduate, if he forswore the primitive
garments that his country-tailor had condemned him to wear, and
adapted the "build" of his dress to the peculiar requirements of
university fashion.

Acting upon this friendly hint, our freshman at once betook himself
to the shop where he had bought his cap and gown, and found its
proprietor making use of the invisible soap and washing his hands in
the imperceptible water, as though he had not left that act of
imaginary cleanliness since Verdant and his father had last seen him.

"Oh, certainly, sir; an abundant variety," was his reply to Verdant's
question, if he could show him any patterns that were fashionable in
Oxford.  "The greatest stock hout of London, I should say, sir,
decidedly.  This is a nice unpretending gentlemanly thing, sir, that
we make up a good deal!" and he spread a shaggy substance before the
freshman's eyes.

"What do you make it up for?" inquired our hero, who thought it more
nearly resembled the hide of his lamented ~Mop~ than any other
substance.

"Oh, morning garments, sir! Reading and walking-coats, for erudition
and the promenade, sir! Looks well with vest of the same material,
sprinkled down with coral currant buttons! We've some sweet things in
vests, sir; and some neat, quiet trouserings, that I'm sure would give
satisfaction."  And the tailor and robe-maker, between washings with
the invisible soap, so visibly "soaped" our hero in what is
understood to


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     93]

be the shop-sense of the word, and so surrounded him with a perfect
irradiation of aggressive patterns of oriental gorgeousness, that Mr.
Verdant Green <VG093.JPG> became bewildered, and finally made choice
of one of the unpretending gentlemanly ~mop~-like coats, and "vest
and trouserings," of a neat, quiet, plaid-pattern, in red and green,
which, he was informed, were all the rage.

When these had been sent home to him, together with a neck-tie of
Oxford-blue from Randall's, and an immaculate guinea
Lincoln-and-Bennett, our hero was delighted with the general effect
of the costume; and after calling in at the tailor's to express his
approbation, he at once sallied forth to "do the High," and display
his new purchases.  A drawn silk bonnet of pale lavender, from which
floated some bewitching ringlets, quickly attracted our hero's
attention; and the sight of an arch, French-looking face, which (to
his short-sighted imagination) smiled upon him as the young lady
rustled by, immediately plunged him into the depths of first-love.
Without the slightest encouragement being given him, he stalked this
little deer to her lair, and, after some difficulty, discovered the
enchantress to be Mademoiselle Mouslin de Laine, one of the presiding
goddesses of a fancy hosiery warehouse. There, for the next fortnight,
- until which immense period his ardent passion had not subsided, -
our hero was daily to be seen purchasing articles for which he had no
earthly use, but fully recompensed for his outlay by the artless
(ill-natured people said, artful) smiles, and engaging, piquant
conversation of mademoiselle.  Our hero, when reminded of this at a
subsequent period, protested that he had thus acted merely to improve
his French, and only conversed with mademoiselle for educational
purposes.  But we have our doubts.  ~Credat Judaeus!~

About this time also our hero laid the nest-eggs for a very pro-


[94 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

mising brood of bills, by acquiring an expensive habit of strolling
in to shops, and purchasing "an extensive assortment of articles of
<VG094.JPG> every description," for no other consideration than that
he should not be called upon to pay for them until he had taken his
degree.  He also decorated the walls of his rooms with choice
specimens of engravings: for the turning over of portfolios at
Ryman's, and Wyatt's, usually leads to the eventual turning over of a
considerable amount of cash; and our hero had not yet become
acquainted with the cheaper circulating-system of pictures, which
gives you a fresh set every term, and passes on your old ones to some
other subscriber.  But, in the meantime, it is very delightful, when
you admire any thing, to be able to say, "Send that to my room!" and
to be obsequiously obeyed, "no questions asked," and no payment
demanded; and as for the future, why - as Mr. Larkyns observed, as
they strolled down the High - "I suppose the bills ~will~ come in
some day or other, but the governor will see to them; and though he
may grumble and pull a long face, yet he'll only be too glad you've
got your degree, and, in the fulness of his heart, he will open his
cheque-book.  I daresay old Horace gives very good advice when he
says, 'carpe diem'; but when he adds, 'quam minimum credula
postero,'* about 'not giving the least credit to the succeeding day,'
it is clear that he never looked forward to the Oxford tradesmen and
the credit-system.  Do you ever read Wordsworth, Verdant?" continued
Mr. Larkyns, as they stopped at the corner of Oriel Street, to look
in at a spacious range of shop-windows, that were crowded with a
costly and glittering profusion of ~papier mache~ articles,
statuettes, bronzes, glass, and every kind of "fancy goods" that
could be classed as "art-workmanship."

"Why, I've not read much of Wordsworth myself," replied

---
* Car. i. od. xi.
-=-


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     95]

our hero; "but I've heard my sister Mary read a great deal of his
poetry."

"Shews her taste," said Charles Larkyns.  "Well, this shop - you see
the name - is Spiers'; and Wordsworth, in his sonnet to Oxford, has
immortalized him.  Don't you remember the lines?-

                'O ye Spiers of Oxford! your presence overpowers
                The soberness of reason!'*

It was very queer that Wordsworth should ascribe to Messrs. Spiers
all the intoxication of the place; but then he was a <VG095.JPG>
Cambridge man, and prejudiced.  Nice shop, though, isn't it?
Particularly useful, and no less ornamental.  It's one of the
greatest lounges of the place.  Let us go in and have a look at what
Mrs. Caudle calls the articles of bigotry and virtue."

Mr. Verdant Green was soon deeply engaged in an inspection of those
~papier-mache~ "remembrances of Oxford" for which the Messrs. Spiers
are so justly famed; but after turning over tables, trays, screens,
desks, albums, portfolios, and other things, - all of which displayed
views of Oxford from every variety of aspect, and were executed with
such truth and perception of the higher qualities of art, that they
formed in

---
* We suspect that Mr. Larkyns is again intentionally deceiving his
freshman friend; for on looking into our Wordsworth (~Misc. Son.~
iii. 2) we find that the poet does ~not~ refer to the establishment
of Messrs. Spiers and Son, and that the lines, truly quoted, are,

        "O ye ~spires~ of Oxford! domes and towers!
        Gardens and groves! Your presence," &c.
We blush for Mr. Larkyns!
-=-


[96 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

themselves quite a small but gratuitous Academy exhibition, - our hero
became so confused among the bewildering allurements around him, as
to feel quite an ~embarras de richesses~, and to be in a state of
mind in which he was nearly giving Mr. Spiers the most extensive (and
expensive) order which probably that gentleman had ever received from
an undergraduate.  Fortunately for his purse, his attention was
somewhat distracted by perceiving that Mr. Slowcoach was at his
elbow, looking over ink-stands and reading-lamps, and also by Charles
Larkyns calling upon him to decide whether he should have the
cigar-case he had purchased emblazoned with the heraldic device of
the Larkyns, or illuminated with the Euripidean motto,-

         {To bakchikon doraema labe, se gar philo.}

When this point had been decided, Mr. Larkyns proposed to Verdant
that he should astonish and delight his governor by having the Green
arms emblazoned on a fire-screen, and taking it home with him as a
gift.  "Or else," he said, "order one with the garden-view of
Brazenface, and then they'll have more satisfaction in looking at
that than at one of those offensive cockatoos, in an arabesque
landscape, under a bronze sky, which usually sprawls over every thing
that is ~papier mache~.  But you won't see that sort of thing here; so
you can't well go wrong, whatever you buy."  Finally, Mr. Verdant
Green (N.B. Mr. Green, senior, would have eventually to pay the bill)
ordered a fire-screen to be prepared with the family-arms, as a
present for his father; a ditto, with the view of his college, for
his mother; a writing-case, with the High Street view, for his aunt;
a netting-box, card-case, and a model of the Martyrs' Memorial, for
his three sisters; and having thus bountifully remembered his
family-circle, he treated himself with a modest paper-knife, and was
treated in return by Mr. Spiers with a perfect ~bijou~ of art, in the
shape of "a memorial for visitors to Oxford," in which the chief
glories of that city were set forth in gold and colours, in the most
attractive form, and which our hero immediately posted off to the
Manor Green.

"And now, Verdant," said Mr. Larkyns, "you may just as well get a
hack, and come for a ride with me.  You've kept up your riding, of
course."

"Oh, yes - a little!" faltered our hero.

Now, the reader may perhaps remember, that in an early part of our
veracious chronicle we hinted that Mr. Verdant Green's equestrian
performances were but of a humble character.  They were, in fact,
limited to an occasional ride with his sisters when they required a
cavalier; but on these occasions, the old cob, which Verdant called
his own, was warranted not


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     97]

to kick, or plunge, or start, or do anything derogatory to its age
and infirmities.  So that Charles Larkyns' proposition caused him
some little nervous agitation; nevertheless, as he was ashamed to
confess his fears, he, in a moment of weakness, consented to
accompany his friend.

"We'll go to Symonds'," said Mr. Larkyns; "I keep my hack there; and
you can depend upon having a good one."

So they made their way to Holywell Street, and turned under a
gateway, and up a paved yard, to the stables.  The upper part of the
yard was littered down with straw, and covered in by a light, open
roof; and in the stables there was accommodation for a hundred
horses.  At the back of the stables, and separated from the Wadham
Gardens by a narrow lane, was a paddock; and here they found Mr.
Fosbrooke, and one or two of his friends, inspecting the leaping
abilities of a fine hunter, which one of the stable-boys was taking
backwards and forwards over the hurdles and fences erected for that
purpose.

The horses were soon ready, and Verdant summoned up enough courage to
say, with the Count in ~Mazeppa~, "Bring forth the steed!" And when
the steed was brought, in all the exuberance of (literally) animal
spirits, he felt that he was about to be another Mazeppa, and perform
feats on the back of a wild horse; and he could not help saying to
the ostler, "He looks rather -vicious, I'm afraid!"

"Wicious, sir," replied the groom; "bless you, sir! she's as
sweet-tempered as any young ooman you ever paid your intentions to.
The mare's as quiet a mare as was ever crossed; this 'ere's ony her
play at comin' fresh out of the stable!"

Verdant, however, had a presentiment that the play would soon become
earnest; but he seated himself in the saddle (after a short delirious
dance on one toe), and in a state of extreme agitation, not to say
perspiration, proceeded at a walk, by Mr. Larkyns' side, up Holywell
Street.  Here the mare, who doubtless soon understood what sort of
rider she had got on her back, began to be more demonstrative of the
"fresh"ness of her animal spirits.  Broad Street was scarcely broad
enough to contain the series of ~tableaux vivants~ and heraldic
attitudes that she assumed.  "Don't pull the curb-rein so!" shouted
Charles Larkyns; but Verdant was in far too dreadful a state of mind
to understand what he said, or even to know which ~was~ the
curb-rein; and after convulsively clutching at the mane and the
pommel, in his endeavours to keep his seat, he first "lost his head,"
and then his seat, and ignominiously gliding over the mare's tail,
found that his lodging was on the cold ground.  Relieved of her
burden, the mare quietly trotted back to her stables; while Verdant,
finding himself unhurt, got up, replaced his hat and spectacles,


[98 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

and registered a mental vow never to mount an Oxford hack again.
"Never mind, old fellow!" said Charles Larkyns, <VG098.JPG>
consolingly; "these little accidents ~will~ occur, you know, even
with the best regulated riders! There were not ~more~ than a dozen
ladies saw you, though you certainly made very creditable exertions
to ride over one or two of them.  Well! if you say you won't go back
to Symonds', and get another hack, I must go on solus; but I shall
see you at the Bump-supper to-night!  I got old Blades to ask you to
it.  I'm going now in search of an appetite, and I should advise you
to take a turn round the Parks and do the same.  ~Au re~ser~voir!~"

So our hero, after he had compensated the livery-stable keeper,
followed his friend's advice, and strolled round the neatly-kept
potato-gardens denominated "the Parks," looking in vain for the deer
that have never been there, and finding them represented only by
nursery-maids and - others.

*        *        *        *        *        *        *        *

Mr. Blades, familiarly known as "old Blades" and "Billy," was a
gentleman who was fashioned somewhat after the model of the torso of
Hercules; and, as Stroke of the Brazenface boat, was held in high
estimation, not only by the men of his own college, but also by the
boating men of the University at large.  His University existence
seemed to be engaged in one long struggle, the end and aim of which
was to place the Brazenface boat in that envied position known in
aquatic anatomy as "the head of the river;" and in this struggle all
Mr. Blades' energies of mind and body, - though particularly of body, -
were engaged.  Not a freshman was allowed to enter Brazenface, but
immediately Mr. Blades' eye was upon him; and if the expansion of the
upper part of his coat and waistcoat denoted that his muscular
development of chest and arms was of a kind that might be serviceable
to the great object aforesaid - the placing


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     99]

of the Brazenface boat at the head of the river, - then Mr. Blades
came and made flattering proposals to the new-comer to assist in the
great work.  But he was also indefatigable, as secretary to his
college club, in seeking out all freshmen, even if their thews and
sinews were not muscular models, and inducing them to aid the
glorious cause by becoming members of the club.  A Bump-supper - that
is, O ye uninitiated! a supper to commemorate the fact of the boat of
one college <VG099.JPG> having, in the annual races, bumped, or
touched the boat of another college immediately in its front, thereby
gaining a place towards the head of the river, - a Bump-supper was a
famous opportunity for discovering both the rowing and paying
capabilities of freshmen, who, in the enthusiasm of the moment, would
put down their two or three guineas, and at once propose their names
to be enrolled as members at the next meeting of the club.

And thus it was with Mr. Verdant Green, who, before the evening was
over, found that he had not only given in his name ("proposed by
Charles Larkyns, Esq., seconded by Henry Bouncer, Esq."), but that a
desire was burning within his breast to distinguish himself in
aquatic pursuits. Scarcely any thing else was talked of during the
whole evening but the prospective chances of Brazenface bumping
Balliol and Brasenose, and thereby getting to the head of the river.
It was also mysteriously whispered, that Worcester and Christ Church
were doing well, and might prove formidable; and that Exeter, Lincoln,


[100 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

and Wadham were very shady, and not doing the things that were
expected of them.  Great excitement too was caused by the
announcement, that the Balliol stroke had knocked up, or knocked
down, or done some thing which Mr. Verdant Green concluded he ought
not to have done; and that the Brasenose bow had been seen with a
cigar in his mouth, and also eating pastry in Hall, -things shocking
in themselves, and quite contrary to all training principles.  Then
there were anticipations of Henley; and criticisms on the new eight
out-rigger <VG100.JPG> that Searle was laying down for the University
crew; and comparisons between somebody's stroke and somebody else's
spurt; and a good deal of reference to Clasper and Coombes, and
Newall and Pococke, who might have been heathen deities for all that
our hero knew, and from the manner in which they were mentioned.

The aquatic desires that were now burning in Mr. Verdant Green's
breast could only be put out by the water; so to the river he next
day went, and, by Charles Larkyns' advice, made his first essay in a
"tub" from Hall's.  Being a complete novice with the oars, our hero
had no sooner pulled off his coat and given a pull, than he
succeeded in catching a tremendous "crab," the effect of which was to
throw him backwards, and almost to upset the boat.  Fortunately,
however, "tubs" recover their equilibrium almost as easily as
tombolas, and "the Sylph" did not belie its character; so the
freshman again assumed a proper position, and was shoved off with a
boat-hook.  At first he made some hopeless splashes in the stream,
the only effect of which was to make the boat turn with a circular
movement towards Folly Bridge; but Charles Larkyns


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     101]

at once came to the rescue with the simple but energetic compendium
of boating instruction, "Put your oar in deep, and bring it out with
a jerk!"

Bearing this in mind, our hero's efforts met with well-merited
success; and he soon passed that mansion which, instead of cellars,
appears to have an ingenious system of small rivers to thoroughly
irrigate its foundations.  One by one, too, he passed those
house-boats which are more like the Noah's <VG101.JPG> arks of
toy-shops than anything else, and sometimes contain quite as original
a mixture of animal specimens.  Warming with his exertions, Mr.
Verdant Green passed the University barge in great style, just as the
eight was preparing to start; and though he was not able to "feather
his oars with skill and dexterity," like the jolly young waterman in
the song, yet his sleight-of-hand performances with them proved not
only a source of great satisfaction to the crews on the river, but
also to the promenaders on the shore.

He had left the Christ Church meadows far behind, and was beginning
to feel slightly exhausted by his unwonted exertions, when he reached
that bewildering part of the river termed "the Gut."  So confusing
were the intestine commotions of this gut, that, after passing a
chequered existence as an aquatic shuttlecock, and being assailed
with a slang-dictionary-full of opprobrious epithets, Mr. Verdant
Green caught another


[102 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

tremendous crab, and before he could recover himself, the "tub"
received a shock, and, with a loud cry of "Boat ahead!" ringing in
his ears, the University Eight passed over the place where he and
"the Sylph" had so lately disported themselves.

With the wind nearly knocked out of his body by the blade of the
bow-oar striking him on the chest as he rose to the surface, our
unfortunate hero was immediately dragged from the water, in a
condition like that of the child in ~The Stranger~ (the only joke, by
the way, in that most dreary play) "not dead, but very wet!" and
forthwith placed in safety in his deliverer's boat.

"Hallo, Giglamps! who the doose had thought of seeing you here,
devouring Isis in this expensive way!" said a voice very coolly.  And
our hero found that he had been rescued by little Mr. Bouncer, who
had been tacking up the river in company with Huz and Buz and his
meerschaum. "You ~have~ been and gone and done it now, young man!"
continued the vivacious little gentleman, as he surveyed our hero's
draggled and forlorn condition.  "If you'd only a comb and a glass in
your hand, you'd look distressingly like a cross-breed with a
mermaid! You ain't subject to the whatdyecallems - the rheumatics,
are you? Because, if so, I could put you on shore at a tidy little
shop where you can get a glass of brandy-and-water, and have your
clothes dried; and then mamma won't scold."

"Indeed," chattered our hero, "I shall be very glad indeed; for I
feel - rather cold. But what am I to do with my boat?"

"Oh, the Lively Polly, or whatever her name is, will find her way
back safe enough.  There are plenty of boatmen on the river who'll
see to her and take her back to her owner; and if you got her from
Hall's, I daresay she'll dream that she's dreamt in marble halls,
like you did, Giglamps, that night at Smalls', when you got wet in
rather a more lively style than you've done to-day.  Now I'll tack
you up to that little shop I told you of."

So there our hero was put on shore, and Mr. Bouncer made fast his
boat and accompanied him; and did not leave him until he had seen him
between the blankets, drinking a glass of hot brandy-and-water, the
while his clothes were smoking before the fire.

This little adventure (for a time at least) checked Mr. Verdant
Green's aspirations to distinguish himself on the river; and he
therefore renounced the sweets of the Isis, and contented himself by
practising with a punt on the Cherwell.  There, after repeatedly
overbalancing himself in the most suicidal manner, he at length
peacefully settled down into the lounging blissfulness of a "Cherwell
water-lily;" and on the hot days,


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     103]

among those gentlemen who had moored their punts underneath the
overhanging boughs of the willows and limes, and <VG103.JPG> beneath
their cool shade were lying, in ~dolce far niente~ fashion, with
their legs up and a weed in their mouth, reading the last new novel,
or some less immaculate work, - among these gentlemen might haply have
been discerned the form and spectacles of Mr. Verdant Green.


                                        CHAPTER XI.

                        MR. VERDANT GREEN'S SPORTS AND PASTIMES.

ARCHERY was all the fashion at Brazenface.  They had as fine a lawn
for it as the Trinity men had; and all day long there was somebody to
be seen making holes in the targets, and endeavouring to realize the
~pose~ of the Apollo Belvidere; - rather a difficult thing to do,
when you come to wear plaid trousers and shaggy coats.  As Mr.
Verdant Green felt desirous not only to uphold all the institutions
of the University, but also to make himself acquainted with the
sports and pastimes of the place, he forthwith joined the Archery and
Cricket Clubs.  He at once inspected the manufactures of Muir and
Buchanan; and after selecting from their stores a fancy-wood bow,
with arrows, belt, quiver, guard, tips, tassels, and grease-pot, he
felt himself to be duly prepared to


[104 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

represent the Toxophilite character.  But the sustaining it was a
more difficult thing than he had conceived; for although he thought
that it would be next to impossible to miss a shot <VG104-1.JPG> when
the target was so large, and the arrow went so easily from the bow,
yet our hero soon discovered that even in the first steps of archery
there was something to be learnt, and that the mere stringing of his
bow was a performance attended with considerable difficulty.  It was
always slipping from his instep, or twisting the wrong way, or
threatening to snap in sunder, or refusing to allow his fingers to
slip the knot, or doing something that was dreadfully uncomfortable,
<VG104-2.JPG> and productive of perspiration; and two or three times
he was reduced to the abject necessity of asking his friends to
string his bow for him.

But when he had mastered this slight difficulty, he found that the
arrows (to use Mr. Bouncer's phrase) "wobbled," and had a
predilection for going anywhere but into the target, notwithstanding
its size; and unfortunately one went into the body of the Honourable
Mr. Stormer's favourite Skye terrier, though, thanks to its shaggy
coat and the bluntness of the arrow, it did not do a great amount of
mischief; nevertheless, the vials of Mr. Stormer's


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     105]

wrath were outpoured upon Mr. Verdant Green's head; and <VG105-1.JPG>
such ~epea pteroenta~ followed the winged arrow, that our hero became
alarmed, and for the time forswore archery practice.

As he had fully equipped himself for archery, so also Mr. Verdant
Green, (on the authority of Mr. Bouncer) got himself up for cricket
regardless of expense; and he made his first appearance in the field
in a straw hat with blue ribbon, and "flannels," and spiked shoes of
perfect propriety.  As Mr. Bouncer had told him that, in cricket,
attitude was every thing, Verdant, <VG105-2.JPG> as soon as he went in
for his innings, took up what he considered to be a very good
position at the wicket.  Little Mr. Bouncer, who was bowling,
delivered the ball with a swiftness that seemed rather astonishing in
such a small gentleman.  The first ball was "wide;" nevertheless,
Verdant (after it had passed) struck at it, raising his bat high in
the air, and bringing it straight down to the ground as though it
were an executioner's axe.  The second ball was nearer to the mark;
but it came in with such swiftness, that, as Mr. Verdant Green was


[106 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

quite new to round bowling, it was rather too quick for him, and hit
him severely on the -, well, never mind, - on the trousers.
<VG106.JPG>

"Hallo, Giglamps!" shouted the delighted Mr. Bouncer, "nothing like
backing up; but it's no use assuming a stern appearance; you'll get
your hand in soon, old feller!"

But Verdant found that before he could get his hand in, the ball was
got into his wicket; and that while he was preparing for the strike,
the ball shot by; and, as Mr. Stumps, the wicket-keeper, kindly
informed him, "there was a row in his timber-yard."  Thus Verdant's
score was always on the ~lucus a non lucendo~ principle of
derivation, for not even to a quarter of a score did it ever reach;
and he felt that he should never rival a Mynn or be a Parr with
anyone of the "All England" players.

Besides these out-of-door sports, our hero also devoted a good deal
of his time to acquiring in-door games, being quickly initiated into
the mysteries of billiards, and plunging headlong into pool.  It was
in the billiard-room that Verdant first formed his acquaintance with
Mr. Fluke of Christ Church, well known to be the best player in the
University, and who, if report spoke truly, always made his five
hundred a year by his skill in the game.  Mr. Fluke kindly put our
hero "into the way to become a player;" and Verdant soon found the
apprenticeship was attended with rather heavy fees.

At the wine-parties also that he attended he became rather a greater
adept at cards than he had formerly been.  "Van John" was the
favourite game; and he was not long in discovering that [s]taking
shillings and half-crowns, instead of counters and "fish," and going
odds on the colours, and losing five pounds before he was aware of
it, was a very different thing to playing ~vingt-et-un~ at home with
his sisters for "love" -


[AN OXFORD FRESHMAN     107]

(though perhaps cards afford the only way in which young ladies at
twenty-one will ~play~ for love).

In returning to Brazenface late from these parties, our hero was
sometimes frightfully alarmed by suddenly finding himself face to
face with a dreadful apparition, to which, by constant familiarity,
he gradually became accustomed, and learned to look upon as the
proctor with his marshal and bulldogs.  At first, too, he was on such
occasions greatly alarmed <VG107.JPG> at finding the gates of
Brazenface closed, obliging him thereby to "knock-in;" and not only
did he apologize to the porter for troubling him to open the wicket,
but he also volunteered elaborate explanations of the reasons that
had kept him out after time, - explanations that were not received in
the spirit with which they were tendered.  When our freshman became
aware of the mysteries of a gate-bill, he felt more at his ease.  Mr.
Verdant Green learned many things during his freshman's term, and,
among others, he discovered that the quiet retirement of
college-rooms, of which he had heard so much, was in many cases an
unsubstantial idea, founded on imagination, and built up by fancy.
One day that he had been writing a letter in Mr. Smalls' rooms, which
were on the ground-floor, Verdant congratulated himself that his own
rooms were on the third floor,

[108 ADVENTURES OF MR. VERDANT GREEN]

and were thus removed from the possibility of his friends, when he
had sported his oak, being able to get through his window to "chaff"
him; but he soon discovered that rooms upstairs had also
objectionable points in their private character, and were not
altogether such eligible apartments as he had at first anticipated.
First, there was the getting up and down the dislocated staircase, a
feat which at night was sometimes attended with difficulty.  Then,
when he had accomplished <VG108.JPG> this feat, there was no way of
escaping from the noise of his neighbours.  Mr. Sloe, the reading-man
in the garret above, was one of those abominable nuisances, a
peripatetic student, who "got up" every subject by pacing up and down
his limited apartment, and, like the sentry, "walked his dreary
round" at unseasonable hours of the night, at which time could be
plainly heard the wretched chuckle, and crackings of knuckles (Mr.
Sloe's way of expressing intense delight), with which he welcomed
some miserable joke of Aristophanes, painfully elaborated by the help
of Liddell-and-Scott; or the disgustingly sonorous way in which he
declaimed his Greek choruses.  This was bad enough at night; but in
the day-time there was a still greater nuisance.  The rooms
immediately beneath Verdant's were possessed by a gentleman whose
musical powers were of