ous success to his work. He
was no longer with the piano house, but had an excellent position
as adjuster of damages, out of court, for one of the street
railway companies. The history of his various promotions and his
favour with his employers was absorbing to him; but the time came,
when Julia was about twenty-two, when his determination to win her
became a serious menace to her peace.

His manner, which had once been boyish and uncertain, was in these
days good-humouredly proprietary. He laughed at little Julia's
earnest explanations, and would answer her most eager appeal only
with a lover's fond comment upon her eyes.

"Yes, darling, I wasn't listening--forgive me!" he said one day,
when, with a spark of real anger, Julia had begged him to make his
calls at the settlement house a little less frequent and less
conspicuous. "What was it?" And with twinkling eyes he caught up
the hand that lay near him on the table and kissed it.

"I want you not to do that, Mark," said Julia gravely, moving a
little farther away, "and please don't call me darling!"

"All right, darling!" smiled Mark.

"I'm not joking," Julia said resentfully, two red spots in her
cheeks.

Mark moved to lay his hand over hers penitently, and said, in the
low, gentle voice Julia dreaded:

"Do you know what's the matter with you, Julie? I'll tell you. You
love me and you won't admit it. Girls never will. But that's what
makes you so unhappy--you won't let yourself go. Ah, Julia! be
fair to yourself, darling! Tell me that you care for me. I've
waited seven years for you, dear--"

"Oh, you have not!" Julia said impatiently.

"I'd like to know why I haven't!" Mark said challengingly. "Ah,
but you know I have, darling. And I want my wife." It was a
Saturday afternoon, and Miss Toland was dozing in her own room.
Julia and Mark were alone in the deserted assembly hall. Suddenly
he slipped on his knees beside her, and locked one arm about her
waist. "You will, won't you, Julia?" he stammered.

Julia, scarlet cheeked, tried to rise, and held him off with her
hands.

"Oh, please, PLEASE," she begged. "I can't, Mark. You are awfully
good to me--I'm not worth it, and all that--but I CAN'T. I--it's
not my fault I don't want to, is it? It would be wrong to do it,
feeling this way--"

She was on her feet now, and Mark stood up, too. Both were
breathing hard; they looked at each other through a widening
silence. Flies buzzed against the closed windows, a gust of summer
wind swept along the street outside. Suddenly Mark caught Julia
fiercely in his arms, and felt her heart beating madly against
him, and forcing up her chin with a gentle big hand, kissed her
again and again upon her unresponsive lips.

"There!" he said, freeing her, a laugh of triumph in his voice.
"Now you belong to me! That's the kind of a man that's in love
with you, my girl, and don't you think for one instant that you
can play fast and loose with him!"

Julia sat still for a long time after the street door banged,
staring straight ahead of her. She was going for this week-end to
the little house the Scotts had been loaned in Belvedere for the
season, and she dressed and packed her suitcase very soberly. Miss
Toland went with her to the ferry, both glad to get the fresh
breath of the water, and Julia had a riotous dinner with the
Scotts, and a wonderful evening drifting about in their punt
between the stars in the low summer sky and the stars in the bay.
When they were in their porch beds she told Kennedy all about
Mark, and Kennedy commented that he certainly was a gratifyingly
ardent admirer.

"Ardent? I should think so!" sighed Julia, and went to sleep, not
ill-pleased with her role of the inaccessible lady. But the fact
that Mark's persistence could not be discouraged fretted her a
good deal. He rarely gave her a chance for a definite snub; if she
was ungracious, his humble patience waited tirelessly upon her
mood; and if she smiled, he showed such wistful delight that even
Julia's cool little heart was stirred. That he never stirred her
in any deeper way, that his kisses did not warm her, was not a
serious trouble to Mark. She would be all the sweeter to win; he
would wake her in his arms to the knowledge that she loved him!
And Julia won, as his little wife, would be dearer even than the
demure and inaccessible Julia of to-day. Mark fed his hungry heart
on love tales; many a man had won a harder fight than his; these
cold, shy girls made the best wives in the world!

Julia began seriously to consider the marriage. She visioned a
safe and pleasant life, if no very thrilling one. Mark was
handsome, devoted, he was making money, he would be faithful to
his wife and adore his children. Julia would have no social
position, of course. She sighed. She would be a comfortable little
complacent wife among a thousand others. She would have her silk
gowns, her cut glass; she could afford an outing at Pacific Grove
with the children; some day she and Mark would go to New York--

No, not she and Mark! She couldn't; she didn't love him enough to
sit opposite him all the mornings of her life, to sell her glowing
dreams for him! She had come so far from the days that united her
childhood with all the Rosenthals--she had not seen Mrs. Tarbury,
nor Rose, nor Connie for years. She was climbing, climbing, away
from all those old associations. And she could climb faster alone!




CHAPTER VII


One warm morning in August, when Miss Toland was stretched out on
the reception-room couch, and Julia, who had washed her hair, was
shaking it, a flying, fluffy mop, over the sill of the bathroom
window, a sudden hubbub broke out in the kindergarten. Miss Toland
flung down her book and Julia gathered her loose wrapper about
her, and both ran to the door of the assembly hall. The children,
crying and frightened, were gathered in a group, and in the centre
of it Julia, from the elevation of the stage, could see Miss
Pierce half-kneeling and leaning over as if she tried to raise
something from the floor. While they watched she arose, holding
the limp body of a five-year-old child in her arms.

"What is it--what is it?" screamed Miss Toland, but as every one
else was screaming and crying, and Julia's automatic, "Is she
dead?" was answered over and over again only by Miss Pierce's
breathless, "No--no--no--I don't think so!" it was some time
before any clear idea of the tragedy could be had. The small girl
was carried in to Julia's bed, where she lay half-conscious,
moaning; great bubbles of blood formed from an ugly skin wound in
her lip, and her little frock was stained with blood. As an
attempt to remove her clothes only roused her to piercing screams,
Julia and Miss Pierce gave up the attempt, and fell to bathing the
child's forehead, which, with the baby curls pushed away from it,
gave a ghastly look to the little face.

"Well, you've killed her, Miss Pierce!" said Miss Toland, beside
herself with nervousness. "That's a dying child, if I ever saw
one. That ruins THIS Settlement House! That ends it! Poor little
thing!"

"I was at the board," said Miss Pierce, white-lipped, and in a low
tone.

"I don't care where you were," said Miss Toland. "There, there,
darling! I pay you to watch these children! It's a fine thing if a
child is going to be killed right here in the house! Where was
Miss Watts?" she broke off to ask.

"Miss Watts is at home, sick," Miss Pierce said eagerly. "And I
was at the board, when some of those bigger boys set a bench up on
top of another bench. I heard the noise and turned around; this
child--poor little Maude Daley, it is--was standing right there,
and got the full weight of both benches as they fell."

"This boy is back," said Julia, coming from the front door, "and
he says that Doctor White is out and Doctor McGuire is out, too!"

"Great heavens!" Miss Toland began despairingly. "No doctor! of
course, eleven o'clock they're all out on morning rounds! And the
child's mother, where is she? Am I the only person here who can do
something except sit around and say 'I'm sorry, I'm sorry!'"

"She has no mother, and her grandmother's out," Julia said
soothingly. "Miss Toland, if I telephone do you think I can catch
Doctor Studdiford at the City and County?"

"A two hours' trip from Sausalito!" Miss Toland said scornfully.
"You must be crazy, that's all! No! Go into Mission Street--"

"I don't mean in Sausalito," Julia said firmly; "he's at the City
and County on Wednesday mornings, you know. I could get him
there."

Miss Toland stared at her unblinkingly for a second.

"Yes, do that!" she said then. "Yes, that's a good idea!" And as
Julia ran to the telephone she called after her, "Yes, that's a
very good idea!"

Julia's heart thumped as she called the big institution, thumped
when after a long wait a crisp voice, out of utter silence, said:

"Yes? This is Doctor Studdiford!"

She explained as concisely as she could, feeling that he listened
attentively.

"Keep the child flat, no pillow," he said, as Julia concluded.
"Tell my aunt I'll be there in fifteen minutes."

Julia, thrilled by she knew not what, knotted her flying hair
loosely on her neck and buttoned on a fresh uniform. Ten minutes
later she admitted Doctor Studdiford to the sickroom.

He had laid aside his hat and washed his hands. Now he sat down by
the bed and smiled at the dazed, moaning little Maude. Julia felt
something expand in her heart as she watched him, his intense,
intelligent face, his singularly winning smile, the loose lock of
dark hair on his forehead.

"Now, then, Maude," said he, his clever, supple fingers on her
wrist, "where does it hurt?"

Maude whimpered something made unintelligible by the fast-
stiffening cut in her lip.

"Her back's broken, Jim, no doubt about it," said Miss Toland
grimly.

"I think her side hurts," Miss Pierce submitted eagerly.

"Well, we'll see--we'll see!" Doctor Studdiford said soothingly.
"Now, if you'll help me, Miss Page, we'll get off these clothes--
ah!" For an anguished moan from the sufferer coincided with his
discovery that the little left arm hung limp. Julia loosened the
sleeve as the surgeon's scissors clipped it away, and she held the
child while the arm was set and bandaged. Miss Pierce was faint,
and Miss Toland admitted freely that she hated to see a child
suffer, and went away. "Only a clean dislocation, Aunt Sanna!"
said Jim, cheerfully, when he came out of the sickroom. "She'll
have to lie still for a while, but that's all. The cut on her
mouth doesn't amount to anything. She's all right, now--Miss Page
is telling her stories. She ought to have a glass of milk, or
soup, or something; then she'll go to sleep. I'll be in to-morrow.
By the way, you have a little treasure there in Miss Page!"

"Julia? Glad you have the sense to see it, Jim!"

"She--is--a--peach!" the doctor mused, packing his very smart
little instrument case. "Who is she?"

"A little girl I found. Yes, she's a nice child, Julia. She's been
here six years now."

"Six years! Great Scott! How old is she?"

"Twenty-two--twenty-three--something like that."

"It doesn't sound much of a life for a young girl, Aunt Sanna.
Imagine the Barbary-flower!" Doctor Studdiford shook his
thermometer, looked at it, and screwed it into its case.

"How IS Barbara?" Miss Toland asked dryly.

"Fine! Mother came to me with a long tale, the other day, about
her being run down, or blue, or something, but I don't see it. She
has a dandy time."

"Why doesn't she marry? Barbara must be twenty-six," her aunt
said, with directness.

"Oh, I don't know; why don't all the girls? The fellows they run
with are an awfully bum lot," Jim said contentedly. "Look at me!
Why don't I?" he added, laughing.

"Well, why don't you?"

"I'm waiting to settle the others off, I guess. Besides, you know,
I've been working like the devil! Sally's been worrying Mother
with her affairs lately," said Jim.

"SALLY--and who?"

"Keith Borroughs!" Jim announced, grinning.

"Keith Borroughs? Why, he's ten years younger!"

"He's about three years younger, and he's an awful fool," said
Jim, "but he's very much in love with Sally, and she certainly
seems to like it!"

"I think that's disgusting!" said Miss Toland. "Has he a JOB?"

"Job? He's a genius, my dear aunt. His father pays for his music
lessons, and his mother gives him an allowance. He's a pianist."

"H'm!" commented the lady briefly.

"Ned has definitely announced his intention of marrying his
Goldfield girl," pursued Jim.

"Yes, I knew that. Kill your mother!"

"It'll just about kill her. And the latest is Ted--falling in love
with Bob Carleton!"

"Carleton! Not the lumber man? But he's fifty!"

"He's forty-five, forty-seven perhaps."

"But he's married, Jim!"

"Divorced, Aunt Sanna."

"Oh, Jim, that's awful!" said his aunt, horrified.

"Well, it may come to nothing. Ted's only twenty--I hope devoutly
it will. There--that's all the news!" Jim jumped up from his
chair, and gave his aunt a kiss. "Why don't you come over and get
it for yourself, now and then! I don't know how much there is in
any of this stuff, because I use my rooms at the club a good deal,
but it's all in the wind. That little Julia Page is a peach, isn't
she?"

"You said that once," Miss Toland said dispassionately. Jim
grinned, unabashed. He had been in love with one girl or another
since his fourteenth year, and liked nothing so much as having his
affairs of the heart discussed.

"Well, it's true, and I'll say it again for luck!" said he. "Who
is she? I suppose Pius Aloysius Maloney, or some good soul who
comes to teach the kids boxing, has got it all framed up with
her?"

"I don't know any Mr. Maloney," Miss Toland answered
imperturbably. "Mr. Craig is director of the Boys' Club, and I
know he admires her, and she has another admirer, too, who comes
here now and then. But how likely she is to marry I really can't
say! She's an extremely ambitious girl, and she has determined to
raise herself."

"Raise herself!" Jim said, with a casual laugh. "I don't suppose
she started much lower than other people?"

"Oh, I imagine she did. Her father was a--I don't know--a sort of
drummer, I guess, but her mother is an awful person, and her
grandfather was a day labourer!"

"Ha!" Jim said, discomfited. "Well, see you tomorrow!" he added,
departing. He walked briskly to the corner of the street, and
experienced a thump at the heart when a casual backward glance
discovered Julia, in a most fetching hat, coming out of the
settlement house with a market basket on her arm. She did not see
him, and Jim decided not to see her. Of course she WAS a little
peach, but that labourer grandfather was too much.

That same evening Julia used the accident to little Maude as an
excuse to break a half engagement with Mark. He was to be given
only a few moments' chat before the Girls' Club met for a
rehearsal, but he showed such bitter disappointment at losing it
that Julia, half against her will, promised to spend at least part
of her Sunday afternoon with him.

This was on Wednesday, and on Thursday and Saturday Doctor
Studdiford came to see his little patient, and both times saw
Julia, too. He asked Julia what books she liked, and, surprised
that she knew nothing of Browning, he sent her a great volume of
his poetry, a leather-bound exquisite edition that Jim had taken
some trouble to find. With the book came a box of violets, and
Julia, opening the package, suddenly remembered that he was a rich
man, and stood, flushed and palpitating to a thousand emotions,
looking down at the damp, fragrant flowers.

She wore a few violets at the breast of her sober little gown when
she met Mark on Sunday for the promised walk. Julia had been most
reluctant to go, but Maude had been moved to her own home, and the
child's father was sitting with her, so that Julia had no excuse
to visit her.

"I want to show you something--something you'll like!" said Mark
eagerly. "We take the Sixteenth Street car and transfer down
Sacramento."

Julia accepted his guidance good-naturedly, and they crossed the
city, which lay in a clear wash of the warm September sunlight.
Mark led Julia finally to the ornate door of a new apartment house
in Sacramento Street.

"What is it, Mark?" the girl asked, as they went in. "Some one we
know live here?"

"You wait!" Mark said mysteriously. He went to a desk in the
handsome entrance hall, and talked for a few moments to a clerk
who sat there. Then a quiet-looking, middle-aged woman came out,
and Mark and Julia went upstairs with her, in a little elevator.

The woman turned a key in a door, and led them into a charmingly
bright front apartment of four good-sized rooms and a shining
bathroom. There was a bedroom with curly-maple furniture, a
dining-room with a hanging lamp of art glass on a brass chain, and
Mission oak table and chairs, a kitchen delightfully convenient
and completely equipped, and a little drawing-room, with a gas
log, a bookshelf, a good rug, a little desk, and some rocking
chairs and small tables. The sun shone in through fresh net
curtains, and the high windows commanded a bright view of city
roofs and a glimpse of the bay.

Julia began to feel nervous and uncomfortable. She did not
understand at all what Mark meant by this, but it was impossible
to doubt, from his beaming face, that some plan involving her was
afoot. He couldn't have furnished this apartment in the hope--?

"Whose place IS this, Mark?" she asked, trying to laugh naturally.

"Do you like it?" Mark countered, his eyes dancing.

"Like it? It's simply sweet, of course! But whose is it?"

"Well, now listen," Mark explained. "It's Joe Kirk's furniture;
he's just been married, you know. He and his wife had just got
back from their honeymoon when Joe got an offer of a fine job in
New York. He asked me to see if I couldn't find a tenant for this-
-two years' lease to run--just as it stands; no raise in rent. And
the rent's fifty-five?" he called to the woman in the next room.

"Fifty, Mr. Rosenthal," she answered impassively.

"Fifty!" Mark exulted. "Think of getting all this for fifty! Ah,
Julia"--he came close to her as she stood staring down from the
window, and lowered his voice--"will you, darling? Will you? You
like it, don't you? Will you marry me, dearest, and make a little
home here with me?" "Oh, Mark!" Julia stammered, a nervous smile
twitching her lips.

"Well, why won't you, Ju? Do you doubt that I love you? Answer me
that!"

"Why, no--no, I don't, of course." Julia moved a little away.

"Don't go over there; she'll hear us! And you love me, don't you,
Ju?"

"But not that way I don't, Mark," Julia said childishly.

"Oh, 'not that way'--that's all rubbish--that's the way girls
talk; that's just an expression they have! Listen! Do you doubt
that I'll always, ALWAYS love you?"

"Oh, no, Mark, of course not!" Julia admitted. "But I don't want
to marry any one--"

"Well, what do you want? Haven't I loved you since you were a
little girl?"

"Yes, I know--of course you have! Only"--Julia gave him a
desperate smile--"only I can't discuss such things here," she
pleaded, "with that woman so near!"

"You're right!" Mark said, with military promptness, and as one
who loves to receive his lady's orders. "We'll go out. Only--I
wanted you to see it!"

And as they went out he must stop to show her the admirably deep
drawers of the little sideboard and the ingenious arrangement by
which the gas was electrically lighted.

They thanked the woman, and began the long ride back to the
settlement house, for Julia never left Miss Toland long alone. In
the Sacramento Street car they both had to stand, but Mark found
seats without difficulty on the dummy of the Fillmore Street car,
and laying his arm along the back of Julia's seat, swung about so
that his face was very close to hers. A world of wistful
tenderness filled his voice as he said again:

"Well, darling, what do you think of it?"

Poor Mark! Perhaps if he had asked her only a week earlier, his
lady might have given him a kinder answer. But Julia was walking
in a golden dream to-day, a dream peopled only by herself and one
other, and she hardly noticed his emotion. She fixed her blue eyes
vaguely on the black eyes so near, and smiled a little.

"Oh, answer me, Julia!" Mark said impatiently. And a second later
he asked alertly: "Where'd you get the violets?"

"Oh--somebody," Julia temporized. Pink flooded her cheeks.

"Who?" said Mark, very calm.

"Oh, Mark, what a tone! Nobody you know!" Julia laughed.

"Is he in love with you?" Mark asked fiercely.

"Oh, don't be so silly! No, of course he's not."

"Tell me who he is!" Mark commanded grimly.

"Now, look here, Mark," Julia said sternly, "you stop that
nonsense, or you can get straight off this car, and I'll go home
alone! And don't you sulk, either, for it's too ridiculous, and I
won't have it!"

Mark succumbed instantly.

"It's because I love you so," he said humbly. There was a little
silence, then Julia, watching the Sunday streets, said suddenly:

"Look, Mark, look at the SIZE of that hat!"

Mark, disdaining to turn his eyes for the fraction of a moment
from her face, said reproachfully:

"Are you going to answer me, Julia?"

"How do you mean?" Julia said nervously.

"You know what I mean," Mark answered, with an impatient nod.

"No, I don't," Julia said, with a little laugh.

"Now, you look-a-here, Julia--you look-a-here," Mark began, almost
angrily. "I am going to ask you to marry me! You've fooled about
it, and you've laughed about it, and I've got a right to KNOW! I
think about it all the time; I lie awake at night and think about
it. I"--his voice softened suddenly--"I love you awfully, Julia,"
he said. And then, with a sort of concentrated passion that rather
frightened the girl, he added, "So I'm going to ask you once more.
I want you to answer me, d'ye see?"

The car sped on, clanged across Market Street, turned into the
Mission. Julia had grown a little pale. She gave Mark a fleeting
glance, looked away, and finally brought her eyes back to him
again.

"I wish you wouldn't take things so SERIOUSLY, Mark," she began
uneasily. "You're always forcing me to say things--and I don't
want to--I don't want to get married AT ALL--"

"Nonsense!" said Mark harshly.

"It's not nonsense!" Julia protested, glad to feel her anger
rising. Mark saw her heightened colour, and misread it.

"Yes," he said sneeringly. "That's all very well, but I'll bet
you'd feel pretty badly if I never came near you again--if I let
the whole thing drop!"

"Oh, Mark," said Julia fervently, "if you only WOULD--I don't mean
that!" she interrupted herself, compunction seizing her at the
look of mortal hurt on his face. "But I mean--if you only didn't
love me! You see, I'm perfectly happy, Mark, I've got what I want.
And if Miss Toland takes me abroad with her next year, why, it'll
mean more to me than ANY marriage could, don't you see that? You
know what my childhood was, Mark; my mother didn't love my father-
-" And as a sudden memory of the old life rose to confront her,
Julia's tone became firm; she felt a certain sureness. "Married
people ought to love each other, Mark," she said positively. "I
KNOW that. And I won't--I NEVER will marry a man I don't love. If
everything goes wrong, after that, you have only yourself to
blame. And so many times it goes wrong, Mark! I should be unhappy,
I should keep wondering if I wouldn't be happier going my own way-
-wondering if I wouldn't have--have gotten farther--do you
understand me?"

This was a long speech for Julia, and during it Mark had twisted
about, and pulled his hat over his face. Now, in a voice curiously
dead and hard, he asked briefly:

"Gotten farther--WHERE?"

"I don't know," said Julia candidly. "But the more I read, and the
more I think, the more it seems to me that anyone can be anything
in this world; there's some queer rule that makes you rise if you
want to rise, if only you don't compromise! The reason so many
people DON'T ultimately get what they want is because they stop
trying for it, and take something else!"

"And marriage with me would be a compromise, is that it?" Mark
muttered sullenly.

"It would be for me," Julia answered serenely. "Because staying
where I am keeps me nearer what I want."

"Money, huh?" asked Mark.

"Oh, money, NO! Books and talk--things. And--and if I loved you,
Mark, then don't you see it WOULD be the right thing to marry
you?" she added brightly. "But now, it would only be because it
was easier, or because I was tired of The Alexander, do you see?"

"I suppose so," Mark answered drearily.

A long silence ensued. In silence they got off the car, and walked
through the cheerless twilight of the dirty streets, and they were
almost in sight of the settlement house before Mark burst out, a
little huskily:

"Then there's no chance for me at all, Julie?"

"Oh, Mark, I feel rotten about it!" said Julia frankly, her eyes
full of pity and regret, and yet a curious relief evident in her
voice. "I AM so sorry! I've just been thinking of girls who like
this sort of thing--I don't see how they CAN! I AM so sorry! But
you won't mind very long, Mark; you won't always care; you'll--
why, there's Doctor Studdiford's automobile!"

For they were in sight of The Alexander now, and could see the
electric runabout at the door. Motor cars were still new to San
Francisco and to the world, and a crowd of curious children
surrounded the machine.

"What's he there for?" Mark asked gruffly.

Julia explained: the accident--the emergency call.

"Well, but the kid is not there now, you say?"

"Yes, I know. But he didn't know that. I suppose he's calling on
his aunt."

To this Mark made no immediate answer. Presently he said:

"City and County! I'll bet the city pays for his automobile!"

"Oh, no!" Julia protested. "He's a rich man in his own right,
Mark."

They were at the house now, and went up the steps together. Doctor
Studdiford was in the little reception hall with Miss Toland. He
looked very handsome, very cheerful, as he came forward with his
fine eyes on Julia. And Julia stood looking up at him with an
expression Mark never had won from her, her serious, beautiful
little face flooded with light, her round eyes soft and luminous.
A woman at last, she seemed as she stood there, a grave and wise
and beautiful woman, ripe for her share of loving and living,
ready to find her mate.

"You got the book?" Jim said, with a little laugh. He laughed
because his heart was shaking curiously, and because the sudden
sight of Julia disconcerted him so that he hardly knew what he
said.

Julia did not answer; she only touched the wilting and fragrant
violets on her breast with her free hand. Jim still held one hand.

"You--you'll like Browning," added Jim. And inconsequentially he
added, "I was thinking of our little talk yesterday--all night."

"So was I," Julia breathed. They turned suddenly and self-
consciously to Miss Toland and Mark. Julia introduced the men; her
breath was coming unevenly and her colour was exquisite; she
talked nervously, and did not meet Mark's eye. Mark was offered a
lift in Doctor Studdiford's motor car, and declined it. The doctor
seemed to be in no hurry to go; wandered into her room to advise
his aunt upon the placing of a telephone extension. Julia and Mark
loitered about the assembly hall for a few empty moments, and then
Mark said he must go, and Julia, absently consenting, went with
him toward the stage door.

"And he's rich, is he?" said Mark.

Julia came out of a brief dream.

"He's very rich--yes!" she smiled.

She mounted to the stage as she spoke, and Mark held out his hand
and turned about as if to say goodbye. The next instant Julia felt
as if the dull twilight room had turned to brass and was falling
with a wild clamour; she felt as if her heart were being dragged
bodily to her lips, and she heard her own wild scream.

Silence fell, and Mark was still staring at her, still smiling.
But now he toppled slowly toward her and stumbled, and as his
body, with a hideous, slithering sound, slipped down to the floor,
his arm fell lax, and the still smoking revolver slid to Julia's
very feet.

"STOP, Julia--what is it?--what is it?" Miss Toland was crying.
She locked her arms tight about the girl, and drew her back into
the reception hall. Julia was silent, suddenly realizing that she
had been screaming. She moved her tongue over her dry lips, and
struggled to explain.

"Now we understand perfectly!" Doctor Studdiford said soothingly.
"He shot himself, poor fellow. I'm going to take care of him, do
you see? Just keep STILL, Aunt Sanna, or we'll have a crowd here.
Aunt Sanna, do you want this to get into the papers?" For Miss
Toland's surmises were delivered at a sort of shriek.

"Oo--oo--oo!" shuddered Julia, fearful eyes on the assembly room
door. "He was--we were just talking--"

"Is he dead, Jim?" asked Miss Toland fearfully.

"I think so. I'm going to call the hospital for an ambulance,
anyway." Doctor Studdiford was all brisk authority.

"But what ever possessed him?" shrilled Miss Toland again. "Of all
THINGS!"

"Had you quarrelled?" asked Jim, keen eyes on Julia as he rattled
the telephone hook.

"No," Julia said shortly, like a child who holds something back.
Then her face wrinkled, and she began to cry. "He wanted to marry
me," she said piteously. "He wanted me to promise! But he always
has asked me--ever since I was fifteen years old, and I always
said no!"

"Well, now," Jim said soothingly. "Don't cry. You couldn't help
it. Do you know why he carried a revolver?"

"He has to carry it, his business isn't a very safe one," Julia
said shakily. "He's shown it to me once or twice!" Her voice
dropped on a trembling note, and her eyes were wild with fright.

"Now, Aunt Sanna," said Jim quietly, after telephoning, "I think
that you and Miss Page ought to get out of here. You'll have a
raft of reporters and busybodies here to-morrow. It's a ghastly
thing, of course, and the quieter we keep it the better for every
one. I'll manage my end of it. I'll have as conservative an
account as I can in the papers--simply that he was despondent over
a love affair and, in a fit of temporary aberration--and so on.
Could you close this place up for a week?"

"Certainly!" said Miss Toland, with Spartan promptness, beginning
to enjoy the desperate demand of the hour.

"And could you take that poor child somewhere, out of the public
eye?"

"I will indeed, Jim!"

"Well, that's the best way to do. You're a trump, Aunt Sanna! I
will say that Miss Page is naturally prostrated, and gone away to
friends."

"Jim, has that poor boy a chance?"

"A chance? No. No; he died instantly. It was straight through the
brain. Yes, terrible--naturally. Now, will you take what you need-
-" "Instantly!" said Miss Toland, with a shudder. "Oh, Jim, I'm so
glad you're a doctor," she added weakly, clutching his arm, "and
so cold blooded and reliable!"

"I'm glad I was here," Jim answered simply. "Hello, look at poor
little Miss Page! She's fainted!"




CHAPTER VIII


It was Christmas time before Julia saw Doctor Studdiford again,
and then it was but for a few minutes. Christmas Eve was wet and
blowy out of doors, but the assembly hall of The Alexander looked
warm and bright; there were painfully made garlands of green
looped about the windows, bells of red paper hung from all the
chandeliers, and on the stage an enormous Christmas tree glittered
with colour and light. Six hundred people were crowded into the
room, more than half of them children. Babies twisted and climbed
on the laps of their radiant mothers, small girls and boys
everywhere were restless with excitement and anticipation. Miss
Toland only appeared at intervals, spending most of the afternoon
with a few chosen guests in the reception hall, but Julia was
everywhere at once. She wore a plain white linen gown, with a bit
of holly in her hair and on her breast, and whether she was
marshalling small girls into groups, stopping to admire a new
baby, meeting the confectioner's men and their immense freezers at
the draughty side door, talking shyly with the directors in Miss
Toland's room, or consoling some weeping infant in the hall, she
was followed by admiring eyes.

At three o'clock the general restlessness visibly increased, and
the air in the hall, between steaming wet garments and perspiring
humanity, became almost insufferable. Julia experimentally opened
a door and let in a wet blast of air, but this was too drastic,
and her eyes were brought back from a wistful study of the high
windows by a voice that said:

"Merry Christmas! Give me a stick, and I'll do it for you!"

The girl found her hand in Doctor Studdiford's, and their eyes
met.

"I didn't know you were here!" said Julia, in swift memory of
their last meeting.

"Just come." He looked at her, all kindliness. "How goes it?"

"Finely," Julia answered. When he had opened a window, he followed
her across the room. "I may stay near you, mayn't I?"

"I am just going to begin," Julia said, taking her place at the
piano, and facing the room across the top of it. Her small person
seemed suddenly fired with authority. She struck a full chord.
"Children!" she said. "CHILDREN! Who is talking? Some one is still
talking! Keep still, everybody, please! Keep still, every one.

"Now we are going to sing the 'Adeste'--four verses. And then
we'll give out the presents. Listen, every one! We are going to
sing the 'Adeste,' and then give out the presents. The presents,
of course, go only to our own girls and boys, do you understand
that? Listen, children, please!

"But we have a box of candy for every child here, whether that
child comes to any of the classes or not! So don't go home without
your candy. And don't come up for your present until you hear your
name called, do you understand that? If I see any child coming up
before Miss Pierce calls her name, I'll send her right back to her
seat! Now, the 'Adeste,' please!"

Jim had listened in intense amusement. How positive she was and
how authoritative! Her straight little back, her severe braids,
her stern blue eyes roving the hall as she touched the familiar
chords, were all so different from the vague young women who were
Barbara's friends. She played a few wandering chords after the
distribution of gifts began, watching the children file up the
aisle, and listening, with only an occasional lifting of her blue
eyes to his face, to Doctor Studdiford's smiling comments. Her
heart was beating high under a flood of unsensed joy, she did not
know why--but she was happy beyond all words.

"I'm afraid I'll have to go help Miss Pierce and Miss Furey,
Doctor," she said presently, standing up. "Our Miss Scott, who got
married two years ago, used to be a perfect wonder at times like
this! Here, little girl, little girl! You don't come to the
classes, do you? No? Well, then, go back to your seat and wait--
you see!" She turned despairingly to Jim. "You see, they're simply
making a MESS of it!"

"I have to go, anyway," said Jim.

"Oh?" Julia turned surprised eyes toward him, and said the one
thing she meant to avoid. "But Mrs. Toland and Miss Barbara are
coming," she submitted.

"And what of it?" Jim said meaningly. It was his turn to say the
awkward thing. "How are the nerves these days?" he asked quickly.

Colour flooded Julia's face.

"Much better, thank you! I gave the tonic up weeks ago. It was
just nerves," explained Julia, "a sort of breakdown after we came
back from Cloverdale! And I'm so much obliged to you!" she ended
shyly.

"Oh, not at all, not at all!" Jim protested gruffly. An
unmanageable silence hung between them for a few seconds; then
Julia, with a murmured excuse, went to the extrication of Miss
Pierce, now hopelessly involved in a surge of swarming children,
and Jim went on his way. He carried with him a warm memory of the
erect young figure in white, and the thick twisted braid, set
against a background of Christmas green. For Julia the rest of the
afternoon was enchanted; an enchantment subtly flavoured with the
odour of evergreen, and pierced by rapturous voices, and by the
glowing colours of the Christmas tree, and the slapping rain at
the window.

She and Miss Toland sat down, exhausted and well satisfied, at
seven o'clock, to a scrappy little supper in the littered dining-
room: one director had left chocolates, another violets; a child's
soiled hair ribbon, still tied, lay on the floor; the chairs were
pushed about at all angles.

"Give me some more coffee, dear, and open that box of candy," said
Miss Toland luxuriously. "We'll sleep late, and go to high mass at
the Cathedral. Alice always has room in her pew. And then we might
go over to Sausalito and say 'Merry Christmas.' They'll all be
scattered; Jim tells me he and my brother have an operation at
twelve, poor wretches! And I suppose Barbara and little Sally will
be off somewhere. Sally always tries to keep them together for
Christmas Eve, but in my opinion they're all bored by this tree
and stocking business. But of course Ned and his extraordinary
wife will be all over the place!"

"I've not been in Sausalito, except once, for eight years," Julia
said reflectively.

"I know you've not. Well, we'll go to-morrow." Miss Toland reached
for a cigarette; yawned as she lighted it. But Julia's heart began
to beat fast in nervous anticipation.

Mrs. Toland received them very graciously the next day, and Julia
was at once made to feel at home in the pretty house, which was
littered charmingly to-day with all sorts of Christmas gifts, and
bright with open fires. Barbara was there, and the crippled
Richie, but Sally had gone to a Christmas concert with her devoted
little squire, Keith Borroughs, and Mrs. Toland presently took
Miss Sanna aside for a long, distressed confidence. Theodora, it
seemed, had had a stormy argument with her father on the subject
of her admirer, Robert Carleton, some days before, and yesterday
had left, in defiance of all authority, to meet him for a walk,
and lunch with him. She and her father had not spoken to each
other since, and Ted was keeping her room. Julia met Ned's wife, a
pretentious, complacent little gabbling village belle, and was
dragged about by the younger sisters to look at everybody's
presents.

"Must be a long time since we saw you here, Miss Page?" said the
old doctor, smiling at her over his glasses, as he carved at
luncheon.

"I was here two years ago, one afternoon," Julia smiled. "But I
think I haven't seen YOU since 'The Amazons'--eight years ago!"

"Eight years!" Barbara said, struck. "Mother, do you realize that
it is eight years since I was in that play with the Hazzards and
Gray Babcock and the Grinells? Isn't that AWFUL?" She fell into
sombre thought.

Julia went through the day in a sort of deep study. This was the
enchanted castle that had stood to her for so long as the
unattainable height of dreams; these were the envied inhabitants
of that castle. Everything was the same, except herself, yet how
incredibly the change in her affected everything about her! She
was at home here now, could answer the table pleasantries with her
ready, grave smile, could feel that her interest in Constance and
Jane was a pleasure to them, or could pick a book from the
drawing-room table with the confidence that what she said of it
would not be ridiculous. She could even feel herself happier than
Barbara, who listened so closely to what Julia said of the
settlement house, and sighed as she listened.

After luncheon Richie took her driving over cold country roads,
behind a big-boned gray mare, and adored her, though she never
dreamed it, because she neither offered to take the reins nor
asked him at intervals if his back was tired. He was finishing
work at the school of medicine now, and although he could never
hope to be in regular practice, his thin, bony face was very
bright as he outlined his plans. Julia listened to him
sympathetically, and said good-bye to him at the boat with a sense
of genuine liking on both sides. Miss Toland was waiting for her
on the upper deck, her long nose nipped and red in the cold air.

"Well, he saw that you didn't miss it, after all!" said she, with
a welcoming light for Julia in her sharp eyes, though she did not
smile. "Sit down! I've been hearing nice things about you, my
dear! I said to Sally, 'So there IS something in old maids'
children, eh?'" Miss Toland chuckled; she was well pleased with
her protegee. Julia settled herself comfortably beside her. She
liked to watch the running gray water, and to feel the cold
December wind in her face. The thought of Mark was always with
her, poor Mark! so much more in her heart dead than living! But
to-day his memory seemed only a part of the tender past; it was
toward the future that her heart turned; she felt young and strong
and full of hope.

In the new year Jim began to come pretty regularly to the
settlement house. Sometimes he stayed but for two minutes, never
for more than ten, and usually, even if Julia was out, he left
some little gift for her, a book or a magazine, flower seeds, or
violets, or a box of candy. She would glance up from the soiled
and rumpled sewing of some small girl to find Jim smiling at her
from the stage door, or come back from her little shopping round
and have a moment's chat with him on the steps. She grew more and
more silent, more and more self-contained, but her beauty deepened
daily, and her eyes shone like blue stars.

"God, I will not believe it--I CANNOT believe it!" said Julia, on
her knees, at night, her hands pressed tight against her eyes.
"But I think he is beginning to love me!" And she walked in a
strange dazzle of happiness, rejoicing in every sunny morning
that, with its warmth and blueness and distant soft whistles from
the bay, seemed to promise the spring, and rejoicing no less when
rain beat against the windows of The Alexander, and the children
rushed in upon her at three o'clock with raindrops in their hair
and on their glowing cheeks. The convent garden, in the February
mornings, the assembly room, with late uncertain sunlight checking
its floor in the long afternoons, the Colonial restaurant filled
with lights and the odours of food at night, all these familiar
things seemed strangely new and thrilling, and the arrival of the
postman was, twice a day, a heart-shaking event.

In April Doctor Toland went on a fortnight's trip to Mexico, and
took his third daughter with him, in the undisguised hope of
winning some small share of her confidence, and convincing her of
his own disinterested affection. Two days later Barbara telephoned
her aunt the harrowing news of Sally's elopement with Keith
Borroughs, and Miss Toland went at once to Sausalito, taking Julia
along.

They found the big house full of excitement. Richie was with his
mother, who had retired to her room and was tearful and
hysterical; Ned and his wife had gone back after Christmas to the
country town, where he held a small position under his father-in-
law; and Jim was doing both his own work and that of his foster
father for the time being, and could not be found by telephone; so
Julia was received by Barbara and the two younger girls, who were
not inclined to make light of the event.

"Four years younger than Sally!" said Constance, not for the first
time.

"It's not THAT," Barbara contributed disgustedly. "But he's only
nineteen--not of age, even! And he hasn't one single penny! Why,
Mrs. Carter was thinking of sending him abroad for two years' work
with his music. I SEE her doing it now! Little sloppy-haired,
conceited idiot, that's what HE is!"

"And Richie says he'll have to have his mother's consent before he
can marry her," said Jane with a virtuous air.

"It's too disgusting!" Barbara added, giving Jane a sharp glance.
"And you oughtn't talk that way, Jane; it doesn't sound very well
in a girl your age to talk about any one's having to marry any
one!"

"I know this," said Constance gloomily. "It's going to give this
family a horrible black eye. A fine chance we'll have to marry, we
younger ones, with Sally disgracing every one this way!" Constance
was the handsomest of all the Tolands, and felt keenly the
disadvantages of being the youngest of four unmarried sisters.

"Don't worry about your marriage until it comes along, Con," said
Barbara wearily.

"I'll bet I marry before you do!" said Constance, without venom.

"I long ago made up my mind never to marry at all," Barbara said,
with a bored air. Julia chuckled.

"It is so funny to hear you go at each other," she explained. "It
sounds so cross--and it really isn't at all! Don't worry, Miss
Toland," she added soothingly, "Miss Sally wouldn't marry him if
she didn't love him--"

"Oh, she loves him fast enough!" Barbara admitted, consoled.

"And if people love each other, it's all right," Julia went on.
Barbara sighed.

"Oh, I hope it is, Julia!" said she, as conscious of the little
familiarity for all her abstracted air as Julia was, and
suspecting that it thrilled Julia, as indeed it did.

"And it's all the result of idleness, that's what it is, and
that's what I've been telling your mother," said Miss Toland,
coming in. "You've all got nothing to do except sit about and
think how bored you are!"

"Oh, Auntie, aren't you low?" Barbara said tranquilly, going to
take an arm of her chair. "All sorts of people elope--there's
nothing so disgraceful in THAT."

"It's disgraceful considering what a father you've got, and what a
mother!" Miss Toland said vexatiously. "And Ted worrying your
father to death about that scamp, too! I declare it's too much!"

"He's a pretty rich scamp, and a pretty attractive scamp," Barbara
said in defence of Theodora's choice. "He's not like that KID of a
Keith!"

Julia heard the garden gate slam, and a quick, springing step on
the porch before the others did, but it was Jane who said, "Here's
Jim!" and Barbara who went to let him in.

"Oh, Jimmy, have you heard of Sally?" she faltered, and as they
came in from the hall Julia's quick eye saw that she was half
clinging to his shoulder, sister fashion, and that his arm was
half about her.

"Hello, every one!" said his big, reassuring voice. "How's Mother?
Hello, Aunt Sanna--and Miss Page, too! Well, this is fun, isn't
it? Yes, Miss Babbie, I've heard of Sally, Sally Borroughs, as she
is now--"

"What! Married?" said every one at once, and Mrs. Toland, making
an impressive entrance with Richie, sank into a deep chair and
echoed: "Married?"

"Married, Mother dear," said Jim. "They found me in Dad's office
at five o'clock; Keith's father, a fierce sort of man, was with
them, and was for calling the whole thing off. Sally was crying,
poor girl, and Keith miserable--"

"Oh, poor old Sally!" said Barbara's tender voice.

"You should have brought her straight home to me!" Mrs. Toland
added severely.

"Well, so I thought at first. But they had their license, which
would be in the morning papers anyway, and Sally had done the fool
thing of mailing letters to two girl friends when she left here
this morning--"

"She left me a mere scribble, pinned to her pin-cushion," said her
mother, magnificently. "Just as any common actress--"

"Oh, Mother! it wasn't pinned to her cushion at all!" Barbara
protested. "She had no pincushion, she has a pin tray."

"I hardly see how it matters, Babbie; it was on her bureau,
anyway! Just like a servant girl!" Mrs. Toland persisted.

"Well, anyway, it seemed best to push it right through," said Jim,
"especially as they persisted that they would do it again or die--
or rather, Sally did!"

"Oh, Jim, DON'T!" wailed Sally's mother. "Poor, deluded child!"

"I don't mean that Keith wasn't fiery enough," Jim hastened to
say. "He's a decent enough little fellow, and he's madly in love.
So we all went up to the French church, and Father Marchand
married them--"

"A child of mine!" said Mrs. Toland, stricken.

"Keith's father and I witnessed," pursued Jim, "and we both kissed
the bride--"

"Sally! And she was such a dear sweet baby!" whispered Mrs.
Toland, big tears beginning to run down her cheeks.

"Ah, Mother!" Constance said soothingly, at her mother's knees.

"Sally's of age, of course," Jim argued soothingly, "and one
couldn't bring her home like a child. The thing would have gotten
out, and she'd have been a marked girl for life! There's really no
REASON why they shouldn't marry, and the boy--Keith, that is, put
her into a carriage quite charmingly, and they drove off. They'll
go no farther than Tamalpais or the Hotel Rafael, probably, for
Keith has to be back at work on Monday, and I made him promise to
bring Sally here on Sunday night."

"And what will they live on?" Mrs. Toland asked stonily.

"That isn't worrying them. Sally has--what? From those bonds of
her grandfather's?"

"Three hundred a year," Mrs. Toland said discouragingly.

"And Keith gets fifty-five a month. That's eighty--h'm!" pursued
Jim.

"Well, some of us simply will have to help them," suggested Mrs.
Toland, with a swift, innocent glance at Miss Sanna.

"His father will have to help," Miss Toland countered firmly.

They presently adjourned to the dining-room, all still talking--
even Julia--of Sally. Sally would have to take the Barnes cottage,
at fifteen dollars a month, and do her own cooking, and her own
sewing--

"They can dine here on Sundays," said Sally's mother, sniffing and
wiping her eyes.

"And wouldn't it be awful if they had a baby!" Jane flung out
casually.

Every one felt the indelicacy of this, except Julia, who relieved
all Jane's hearers by saying warmly:

"Oh, don't say awful! Why, you'd all go wild over a dear little
baby!"

Doctor Studdiford gave her a curious look at this, and though
Julia did not see it, Barbara did. After dinner the doctor and
Barbara played whist with the older ladies, and Julia sat looking
over their shoulders for a few minutes, and then went upstairs
with Constance and Jane for a long, delightful gossip. The girls
must show her various pictures of Keith and Sally, books full of
kodak prints, and everywhere Julia saw Jim, too: Jim from the days
of little boyhood on to to-day, Jim as camp cook, Jim as tennis
champion, Jim riding, yachting, fishing; a younger Jim, in the
East at college, a small, stocky, unrecognizable Jim, in short
trousers and straw hat. And everywhere, with him, Barbara.

"That's when they gave a play--I was only five," Constance said.
"See, this is Jim as Jack Horner, and Babbie as Mother Goose. And
look! here's Jim on a pony--that's at his grandfather's place in
Honolulu, He stayed there a month every year, when he was a little
boy, and Mother and Barbara visited there once. Here we all are,
swimming, at Tahoe. And here's Bab in the dress she wore at her
coming-out tea--isn't it dear? And look! here she is in an old
dress of Jim's mother, and see the old pearls; aren't they lovely?
Jim gave them to her when she was twenty."

"Jim was crazy about her then," said Jane.

"_I_ don't think he was," Constance said perversely.

"Oh, Con, you know he was!" Jane protested. "He WAS, too," she
added, to Julia.

"_I_ don't think he was," persisted Constance lightly.

Barbara came in a second later, and again the talk went back to
Sally.

"Mother and Aunt Sanna said good-night," reported Barbara, "and
Aunt Sanna said to leave the door between your rooms open, and--
oh, yes, Doctor Studdiford has been teasing Aunt Sanna to stay for
a few days, Miss Page; he says you look as pale as a little
ghost!"

"I liked so much to have you call me Julia," was Julia's extremely
tactful answer to this. Barbara, perhaps glad to find her message
so casually dismissed, smiled her prettiest.

"Julia--then!" and Barbara sat down on a bed, and began to roll up
her belt. "Aunt Sanna says she gives Sally and Keith about three
months--" she began.

Two days later, on Sunday, the bride and groom came home. Sally,
who looked particularly well and was quite unashamed, rushed into
her mother's arms, and laughed and cried like a creature
possessed. She kissed all her sisters, and if there was a note of
disapproval in her welcome, she did not get it. Richie having
charitably carried off the somewhat sullen young husband, the
bride was presently free to open her heart to the women of the
house.

"It's all so different when you're married, isn't it, Mother?"
bubbled Sally. "Going into hotels and everything--you don't care
who looks at you, you know you've a perfect right to go anywhere
with your husband! Now, that look that Keith just gave me, as he
went off with Richie--BLAZING! Well, it would just have amused me
when we were engaged, but now I know that he's simply wretched
with jealousy, and I'll have to pet him a little and quiet him
down! He is a perfect child about money; he WILL spend too much on
everything, and if we go abroad I'll simply have to--"

"Go abroad?" every one echoed.

"Oh, I think we must, for Keith's music," Sally said gravely. "He
can't settle down here, you know. He's got to live abroad, and
he's got to have lessons--expensive lessons. Office work makes him
too nervous, anyway."

"Well, my dear, I hope you have money enough to carry out these
pleasing plans," said Miss Toland dryly.

"Well, we have my twenty-five a month," Sally said capably, "and
Keith's father OUGHT to give him another twenty-five, because the
expense of having Keith live at home will be gone, and"--Sally
fixed a hopeful eye on her mother--"and I should think Dad would
give me at least that, Mother," said she. "I must cost him much
more than that!"

"Oh, I--don't--know!" said Mrs. Toland guardedly, taken unawares,
and slowly shaking her head.

"Then I thought," pursued the practical Sally, "that if you would
give me half the clothes of a regular trousseau, and if Dad would
give us our travelling expenses to Berlin for a wedding present--
why, there you are!"

"But you two couldn't live on seventy-five dollars a month,
Sally!"

"Oh, Mother, Jeannette said you could get a lovely room for two--
in a pension--for a dollar a day! And that leaves forty for
lessons, two a week, and five dollars over!"

"For laundry and carfare and doctor's bills," said Miss Toland
unsympathetically.

"Well!" Sally flared, resentful colour in her cheeks.

"And Dad will never consent to anything so OUTRAGEOUSLY unfair as
living on thirty-five and spending forty for lessons!" said
Barbara.

Poor little Sally looked somewhat crushed.

"For heaven's sake don't let Keith hear you say that, Babbie!" she
said nervously. "It makes him frantic to suggest that you can get
decent lessons in harmony for nothing! I don't know what you know
about it, anyway. I'll fix it with Dad!"

"If Dad allows Sally so much, he ought to do the same for the rest
of us," Constance suggested. Julia, foreseeing a scene, slipped
out of the room.

In the hallway she encountered Doctor Studdiford, who was just
downstairs after a late sleep. Jim had the satisfied air of a man
who has had a long rest, a shave and a bath, and a satisfactory
breakfast.

"Family conference?" he said, nodding toward the sitting-room
door.

"Sally and Keith are here," Julia announced.

"Oh, are they? Well, I ought to go in. But I also ought to walk up
to the Ridge, and see that poor fellow who ran a shaft into his
leg." Jim hesitated. "I suppose you wouldn't like to go with me?"
he asked, with his sudden smile. Julia's heart jumped; her eyes
answered him. "Well, wrap up snug," said Jim, "for there's the
very deuce of a wind!"

So Julia tied herself into the most demure of hats, and buttoned
her long coat about her, and Jim shook himself into his heaviest
overcoat, and pulled an old cap down over his eyes. They let
themselves out at a side door, and a gust of wet wind howled down
upon them, and shook a shower from the madly rippling ivy leaves.
The sky was high and pale, and crossed by hurrying and scattered
clouds; a clean, roaring gale tore over the hills, and ruffled the
rain pools in the road, and bowed the trees like whips. The bay
was iron colour; choppy waves chased each other against the piers.
Now and then a pale flicker of sunlight brightened the whole scene
with blues and greens and shadows spectacularly clear; then the
clouds met again, and the wind sang like a snapped wire.

Julia and the doctor climbed the long flights of stairs that cut
straight up through the scattered homes on the hill. These earthen
steps were still running with the late rain, and moss lay on them
like a green film. Julia breathed hard, a veil of blown hair
crossed her bright eyes, her stinging cheeks glowed.

"I love this kind of a day!" she shouted. Jim's gloved hand helped
her to cross a wide pool, and his handsome eyes were full of all
delight as he shouted back.

Presently, when they were in a more quiet bit of road, he told her
of some of his early boyish walks. "Listen, Julia!" he said,
catching her arm. "D'you hear them? It's the peepers! We used to
call them that, little frogs, you know--sure sign of the spring!"

And as the wind lulled Julia heard the brave little voices of a
hundred tiny croakers in some wet bit of meadow. "We'll have
buttercups next week!" said Jim.

He told her something of the sick man to whom they were going, and
spoke of other cases, of his work and his hopes.

"Poor Kearney!" said Jim, "his oldest kid was sick, then his wife
had a new baby, and now this! You'll like the baby--he's a nice
little kid. I took him in my arms last time I was here, and I wish
you could have seen the little lip curl up, but he wouldn't cry! A
kid two months old can be awfully cunning!" He looked a little
ashamed of this sentiment, but Julia thought she had never seen
anything so bright and simple and lovable as the smile with which
he asked her sympathy.

She was presently mothering the baby, in the Kearneys' little hot
living-room, while Doctor Studdiford caused the patient in the
room beyond to shout with pain. The howling wind had a sinister
sound, heard up here within walls, and Julia was glad to be out in
it, and going down the hills again.

"Well, how do you like sick calls?" asked Jim.

"I was glad not to have to see him," Julia confessed. "But it is a
darling baby, and such a nice little wife! She has a sister who
comes up every afternoon, so she can get some sleep, poor thing.
His mother is going to pay their rent until he gets well, and he
gets two dollars a week from his union. But she said that if you
hadn't--"

"Well, you know now, for such a quiet little mouse of a girl,
Julia, you are a pretty good confidence woman!"

"And the baby's to be named for you!" Julia ended triumphantly.

"Lord, they needn't have done that!" said the doctor, with his
confused, boyish flush. "Look, Julia, how the tide has carried
that ferryboat out of her course!"

Julia's heart flew with the winds; she felt as if she had never
known such an hour of ecstasy before. They had crossed the upper
road, and were halfway down the last flight of steps, when Jim
suddenly caught her hand, and turned her about to face him.
Dripping trees shut in this particular landing, and they were
alone under the wind-swept sky. Jim put his arms about her, and
Julia raised her face, with all a child's serene docility, for his
kiss.

"DO you love me, Julie?" said Jim urgently, then. "Do you love me,
little girl? Because I love you SO much!"

Not the words he had so carefully chosen to say, but he said them
a score of times. If Julia answered, it was only with a confused
murmur, but she clung to him, and her luminous eyes never moved
from his own.

"Oh, my God, I love you so!" Jim said, finally releasing her, only
to catch her in his arms again. "Won't you say it once, Julia,
just to let me hear you?"

"But I did say it," Julia said, dimpling and rosy.

"Oh, but darling, you don't know how HUNGRY I am to hear you!"

"How--how could I help it?" Julia stammered; and now the blue eyes
she raised were misty with tears.

Jim found this satisfactory, intoxicatingly so. They went a few
steps farther and sat on a bit of dry bulk-heading, and began to
discuss the miracle. About them the winds of spring shouted their
eternal promise, and in their hearts the promise that is as new
and as old as spring came to dazzling flower.

"My clever, sweet, little dignified girl!" said Jim. "Julia, do
you know that you are the most fascinating woman in the world? I
never saw any one like you!"

"I--Oh, Jim!" was all that Julia said, but her dimples and the
nearness of the blue eyes helped the stammered words.

"Among all the chattering, vapid girls I know," pursued Jim, "you
stand utterly alone, you with your ambitions, and your WISENESS!
By George! when I think what you have made of yourself, I could
get down and worship you. I feel like a big spoiled kid beside
you! I've always had all the money I could spend, and you, you
game little thing, you've grubbed and worked and made things do!"

"I never had any ambition as high as marrying YOU," Julia said,
with the mysterious little smile that at once baffled and
enchanted him. "When I think of it, it makes me feel giddy, like a
person walking in a valley who found himself set down on top of a
mountain! I never thought of marriage at all!"

"But you are going to marry me, sweet, aren't you?" Jim asked
anxiously. "And you ARE happy, dear? For I feel as if I would die
of joy and pride!"

"Oh, I'm happy!" Julia said, and instantly her lip quivered, and
her eyes brimmed with tears. She jumped to her feet, and caught
him by the hand. "Come on!" she said. "We MUSTN'T be so long!"

"But darling," said Jim, infinitely tender, "why the tears?"

For answer she caught his coat in her shabbily gloved little
hands.

"Because I love you so, Jim," she faltered, trying to smile. "You
don't know how much!" Her voice had dropped to a whisper, and for
a moment her eyes looked far beyond him, down into the valley, and
at the iron-cold bay with its racing whitecaps. Then she took his
hand, and they began to descend the steps.

"I may tell my mother, Julie?" Jim asked joyously. "And Aunt
Sanna? And do you know that Julia is one of my favourite names--"

"No, I want you not to tell any one," Julia decided quickly. "You
must promise me that. Nobody." Something in her tone surprised, a
little chilled, him.

"Julie--but why?"

"Well, because we want to be SURE--"

"Oh, sure! Why, but, dearest, AREN'T you--"

"No, but wait a moment," Julia interrupted, and Jim, turning
toward her, saw a real trouble reflected in her face. "I want you
to meet my mother, and my own people," she said, scarlet cheeked.
Jim's grave, comprehensive look met hers.

"And I want to, dear," he said. And then, as her face did not
brighten: "Why, my dearest, you aren't going to worry because your
people aren't in the Social Register, and don't go to the
Brownings'? I know all sorts of people, Ju--Kearney, up there, is
a good friend of mine! And I know from Aunt Sanna that you're a
long way ahead of your own people."

"I don't know whether it's 'ahead' or not," said Julia, with a
worried laugh. "I suppose only God knows the real value of finger
bowls and toothbrushes and silk stockings! I SUPPOSE it's
'ahead'!"

She opened the Tolands' side gate as she spoke, and they went into
the bare garden.

"Well--but DON'T go in," pleaded Jim, "there'll be a mob about us
in no time, and I've never had you to myself before! When may I
come see your people?"

"Will you write?" Julia asked at the side door.

"Oh, but darling, when we've just begun to talk!" fretted Jim.
"Would you dare to kiss me right here--no one could possibly see
us!"

"I would NOT!" And Julia flashed him one laughing look as she
opened the door. A moment later he heard her running up the
stairway.

Julia found Miss Toland upstairs, hastily packing. "Well,
runaway!" said the older lady. And then, in explanation, "I think
we'd best go, Julia, for my brother and Teddy have just got home,
and there'll have to be a great family council to-night."

"Would you stay if I went?" Julia asked, coming close to her.

"No, you muggins! I'd pack you off in a moment if that was what I
meant! No, I'm glad enough to get out of it!" Miss Toland stood
up. "What's Jim Studdiford been saying to you to give you cheeks
like that?" she asked.

"I don't know," Julia whispered, with a tremulous laugh. And for
the first time she went into Miss Toland's open arms, and hid her
face, and for the first time they kissed each other.

"Anything settled?" the older woman presently asked in great
satisfaction.

"Not--quite!" Julia said.

"Not quite! Well, that's right; there's no need of hurry. Oh, law
me! I've seen this coming," Miss Toland assured her; "he all but
told me himself a week ago! Well, well, well! And it only goes to
show, Julia," she added, shaking a skirt before she rolled it into
a ball and laid it in her suitcase, "that if you give a girl an
occupation, she's better off, she's more useful, and it doesn't
keep her fate from finding her out! You laugh, because you've
heard me say this before, but it's true!"

Julia had laughed indeed; her heart was singing. She would have
laughed at anything to-day.

Four days later, at four o'clock in the afternoon, Doctor
Studdiford called at The Alexander, and Miss Page joined him, in
street attire, at once. They walked away to the car together, in a
street suddenly flooded with golden sunshine.

"Did you tell your mother I was coming, dear?"

"Oh, Jim, of course! I never would dare take them unawares!"

"And did you tell her that you were going to be my adored and
beautiful little wife in a few months?"

"In a few months--hear the man! In a few years! No, but I gave
them to understand that you were my 'friend.' I didn't mention
that you are a multi-millionaire and a genius on leg bones--"

"Julia, my poor girl, if you think you are marrying a multi-
millionaire, disabuse your mind, dear child! Aren't women
mercenary, though! Here I thought I--No, but seriously, darling,
why shouldn't your mother have the satisfaction of knowing that
your future is pretty safe?"

"Well, that's hard to say, Jim. But I think you will like her
better if she takes it for granted that you are just--well, say
just the sort of doctor we might have called in to the settlement
house, establishing a practice, but quite able to marry. I feel,"
said Julia, finding her words with a little difficulty, "that my
mother might hurt my feelings--by doubting my motives, otherwise--
and if she hurt my feelings she would anger you, wouldn't she?"

"She certainly would!" Jim smiled, but the look he gave his plucky
little companion was far removed from mirth.

"And I do dread this call," Julia said nervously. "I came down
here yesterday, just to say we were coming, and it all struck me
as being--However, there's the house, and you'll soon see for
yourself!"

The house itself was something of a shock to Jim, but if Julia
guessed it, he gave her no evidence of his feeling, and was
presently taken into the stifling parlour, and introduced to
Julia's mother, a little gray now, but hard lipped and bright eyed
as ever, and to Mrs. Cox, who had been widowed for some years, and
was a genial, toothless, talkative old woman, much increased in
her own esteem and her children's as the actual owner of the old
house.

"Mother, we want some air in here!" Julia said, going to a window.

"Julia's a great girl for fresh air," said Emeline. "Sit down,
Doctor, and don't mind Ma!" Mrs. Cox, perhaps slightly self-
conscious, was wandering about the room picking threads from the
carpet, straightening the pictures on the walls, and dubiously
poking a small stopped clock on the mantel.

"How's your arm to-day?" Julia asked, stopping behind her mother's
chair, and laying two firm young hands on her shoulders.

"What do you think of a girl that runs off and doesn't see her
mother for weeks at a time, Doctor?" Mrs. Page demanded a little
tartly. "Her papa and I was devoted to her, too! But I suppose if
she marries, she'll be too grand for us altogether!"

"Now, Mother!" said Julia pleadingly, half vexed, half indulgent.

"I had an elegant little place myself when I was first married,"
Mrs. Page continued, in a sort of discontented sing-song. "Julia
must have told you about her papa--"

Julia's serious eyes flashed a look to Jim, and he saw something
almost like humour in their blue deeps.

"That's a crayon enlargement of my youngest son," the old woman
was presently saying, "Chess. A better boy never lived, but he got
in with bad companions and they got him in jail. Yes, indeed they
did! On'y the governor let him out again--"

The call was not long. Doctor Studdiford shook hands with both the
ladies, in departing, and Julia kissed her mother and grandmother
dutifully. The two walked almost in silence to the car.

"Downtown?" asked Julia, in surprise.

"Downtown, for tea," Jim said. And when they were comfortably
established in a secluded corner of the Golden Pheasant, he
expelled a long breath from his lungs, and sent Julia his sunniest
smile as he said:

"Well, you're a wonder!"

"I?" Julia touched her heart with her fingers, and raised her
eyebrows.

"Oh, yes, you are!" Jim repeated. "You're a little wonder! To make
yourself so sweet and fine and dear, it shows that you're one of
the big people of the world, Julie! Some one of the writers,
Emerson I guess it was, says that when you find a young person who
is willing to accept the wisdom of older people, and abide by it,
why, you may watch that young person for great things. And you
see, I propose to!"

Julia had no answering smile ready. Instead her face was very
grave as she said musingly:

"I hardly know why I wanted you to meet my mother and grandmother,
Jim. I don't know quite what I expected when you DID meet them,
but--but you mustn't make light of the fact that they ARE
different from your people, and different from me, too. For three
or four days and nights now I've been thinking about--us. I've
been wondering whether this engagement would be a--a happy thing
for you, Jim. I've wondered--"

"But, sweetheart!" he interrupted eagerly, "I love you! You're the
only woman I ever wanted to marry! I love you just because you ARE
different, you are so much wiser and deeper and truer than any
other girl I ever knew, and if your people and your life have made
you that, why I love them, too! And you do love me, Julie?"

Julia raised heavy eyes, and he could see that tears were pressing
close behind them. She did not speak, but her look suddenly
enveloped him like a cloud. Jim felt a sudden prick of tears
behind his own eyes.

"Sweetness," he said gravely, "I know you love me! And Julia, my
whole soul is simply on fire for you. Don't--DON'T let any mere
trifle come between us now. Let me tell my mother and father to-
morrow!"

A clear light was shining in Julia's eyes. Now, as she
automatically arranged the tea things before her, and poured him
his first cup of tea, she said:

"Jim, I told you that I haven't thought much about marriage for
myself. I suppose it's funny that I shouldn't, for they say most
girls do! But perhaps it was because the biographies and histories
I began to read when I came to the settlement house were all about
men: how Lincoln rose, how Napoleon rose, how this rich man sold
newspapers when he was a little boy, and that other one spent his
first money in taking his mother out of the poorhouse. And of
course marriage doesn't enter so much into the lives of men. It
came to me years ago that what wise men are trying to din into
young people everywhere is just this: that if you make yourself
ready for anything, that thing will come to you. Just do your end,
and somewhere out in the queer, big, incomprehensible machinery of
the world your place will mysteriously begin to get ready for you-
-Am I talking sense, Jim?"

"Absolutely. Go on!" said Jim.

"Well, and so I thought that if I took years and years I might--
well, you won't see why, but I wanted to be a lady!" confessed
Julia, her lips smiling, but with serious eyes. "And, Jim,
everything comes so much more easily than one thinks. Your aunt
knew I wasn't, but I happened to be what she needed, and I kept
quiet, and listened and learned!"

"And suppose you HADN'T happened upon the settlement house?" asked
Jim, his ardent eyes never moving from her face.

"Why, I would have done it somehow, some other way. I meant to
take a position in some family, and perhaps be a trained nurse
when I was older, or study to be a librarian and take the City
Hall examinations, or work up to a post-office position! I had
lots of plans, only of course I was only a selfish little girl
then, and I thought I would disappear, and never let my own people
hear from me again!"

"But you softened on that point, eh?" asked Jim.

"Oh, right away!" Julia's wonderful eyes shone upon him with
something unearthly in their light. "Because God decides to whom
we shall belong, Jim," said she, with childish faith, "and to
start wrong with my own people would mean that I was all wrong,
everywhere. But my highest ambition then was to grow, as the years
went on, to be useful to nice people, and to be liked by them. I
never dreamed every one would be so friendly! And when Miss Pierce
and Miss Scott have asked me to their homes, and when Mrs. Forbes
took me to Santa Cruz, and Mrs. Chetwynde asked me to dine with
them, well, I can't tell you what it meant!"

"It meant that you are as good--and better, in every way--than all
the rest of them put together!" said the prejudiced Jim.

"Oh, Jim!" Julia looked at him over her teacup, a breach of
manners which Jim thought very charming. "No," she said,
presently, pursuing her own thoughts, "but I never thought of
marriage! And now you come along, Jim, so--so good to me, so
infinitely dear, and I can't--I can't help caring--" And suddenly
her lip trembled, and tears filled her eyes. She looked down at
her teacup, and stirred it blindly.

"You angel!" Jim said.

"Don't--make--me--cry--!" Julia begged thickly. A second later she
looked up and laughed through tears. "And I feel like a person who
has been skipped over four or five grades at school; I don't know
whether I CAN be a rich man's wife!" she said whimsically. "I know
I can go on as I am, reading and thinking, and listening to other
people, and keeping quiet when I have nothing to say, but--but
when I think of being Mrs. James Studdiford--"

"Oh, I love to hear you say it!" Jim leaned across the table, and
put one warm big hand over hers. "My darling little wife!"

The word dyed Julia's cheeks crimson, and for the long hour that
they lingered over their tea she seemed to Jim more charming than
he had ever found her before. Her gravity, with its deep hint of
suppressed mirth, and her mirth that was always so delicate and
demure, so shot with sudden pathos and seriousness, were equally
exquisite; and her beauty won all eyes, from the old waiter who
hovered over their happiness, to the little baby in the street car
who would sit in Julia's lap and nowhere else. Jim presently left
Julia to her Girls' Club, consoling himself with the thought that
on the following night they were to make their first trip to the
theatre together.

But when, at half-past seven the next evening, Jim presented
himself at the settlement house, he found Julia alone, and
obviously not dressed for the theatre. She admitted him with a
kiss that to his lover's enthusiasm was strangely cool, and drew
him into the reception hall.

"Your aunt had to go out with Miss Parker," said Julia. "But
she'll positively be here a little after eight."

"My darling, I didn't come to see Aunt Sanna!" Jim caught her to
him. "But, sweetheart," he said, "how hot your face is, and your
poor little hands are icy! Aren't you well?"

"No, I don't believe I'm very well!" Julia admitted restlessly,
lighting the shaded lamp on the centre table, and snapping off the
side lights that so mercilessly revealed her pale face and burning
eyes.

"Not well enough for the theatre? Well, but darling, I don't care
one snap for the theatre," Jim assured her eagerly. "Only I hate
to see you so nervous and tired. Has it been a hard day? Aunt
Sanna--?"

"No, your aunt's an angel to me--no, it's been an easy day," Julia
said, dropping into a chair, and pushing her hair back from her
face with a feverish gesture. A second later she sprang up and
disappeared into the assembly hall. "I thought I mightn't have
locked the door," she said, returning.

"Why, sweetheart," Jim said, in great distress, "what is it?
You're not one bit like yourself!"

"No, I know I'm not," Julia said wildly. She sat down again. "I've
been thinking and thinking all day, until I feel as if I must go
CRAZY!" she said with a desperate gesture. "And it's come to this,
Jim--Don't think I'm excited--I mean it. I--we can't be married,
Jim. That's all. Don't--don't look so amazed. People break
engagements all the time, don't they? And we aren't really
engaged, Jim; nobody knows it. And--and so it's ALL right!"

Anything less right than Julia's ashen face and blazing eyes, and
the touch of her cold wet little hands, Jim thought he had never
seen. He stepped into the bathroom, and ran his eye along the trim
row of labelled bottles on the shelf.

"Here, drink this, dear," he said, coming back to her with
something clear and pungent in a glass. "Now, come here," and half
lifting the little figure in his arms he put her on the couch, and
tucked a plaid warmly about her. "Don't forget that your husband
is also a doctor," said Jim, sitting down so that he could see her
face, and hold one hand in both of his. "You're all worn out and
excited, and no wonder! You see, most girls take out their excess
emotion on their families, but my little old girl is too much
alone!"

Julia's eyes were fixed on him as if she were powerless to draw
them away. It was sweet--it was poignantly sweet--to be cared for
by him, to feel that Jim's warm heart and keen mind were at her
service, that the swift smile was for her, the ardour in his eyes
was all her own. For perhaps half an hour she rested, almost
without speaking, and Jim talked to her with studied lightness and
carelessness. Then suddenly she sat up, and put her hands to her
loosened hair.

"I must look wild, Jim!"

"You look like a ravishing little gipsy! But I wish you had more
colour, mouse!"

"Am I pale?" Julia asked, with a little nervous laugh. Jim dropped
on one knee beside her, and studied her with anxious eyes, and she
pushed the hair off his forehead, and rested her cheek against it
with a long sigh as if she were very tired.

"What is it, dear?" asked Jim, with infinite solicitude.

"Well!" Julia put the faintest shadow of a kiss on his forehead,
then got abruptly to her feet and crossed the room, as if she
found his nearness suddenly insufferable. "I can't break my
engagement to you this way, Jim," said she. "For even if I told
you a thousand times that I had stopped loving you"--a spasm of
pain crossed her face, she shut her hands tightly together over
her heart--"even then you would know that I love you with my whole
soul," she said in a whisper with shut eyes. "But you see," and
Julia turned a pitiful smile upon him, "you see there's something
you don't understand, Jim! You say I have climbed up alone, from
being a tough little would-be actress, who lived over a saloon in
O'Farrell Street, to this! You say--and your aunt says--that I am
wise, wise to see what is worth having, and to work for it! But
has it never occurred to ONE of you--" Julia's voice, which had
been rising steadily, sank to a cold, low tone. "No," she said, as
if to herself, sitting down at the table, and resting her arms
upon it. "No, it has never occurred to one of them to ask WHY I am
different--to ask just what made me so! Life boils itself down to
this, doesn't it?" she went on, staring drearily at the shadowy
corner of the room beyond her. "That women have something to sell,
or give away, and the question is just how much each one can get
for it! That's what makes the most insignificant married woman
feel superior to the happiest and richest old maid. She says to
herself, 'I've made my market. Somebody chose me!' That's what
motherhood and homemaking rest on: the whole world is just one
great big question of sex, spinning away in space! And even after
a woman is married, she still plays with sex; she likes to feel
that men admire her, doesn't she? At dinners there must be a man
for every woman; at dances no two girls must dance together! And
here, the minute a new girl comes to join my clubs, I try to read
her face. Is she pure, or has she already thrown away--"

"Julia, DEAR!" said Jim, amazed and troubled, but she silenced him
with a quick gesture. Her cheeks were burning now, and her words
came fast.

"Those poor little girls at St. Anne's," she said feverishly,
"they've thrown their lives away because this thing that is in the
air all about them came too close. They were too young legally to
be trusted as Nature has trusted them for years! They heard people
talk of it, and laugh about it--it didn't SEEM very dangerous--"

"Julia!" Jim said again, pleadingly.

"Just one moment, Jim, and I'll be done! When they had learned
their lesson, when they had found out what sorrow it brought, when
they knew that there was only loss and shame in it for them--then
it was too late! Then men, and women, too, expected them to go on
giving; there was nothing else to do. Oh," said Julia, in a
heartbreaking voice, bringing her locked hands down upon the table
as if she were in physical agony, "if the law would only take a
hand before and not afterward! Or if, when they are sick to death
of men, they could believe that time would wash it all away; that
there was clean, good work for them somewhere in the world!"

"My darling, why distress yourself about what can't possibly
concern you?" Jim said. Julia stared at him thoughtfully for a few
silent seconds.

"It DOES concern me. That's how I bought my wisdom," she said
quietly then, with no emotion deeper than a mild regret visible in
her face. Voice and manner were swept bare of passion; she seemed
infinitely fatigued. "That's why I can't marry you, Jim."

"What do you mean?" Jim said easily, uncomprehendingly, the
indulgent smile hardly stricken from his lips.

Julia's eyes met his squarely across the lamplight.

"That," she said simply.

There was a silence, and no change of expression on either face.
Then Jim stood up.

"I don't believe it!" he said, with a short laugh.

"It's true," said Julia. "I was not fifteen. How long ago it was!
Nobody has ever known--you need not have known. But I am glad I
told you. I have been thinking of nothing else but telling you for
two days and two nights. And sometimes I would say to myself that
what that old little ignorant Julia did would not concern you--"

Jim made an inarticulate sound, from where he sat with his elbows
on his knees, with his face dropped in his hands.

"But I see it does concern you!" Julia said, quickly, with great
simplicity. "I--luckily I decided to tell you this morning," she
said, "for I am absolutely exhausted now. It was a terrible thing
to keep thinking about, and I could not have fought it out any
longer! There were extenuating circumstances, I suppose. I was a
spoiled little empty-headed girl; the girls all about me were
reckless in everyway; I did not know the boundary-line, or dream
that it mattered very much, so long as no one knew! My mother had
been unhappy in my childhood, and used to talk a good deal about
the disappointment of marriage. Perhaps I don't make myself
clear?"

"YOU! Julia!" Jim whispered, his hands still over his face.

"Yes, I know," Julia said drearily. "I don't seem like that sort
of a girl, I know."

Then there was a long silence.

"You--poor--little--kid!" Jim said, after a while, getting up and
beginning to walk the floor. "Oh, my God! My God! Poor little
kid!"

"I suppose there are psychological moments when one wakes up to
things," Julia went on, in a tone curiously impersonal. "I was in
some theatricals with your sister, years ago. Every one snubbed
me, and no wonder! There was a man named Carter Hazzard--and I
suddenly seemed to wake up at about that time--"

"Carter Hazzard!" The horror in Jim's voice rang through the room.
Julia frowned.

"I only saw him two or three times," she said. "No. But he flirted
with me, and flattered me, and then Barbara told me he was
married, and then I found out that they all thought I was vulgar
and common--and so I was. And I suppose I wanted to be loved and
made much of, and he--this man--was good to me!"

"Not you--of all women!" Jim said dully, as if to himself.

"I know how you feel," Julia said without emotion, "because of
course I feel that way, too--now! And I never loved him, never
even thought I did! It was only a little while--two weeks or
three, I guess--before I told him I couldn't ever love him. I said
I thought I might, but it was like--like realizing that I had been
throwing away gold pieces for dimes. Do you know what I mean? And
the most awful disgust came over me, Jim--a sort of
disappointment, that this talked-of and anticipated thing was no
more than that! And then I came here, and I knew that keeping
still about it was my only chance, and oh, how sick I was, soul
and body, for a fresh start! And then your aunt talked to me, and
said what a pity it is that young girls think of nothing but love
and lovers, and so throw away their best years, and I thought that
I was done with love; no more curiosity--no more thrill--and that
I would do something with my life after all!"

Her voice dropped, and again there was silence in the room. Jim
continued to pace the floor.

"Why, there's never been a morning at St. Anne's that I haven't
looked at those girls," Julia presently resumed, "and said to
myself that I might have been there, with my head shaved and a
green check dress on! Lots of them must be better than I!"

"Don't!" Jim said sharply, and there was a silence until Julia
said wonderingly:

"Isn't it funny that all last night, and the night before, I
thought I was going to DIE, telling you this--and now it just
doesn't seem to matter at all?"

"That's why you've never married?" Jim said, clearing his throat.

"I've never wanted to until now," Julia said. "And I--I am so
changed now that somehow I would never think of that--that bad old
time, in connection with marriage! It was as if that part of my
life was sealed beyond opening again--

"And then you came. I only wanted no one to guess that I cared at
first. And then, when I saw that you were beginning to care, too,
oh, my God! I thought my heart would burst!"

And with sudden terrible passion in her voice, she got up in her
turn and began to pace the room. Jim, who had flung himself into a
chair opposite hers, rested his elbows on the table, and his face
in his hands.

"But I feel this about your caring for me, Jim," Julia said. "In a
strange, mysterious way I feel that giving you up--giving you up,
my best and dearest, is purification! When--when this is over, I
shall have paid! It may be"--tears flooded her eyes, and she came
back to her chair and laid her head on her arm--"it may be that I
can't bear it, and that I will die!" sobbed Julia. "But I shall
always be glad that I told you this to-night!" There was a long
silence, and then again Jim came to kneel beside her, and put one
arm about her.

"My own little girl!" said he. At his voice Julia raised her head,
and put her arms about his neck like a weary child, and rested her
wet face against his own.

"My own brave girl!" Jim said. "I know what courage it took to
have you tell me this! It will never be known to any one else,
sweetheart, and we will bury it in our hearts forever. Kiss me,
dearest, and promise me that my little wife will stop crying!"

For a moment it was as if she tried to push him away.

"Jim," she whispered, tears running down her face, "have you
thought--are you SURE?"

"Quite sure, sweetheart," he said soothingly and tenderly. "Why,
Julie, wouldn't you forgive me anything I might have done when I
was only an ignorant little boy?"

Julia tightened her arms about him, and sobbed desperately for a
long while. Then her breathing quieted, and she let Jim dry her
eyes with his own handkerchief, and listened, with an occasional
long sigh, to his eager, confident plans. They were still talking
quietly when the street door was flung open and Miss Toland came
in, on a rush of fresh air.

"Rain!" said Miss Toland. "Terrible night! Not an umbrella in the
Parker house until Clem came home--it's quarter to ten!"

"Congratulate us, Aunt Sanna," said Jim, rising to his feet with
his arm still about Julia. "Julia has promised to marry me!"


End of Part One




PART TWO




CHAPTER I


Yet Dr. James Studdiford, walking down to his club, an hour later,
with the memory of his aunt's joyous congratulations ringing in
his ears, and of Julia's last warm little kiss upon his cheek, was
perhaps more miserable than he had been before in the course of
his life. Julia was his girl--his own girl--and the thrill of her
submission, the enchanting realization that she loved him, rose
over and over again in his heart, like the rising of deep waters--
only to wash against the firm barrier of that hideous Fact.

Jim could do nothing with the Fact. It did not seem to belong to
him, or to Julia, to their love and future together, or to her
gallant, all-enduring past. Julia was Julia--that was the only
significant thing, the sweetest, purest, cleverest woman he knew.
And she loved him! A rush of ecstasy flooded his whole being; how
sweet she was when he made her say she loved him--when she
surrendered her hands, when she raised her gravely smiling blue
eyes! What a little wife she would be, what a gay little comrade,
and some day, perhaps, what a mother!

Again the Fact. After such a little interval of radiant peace it
seemed to descend upon him with an ugly violence. It was true;
nothing that they could do now would alter it. And, of course, the
thing was serious. If anything in life was serious, this was. It
was frightful--it seemed sacrilegious to connect such things for
an instant with Julia. Dear little Julia, with her crisp little
uniforms, her authority in the classroom, her charming deference
to Aunt Sanna! And she loved him---

"Damn it, the thing either counts or it doesn't count!" Jim
muttered, striding down Market Street, past darkened shops and
corners where lights showed behind the swinging doors of saloons.
Either it was all important or it was not important at all. With
most women, all important, of course. With Julia--Jim let his mind
play for a few minutes with the thought of renunciation. There
would be no trouble with Julia, and Aunt Sanna could easily be
silenced.

He shook the mere vision from him with an angry shake of the head.
She belonged to him now, his little steadfast, serious girl. And
she had deceived them all these years! Not that he could blame her
for it! Naturally, Aunt Sanna would never have overlooked that,
and presumably no other woman would have engaged her, knowing it,
even to wash dishes and sweep steps.

"Lord, what a world for women!" thought Jim, in simple wonder.
Hunted down mercilessly, pushed at the first sign of weakening,
they know not where, and then lost! Hundreds of thousands of them
forever outcast, to pay through all the years that are left to
them for that hour of yielding! Hundreds of thousands of them, and
his Julia only different because she had made herself so--

It seemed to Jim, in his club now, and sunk in a deep chair before
the wood fire in the quiet library, that he could never marry her.
It must simply be his sorrow to have loved Julia--God, how he did
love her!

But, through all their years together, there must not be that
shadow upon their happiness; it was too hideous to be endured. "It
must be endured," mused Jim wretchedly. "It is true!

"Anyway," he went on presently, rousing himself, "the thing is no
more important than I choose to make it. Ordinarily, yes. But in
this case the thing to be considered is its effect on Julia's
character, and if ever any soul was pure, hers is!

"And if we marry, we must simply make up our minds that the past
is dead!" And suddenly Jim's heart grew lighter, and the black
mood of the past hour seemed to drop. He stretched himself
luxuriously and folded his arms. "If Julia isn't a hundred per
cent, sweeter and better and finer than these friends of Babbie's,
who go chasing about to bad plays and read all the rottenest books
that are printed," he said, "then there's no such thing as a good
woman! My little girl--I'm not half worthy of HER, that's the
truth!"

"Hello, Jim!" said Gray Babcock, coming in from the theatre, and
stretching his long cold hands over the dying fire. "We thought
you might come in to-night. Hazzard and Tom Parley had a little
party for Miss Manning, of the 'Dainty Duchess' Company, you know-
-awfully pretty girl, straight, too, they say. There were a couple
of other girls, and Roy Grinell--things were just about starting
up when I came away!"

Jim rose, and kicked the scattered ends of a log toward the flame.

"I've not got much use for Hazzard," he observed, frowning.

Babcock gave a surprised and vacant laugh.

"Gosh! I thought all you people were good friends!"

"Hazzard's an ass," observed Jim irritably. "There are some things
that aren't any too becoming to college kids--however, you can
forgive them! But when it comes to an ass like Hazzard chasing to
every beauty show, and taking good little girls to supper--"

"Alice don't care a whoop what he does," Babcock remarked hastily.

"Yes, so of course that makes everything all right," Jim said
ironically. But Mr. Babcock was in no mood to be critical of
tones.

"Sure it does!" he agreed contentedly. And when Jim had
disgustedly departed, he remained still staring into the fire, a
pleased smile upon his face.

Julia spent the next day in bed fighting a threatened nervous
breakdown, and Jim came to see her at two o'clock, and they had a
long and memorable talk, with Jim's chair drawn close to the
couch, and the girl's lax hand in his own. She had not slept all
night, she told him, and he suspected that she had spent much of
the long vigil in tears. Tears came again as she begged a hundred
times to set him free, but he quieted her at last, and the old
tragedy that had risen to haunt them was laid. And if Julia felt a
rush of blind gratitude and hope when they sealed their new
compact with a kiss, Jim was no less happy--everything had come
out wonderfully, and he loved Julia not less, but more than he had
ever loved her. The facts of her life, whatever they had been, had
made her what she was; now let them all be forgotten.

"Still, you are not sorry I told you, Jim?" Julia asked.

"No, oh, no, dearest! If only because you would have been sure to
want to do it sooner or later--it would have worried you. But now
I do know, Julie, you little Spartan! And this ends it. We'll
never speak of it again, and we'll never think of it again. You
and I are the only two who know--And we love each other. When
all's said and done, it's I that am not good enough for you,
darling, not worthy to tie your little shoe laces!"

"Oh, YOU!" Julia said, in great content.

The rest followed, as Julia herself said, like "a house-maid's
dream." Jim went home to tell his own people that night, and the
very next morning Julia, surprised and smiling, took in at the
door a trim little package that proved to be a blue-and-white
Copenhagen teacup, with a card that bore only the words "Miss
Barbara Lowe Toland." Julia twisted it in her fingers with a
curious little thrill at the heart. The "nicest" people sent cups
to engaged girls, the "nicest" people sent their cards innocent of
scribbled messages. She, Julia Page, was one of the "nicest"
people now, and these were the first tentacles of her new estate
reaching out to meet her.

Notes and flowers from the Tolands and the warm-hearted Tolands
themselves followed thick and fast, and in a day or two notes and
cups--cups--cups--were coming from other people as well. The
Misses Saunders, the Harvey Brocks, the George Chickerings, Mr.
Peter Coleman, Mr. Jerome Phillips, Mrs. Arnold Keith, and Miss
Mary Peacock--all had found time to go into Nathan Dohrmann's, or
Gump's, or the White House, and pick out a beautiful cup to send
Miss Julia Page.

Six weeks--five weeks--three weeks to the wedding, sang Julia's
heart; the time ran away. She had dreaded having to meet Jim's
friends, and had dreaded some possible embarrassment from an
unexpected move on the part of her own family, but the days fled
by, and the miracle of their happiness only expanded and grew
sweeter, like a great opening rose. Their hours together, with so
much to tell each other and so much to discuss, no matter how
short the parting had been, were hours of exquisite delight. And
as Julia's beauty and charm were praised on all sides, Jim beamed
like a proud boy. As for Julia, every day brought to her notice
something new to admire in this wonderful lover of hers: his scowl
as he fixed his engine, the smile that always met hers, the
instant soberness and attention with which he answered any
question as to his work from the older doctor--all this was
delightful to her. And when he took her to luncheon, his careless
big fingers on the ready gold pieces and his easy nod to the
waiter were not lost upon Julia. She had loved him for himself,
but it was additionally endearing to learn that other people loved
him, too, to be stopped by elderly women who smiled and praised
him, to have young people affectionately interested in his plans.

"You know you are nothing but a small boy, Jim," Julia said one
day, "just a sweet, happy kid! You were a spoiled and pitied
little boy, with your big eyes and your velvet suits and your
patent leathers; you loved every one--every one loved you; you had
your allowance, you were born to be a surgeon, and chance made
your guardian a doctor--"

"I fell down on my exams," Jim submitted meekly. "And there was a
fellow at college who said I bored him!"

"Oh, dearest," Julia said, beginning to laugh at his rueful face,
"and are those the worst things that ever happened to you?"

"About," said Jim, enjoying the consolatory little kiss she gave
him.

"And your youngness baffles me," pursued Julia thoughtfully.
"You're ten years older than I am, you've been able to do a
thousand things I never did, you're a rising young surgeon, and
yet--and yet sometimes there's a sort of level--level isn't the
word!--a sort of POSITIVE youth about you that makes me feel
eighty! It's just as if you had been born everything you are,
ready made! When you have to straighten a child's hip, you push
your hair back like a nice little kid, and say to yourself, 'Sure-
-I can do that!' You seem as pleased and surprised as any one else
when everything comes out right!"

"Well, gosh! I never can put on any lugs!" said James, rumpling
his hair in penitential enjoyment.

"I have to learn things so HARD," Julia mused, "they dig down
right into the very soul of me--"

"You're implying that I'm shallow," said the doctor sternly. "You
think I'm a pampered child of luxury, but I'm not! I just think
I'm a pretty ordinary fellow who came in for an extraordinary line
of luck. I would have made a pretty good bluff at supporting
myself in any sort of life; as it was, when I was a youngster,
growing up, I used to say to myself, 'You think you're going to be
rich, but half the poor men in the world are born rich, anything
may happen!' However, I enjoyed things just the same, and I went
to medical college just because Dad said every man ought to be
able to support himself. Then I got interested in the thing, and
old Fox was a king to me, and told me I ought to go in for
surgery. My own father was a surgeon, you know. Some hands are
just naturally better for it than others, and his were, and mine
are. And at twenty-five I came of age, and found that my money was
pretty safely fixed, and that Dad was kind of counting on my going
in with him. So there you are! Things just come my way; as I say,
I'd have been satisfied with less, but I've got in the habit of
taking my luck for granted."

"And some people, like--well, like my grandmother, for instance,
just get in the habit of bad luck," Julia said, with a sigh. "And
some, like myself," she added, brightening, "are born in the bad
belt, and push into the good! And we're the really lucky ones! I
shall never put on a fresh frock, or go downtown with you to the
theatre, without a special separate joy!"

Jim said, "You angel!" and as she jumped up--they had been sitting
side by side in the hall at The Alexander--he caught her around
the waist, and Julia set a little kiss on the top of his hair.

"But you do love me, Ju?" Jim asked.

"But I do indeed!" she answered. "Why do you always ask me in that
argumentative sort of way? But me no buts!"

"Ah, well, it's because I'm always afraid you'll stop!" Jim
pleaded. "And I do so want you to begin to love me as much as I do
you!"

"You must have had thousands of girls!" Julia remarked, idly
rumpling his hair.

"I never was engaged before!" he assured her promptly. "Except to
that Delaware girl, as I told you, and after five years she threw
me over for a boy named Gregory Biddle, with several millions, but
no chin, Julia, and had the gall to ask me to the wedding!"

"Jim, and you went?"

"Sure I went!" Jim declared.

"Oh, Jim!" and Julia gave him another kiss, through a gale of
laughter, and ran off to change her gown and put on her hat.

It was a Saturday afternoon, and they were going to Sausalito. But
first they went downtown in the lazy soft spring afternoon, to buy
gloves for Julia and a scarf pin for Richie, who was to be Jim's
best man, and to go into the big railroad office to get tickets
for the use of Dr. and Mrs. James Studdiford three days later.

"Where are we going?" Julia asked idly, her eyes moving about the
bright pigeonholed office, and to the window, and the street
beyond. Jim for answer put his thumb upon the magic word that
stared up at her from the long ticket.

"New York!" she whispered; her radiant look flashed suddenly to
him. "Oh, Jim!" And as they went out he heard a little sigh of
utter content beside him. "It's too much!" said Julia. "To go to
New York--with you!"

"Wherever you go, you go with me," he reminded her, with a glance
that brought the swift colour to her face.

Then they went down to the boat. It was the first hot afternoon of
the season; there was a general carrying of coats, and people were
using the deck seats; there was even some grumbling at the heat.
But Sausalito was at its loveliest, and Julia felt almost
oppressed by the exquisite promise of summer that came with the
sudden sound of laughter and voices in lanes that had long been
silent, and with the odour of dying grass and drooping buttercups
beside the road. The Toland garden was full of roses, bright in
level sunshine, windows and doors were all wide open, and the
odours from bowls of flowers drifted about the house. Barbara,
lovely in white, came to meet them.

"Come in, you poor things, you must be roasted! Jim, you're as red
as a beet; go take a bath!" said Barbara. "And Julia, Aunt Sanna
is here, and she says that you're to lie down for not less than an
hour. And there are some packages for you, so come up and lie down
on my bed, and we'll open them!"

"Barbara, I am so happy I think my heart will burst!" said Julia,
ten minutes later, from Barbara's pillows.

"Well, you ought to be, my good woman! Jim Studdiford--when he's
sober--is as good a husband as you're likely to get!" said
Barbara, laughing. "Now, look, Julia, here's a jam pot from the
Fowlers--Frederic Fowlers--I call that decent of them! Janey, come
in here and put this jam pot down on Julia's list! And this heavy
thing from the Penroses. I hope to goodness it isn't more
carvers!"

It was Barbara who said later to Julia, in a confidential
undertone:

"You know you've got to write personal notes for every bit of this
stuff, Julia, right away? Lots of girls do it on their
honeymoons."

"Well, I wanted to ask you, Barbara: how do I sign myself to these
people I've never seen: 'Yours truly'?"

"Oh, heavens, no! 'Sincerely yours' or 'Yours cordially' and make
'em short. The shorter they are the smarter they are, remember
that."

"And if I sign J. P. Studdiford, or Julia P. Studdiford--then
oughtn't 'Mrs. J. N.' go in one corner?"

"Oh, NO, you poor webfoot! No. Just write a good splashy 'Julia
Page Studdiford' all over the page; they'll know who you are fast
enough!"

"Thanks," said Julia shyly.

"You're welcome," Barbara said, smiling. "Are you ready to go
down?"

After dinner the young Tolands, augmented by several young men,
and by Julia and the doctor, all wandered out into the thick
darkness, rejoicing in the return of summer. Sausalito's lanes
were sweet with roses, lights shone out across the deep fresh
green of gardens, and lights moved on the gently moving waters of
the bay. A ferryboat, a mass of checkered brightness, plowed its
way from Alcatraz--far off the city lay like a many-stranded chain
of glittering gems upon the water. Julia and Doctor Studdiford let
the others go on without them, and sat together in the dim curve
of the O'Connell seat, and the heartbreaking beauty of the night
wrapped them both in a happiness so deep as to touch the
borderland of pain.

"Was there ever such a night?" said little Julia. "Shall we ever
be so happy again?"

Jim could not see her clearly, but he saw her bright, soft eyes in
the gloom, the shimmer of her loosened hair, the little white-clad
figure in the seat's wide curve, and the crossed slim ankles. He
put his arm about her, and she rested her head on his shoulder.

"Don't say that, darling!" said Jim. "This is great, of course.
But it's nothing to all the happy months and years that we'll
belong to each other. Nothing but death will ever come between you
and me, Julie!"

"And I shouldn't be afraid of death," murmured Julia, staring up
at the stars. "Strange--strange--strange that we all must go that
way some day!" she mused.

"Well, please God, we'll do some living first," Jim said, with
healthy anticipation. "We'll go to New York, and gad about, and go
to Washington and Boston, and pick up things here and there for
the house, do you see? Then we'll come back here and go to a
hotel, and find a house and fix it up!"

"That'll be fun," said Julia.

"You bet your life it'll be fun! And then, my dear, we'll give
some corking dinners, and my beautiful wife will wear blue velvet,
or white lace, or peachy silk--"

"Or all three together," the prospective wife suggested, "with the
flags of all nations in my hair!"

"Then next year we'll visit old Gilchrist, at Monterey, and go up
to Tahoe," continued Jim, unruffled. "Or we could take some place
in Ross--"

"And then I will give a small and select party for one guest,"
said Julia whimsically," and board him, free, for fifteen or
twenty years--"

"Julia, you little DUCK!" Jim bent his head over her in the
starlight, and felt her soft hair brush his face, and caught the
glint of her laughing eyes close to his own, and the vague
delicious little perfume of youth and beauty and radiant health
that hung about her. "Do you know that you are as cunning as a
sassy kid?" he demanded. "Now, kiss me once and for all, and no
nonsense about it, for I can hear the others coming back!"

Two days later they were married, very quietly, in the little
Church of Saint Charles Borromeo, where Julia's father and mother
had been married a quarter of a century ago. They had "taken
advantage," as Julia said, of her old grandfather's death, and
announced that because the bride's family was in mourning the
ceremony would be a very quiet one. Even the press was not
notified; the Tolands filled two pews, and two more were filled by
Julia's mother, her grandmother, and cousins. Kennedy Scott
Marbury and her husband were there, and sturdy two-year-old Scott
Marbury, who was much interested in this extraordinary edifice and
impressive proceeding, but there were no other witnesses. Julia
wore a dark-blue gown, and a wide black hat whose lacy brim cast a
most becoming shadow over her lovely, serious face. She and Miss
Toland drove from the settlement house, and stopped to pick up
Mrs. Page, who was awed by Julia's dignity, and a little resentful
of the way in which others had usurped her place with her
daughter. However, Emeline had very wisely decided to make the
best of the situation, and treated Miss Toland with stiff
politeness. Julia was in a smiling dream, out of which she roused
herself, at intervals, for only a gentle, absent-minded "Yes" or
"No."

"I tried to persuade her to be married at the Cathedral, by His
Grace," said Miss Toland to Mrs. Page. "But she wanted it this
way!"

"Well, I'm sure she feels you've done too much for her as it is,"
Emeline said mincingly. "Now she must turn around and return some
of it!"

To this Miss Toland made no answer except an outraged snort, and a
closer pressure of her fine, bony hand upon Julia's warm little
fingers. They presently reached the church, and Julia was in
Barbara's hands.

"You look lovely, darling, and your hat is a dream!" said Barbara,
who looked very handsome herself, in her brown suit and flower-
trimmed hat. "We go upstairs, I think. Jim's here, nervous as a
FISH. You're wonderful--as calm! I'd simply be in spasms. Ted was
awful; you'd think she had been married every day, but Robert--his
collar was WILTED!"

They had reached the upper church now, and Miss Toland and Mrs.
Page followed the girls down the long aisle to the altar. Julia
saw her little old grandmother, in an outrageous flowered bonnet,
and Evelyn who was a most successful modiste now, and Marguerite,
looking flushed and excited, with her fat, apple-faced young
husband, and three lumpy little children. Also her Aunt May was
there, and some young people: Muriel, who was what Evelyn had been
at fifteen, and a toothless nine-year-old Regina, in pink, and
some boys. On the other side were the elegant Tolands, the dear
old doctor in an aisle seat, with his hands, holding his eye-
glasses and his handkerchief, fallen on either knee; Ted lovely in
blue, Constance and Jane with Ned and Mrs. Ned, frankly staring.

As Julia came down the aisle, with a sudden nervous jump of her
heart, she saw Jim and Richie, who was limping badly, but without
his crutch, come toward her. The old priest came down the altar
steps at the same time. She and Jim listened respectfully to a
short address without hearing a word of it, and found themselves
saying the familiar words without in the least sensing them. Julia
battled through the prayer with a vague idea that she was losing a
valuable opportunity to invoke the blessing of God, but unable to
think of anything but the fact that the bride usually walked out
of church on the groom's arm, and that St. Charles's aisle was
long and rather dismal in the waning afternoon light.

"Here, darling, in the vestry!" Jim was whispering, smiling his
dear, easy, reassuring smile as he guided her to the nearby door.
And in a second they were all about her, her first kiss on the wet
cheek of Aunt Sanna, the second to her mother--"Evelyn, you were a
darling to come way across the city, and Marguerite, you were a
darling to bring those precious angels"--and then the old doctor's
kiss, and Richie's kiss, and a pressure from his big bony fingers.
Julia half knelt to embrace little Scott Marbury. "He's beautiful,
Kennedy; no wonder you're proud!" And she tore her beautiful bunch
of roses apart, that each girl might have a few.

"I've got to get her to the train!" Jim protested presently,
trying patiently to disengage his wife's hands, eyes, and
attention. "Julia! Julia Studdiford!"

"Yes, I know!" Julia laughed, and was snatched away, half laughing
and half in tears, and hurried down to the side street, where a
carriage was waiting. And here there was one more delay: Chester
Cox, a thin shambling figure, came forward from a shadowy doorway,
and rather timidly held out his hand.

"I couldn't get away until jest now," said Chester. "But of course
I wish you luck, Julia!"

"Why, it's my uncle!" Julia said, cordially clasping his hand.
"Mr. Cox--Doctor Studdiford. I'm so glad you came, Chess!"

"Glad to know you, Mr. Cox," Jim said heartily.

"And I brought you a little present; it ain't much, but maybe you
can use it!" mumbled Chester, terribly embarrassed, and with a
nervous laugh handing Julia a rather large package somewhat
flimsily wrapped and tied.

"Oh, thank you!" Julia said gratefully. And before she got in the
carriage she put her hand on Chester's arm, and raised her fresh,
exquisite little face for a kiss.

"Now, about this--" Doctor Studdiford began delicately, glancing
at Chester's gift, which Julia had given him to hold. "I wonder if
it wouldn't be wise to ask your uncle to send this to my mother's
until we get back, Ju. You see, dear--"

"Oh, no-no!" Julia said eagerly, leaning out of the carriage, and
taking the package again. She sent Chester a last bright smile, as
Jim jumped in and slammed the door, but it was an April face that
she turned a second later to her husband.

"They're all so good to me, and it just breaks my heart!" she
said.

"At last--it's all over--and you belong to me!" exulted Jim. "I
have been longing and LONGING for this, just to be alone with you,
and have you to myself. Are you tired, sweetheart?"

"No-o. Just a little--perhaps."

"But you do love me?"

"Oh, Jim--you idiot!" Julia slipped her hand into his, as he put
one arm about her, and rested against his shoulder. "When I think
that I will often ride in carriages," she mused, half smiling,
"and that, besides being my Jim, you are a rich man, it makes me
feel as if I were Cinderella!"

"You shall have your own carriage if you want it, Pussy!" he
smiled.

"Oh, don't--don't give me anything more," begged Julia, "or a
clock somewhere will strike twelve, and I'll wake up in The
Alexander, with the Girls' Club rehearsing a play!"

When she had examined every inch of her Pullman drawing-room, and
commented upon one hundred of its surprising conveniences, and
when her smart little travelling case, the groom's gift, had been
partly unpacked, and when her blue eyes had refreshed themselves
with a long look at the rolling miles of lovely San Mateo hills,
then young Mrs. Studdiford looked at her Uncle Chester's wedding
gift. She found a brush and comb and mirror in pink celluloid,
with roses painted on them, locked with little brass hasps into a
case lined with yellow silk.

"Look, Jim!" said Julia pitifully, not knowing whether to laugh or
to cry.

"Gosh!" said the doctor thoughtfully, looking over the coat he was
neatly arranging on a hanger. "I've often wondered who buys those
things!"

"I'll give it to the porter," Julia decided. "He may like it. Dear
old Chess!" And Jim grinned indulgently a few minutes later at the
picture of his beautiful little wife enslaving the old coloured
porter, and gravely discussing with him the advantages and
disadvantages of his work.

"You know, we could have our meals in here, Ju," Jim suggested.
"Claude here"--all porters were "Claude" to Jim--"would take care
of us, wouldn't you, Claude?"

"Dat I would!" said Claude with husky fervour. But Julia's face
fell.

"Oh, Jim! But it would be such fun to go out to the dining-car!"
she pleaded.

Jim shouted. "All right, you baby!" he said. "You see, my wife's
only a little girl," he explained. "She's--are you eight or nine,
Julia?"

"She sho' don't look more'n dat," Claude gallantly assured them,
as he departed.

"I'll be twenty-four on my next birthday," Julia said
thoughtfully, a few moments later.

"Well, at that, you may live three or four years more!" Jim
consoled her. "Do you know what time it is, Loveliness? It's
twenty minutes past six. We've been married exactly two hours and
twenty minutes. How do you like it?"

"I love it!" said Julia boldly. "Do I have to change my dress for
dinner?"

"You do not."

"But I ought to fix my hair, it's all mashed!" Julia did wonders
to it with one of the ivory-backed brushes that had come with the
new travelling case, fluffing the thick braids and tucking the
loose golden strands about her temples trimly into place. Then she
rubbed her face with a towel, and jumped up to straighten her
belt, and run an investigating finger about the embroidered "turn-
down" collar that finished her blue silk blouse. Finally she
handed Jim her new whisk-broom with a capable air, and presented
straight little shoulders to be brushed.

Jim turned her round and round, whisking and straightening, and
occasionally kissing the tip of a pink ear, or the straight white
line where her hair parted.

"Here, you can't keep that up all night!" Julia suddenly
protested, grabbing the brush. "I'll do you!" But Jim stopped the
performance by suddenly imprisoning girl and whiskbroom in his
arms.

"Do you know I think we are going to have great fun!" said he.
"You're such a good little sport, Ju! No nerves and no nonsense
about you! It's such fun to do things with a person who isn't
eternally fussing about heat and cold, and whether she ought to
wear her gloves into the dining-car, and whether any one will
guess that she's just married!"

"Oh, I have my nervous moments," Julia confessed, her eyes looking
honestly up into his. "It seems awfully strange and queer, rushing
farther and farther away from home, alone with you!" Her voice
sank a little; she put up her arms and locked them about his neck.
"I have to keep reminding myself that you are just you, Jim," she
said bravely, "who gave me my Browning, and took me to tea at the
Pheasant--and then it all seems right again! And then--such lots
of nice people HAVE got married, and gone away on honeymoons," she
ended, argumentatively.

The laughter had gone from Jim's eyes; a look almost shy, almost
ashamed, had taken its place. He kept her as she was for a moment,
then gave her a serious kiss, and they went laughing through the
rocking cars to eat their first dinner together as man and wife.
And Jim watched her as she radiantly settled herself at table, and
watched the frown of childish gravity with which she studied her
menu, with some new and tender emotion stirring at his heart. Life
had greater joys in it than he had ever dreamed, and greater
potentialities for sorrow, too. What was bright in life was
altogether more gloriously bright, and what was dark seemed to
touch him more closely; he felt the sorrow of age in the trembling
old man at the table across the aisle, the pathos of youth in the
two young travelling salesmen who chattered so self-confidently
over their meal.

Several weeks later young Mrs. Studdiford wrote to Barbara that
New York was "a captured dream." "I seem to belong to it," wrote
Julia, "and it seems to belong to me! I can't tell you how it
SATISFIES me; it is good just to look down from my window at Fifth
Avenue, every morning, and say to myself, 'I'm still in New York!'
For the first two weeks Jim and I did everything alone, like two
children: the new Hippodrome, and Coney Island, and the Liberty
Statue, and the Bronx Zoo. I NEVER had such a good time! We went
to the theatres, and the museums, and had breakfast at the Casino,
and LIVED on top of the green 'busses! But now Jim has let some of
his old college friends know we are here, and we are spinning like
tops. One is an artist, and has the most fascinating studio I ever
saw, down on Washington Square, and another is an editor, and gave
us a tea in his rooms, overlooking Stuyvesant Square, and Barbara,
everybody there was a celebrity (except us) and all so sweet and
friendly--it was a hot spring day, and the trees in the square
were all such a fresh, bright green.

"They make a great fuss about the spring here, and you can hardly
blame them. The whole city turns itself inside out; people simply
stream to the parks, and the streets swarm with children. Some of
the poorer women go bareheaded or with shawls, even in the cars--
did you ever see a bareheaded woman in a car at home? But they are
all much nearer the peasant here. And after clean San Francisco,
you wouldn't believe how dirty this place is; all the smaller
stores have shops in the basements, and enough dirt and old rags
and wet paper lying around to send Doctor Blue into a convulsion!
And they use pennies here, which seems so petty, and paper dollars
instead of silver, which I hate. And you say 'L' or 'sub' for the
trains, and always 'surface cars' for the regular cars--it's all
so different and so interesting.

"Tell Richie Jim is going to assist the great Doctor Cassell in
some demonstrations of bone transplanting, at Bellevue, next week-
-oh, and Barbara, did I write Aunt Sanna that we met the
President! My dear, we did. We were at the theatre with the
Cassells, and saw him in a box, and Doctor Cassell, the old
darling, knows him, and went to the President's box to ask if we
might be brought in and presented, and, my dear, he got up and
came back with Doctor Cassell to our box, and was simply SWEET,
and asked me if I wasn't from the South, and I nearly said, 'Yes,
south of Market Street,' but refrained in time. I had on the new
apricot crepe, and a black hat, and felt very Lily-like-a-
princess, as Jane says.

"But we're both getting homesick; it will seem good to see the old
ferry building again--and Sausalito, and all of you."

Early in July they did start homeward, but by so circuitous a
route, and with such prolonged stops at the famous hotels of
Canada, that it was on a September afternoon that they found
themselves taking the Toland household by storm. And Julia thought
no experience in her travels so sweet as this one: to be received
into the heart of the family, and to settle down to a review of
the past five months. Richie was so brotherly and kind, the girls
so admiring of her furs and her diamonds, so full of gay chatter,
the old doctor so gallant and so affectionate! Mrs. Toland chirped
and twittered like the happy mother of a cageful of canaries; and
Julia, when they gathered about the fire after dinner, took a low
stool next to Miss Toland's chair and rested a shoulder, little-
girl fashion, against the older woman's knee.

"It was simply a tour of triumph for Ju," said Doctor Jim, packing
his pipe at the fireplace, with satisfied eyes on his wife. "She
has friends in the Ghetto and friends in the White House. We went
down to the Duponts', on Long Island, and Dupont said she--"

"Oh, please, Jim!" Julia said seriously.

"Dupont said she was one of the most interesting women he ever
talked to," Jim continued inexorably, "and John Mandrake wanted to
paint her!"

"Tell me the news!" begged Julia. "How's The Alexander, Aunt
Sanna--how is Miss Striker turning out?"

"She's turned out," said Miss Toland grimly, her knitting needles
flashing steadily. "She came to me with her charts and rules, and
oh, she couldn't lie in bed after half-past six in the morning,
and she couldn't put off the sewing class, and she would like to
ask me not to eat my breakfast after nine o'clock! A girl who
never cared what she ate--sardines and tea!--and she wouldn't come
in with me to dinner at the Colonial because she was afraid they
used coal tar and formaldehyde--ha! Finally she asked me if I
wouldn't please keep the expenditures of the house and my own
expenditures separate, and that was the END!"

Jim's great laugh burst out, and Julia dimpled as she asked
demurely:

"What on EARTH did you say?"

"Say? I asked her if she knew I built The Alexander, and sent her
packing! And now"--Miss Toland rubbed her nose with the gesture
Julia knew so well--"now Miss Pierce is temporarily in charge, but
she won't stay there nights, so the clubs are given up," she
observed discontentedly.

"And what's the news from Sally?" Julia pursued.

"Just the loveliest in the world," Mrs. Toland said. "Keith is
working like a little Trojan; and Sally sent us a perfectly
charming description of the pension, and their walks--"

"Yes, and how she couldn't go out because she hadn't shoes," Jane
added, half in malice, half in fun. "DON'T look so shocked, Mother
dear, you know it's true. And the landlady cheating them out of a
whole week's board--"

"Gracious me!" said Mrs. Toland, in a low undertone full of
annoyance. "Did any one ever hear such nonsense! All that is past
history now, Janey," she reminded her young daughter, in her usual
hopeful voice. "Dad sent a cheque, like the dear, helpful daddy he
is, and now everything's lovely again!"

Julia did not ask for Ted until she saw Barbara alone for a moment
the next day. It was about ten o'clock on a matchless autumn
morning, and Julia, stepping from her bedroom's French window to
the wide sunny porch that ran the width of the house, saw Barbara
some forty feet away sitting just outside her own window, with a
mass of hair spread to the sun.

Julia joined her, dragged out a low, light chair from Barbara's
room, and settled herself for a gossip.

"Had breakfast?" Barbara smiled. "Jim downstairs?"

"Oh, hours ago!" Julia said to the first question, and to the
second, with the young wife's conscious blush, "Jim's dressing.
He's the most impossible person to get started in the morning!"

Barbara did not blush but she felt a little tug at her heart.

"Come," she said, "I thought Jim had no faults?"

"Well, he hasn't," Julia laughed. And then, a little confused by
her own fervent tone, she changed the subject, and asked about
Ted.

"Why, Ted's happy, and rich, and simply adored by Bob Carleton,"
Barbara summarized briefly, in a rather dry voice, "but Mother and
Dad never will get over it, and I suppose Ted herself doesn't like
the idea of that other wife--she lives at The Palace, and she's
got a seven-year-old girl! It's DONE, you know, Julie, and of
course Ted's accepted everywhere; she'll go to the Brownings' this
year, and Mrs. Morton has asked her to receive with her at some
sort of dinner reception next month, you'll meet her everywhere.
But I do think it's terribly hard on Mother and Dad!"

"But how COULD she, that great big black creature?"

"Oh, she loves him fast enough! It was perfectly legal, of course.
I think Dad was at the wedding, and I think Richie was, but we
girls never knew anything until it was all over. Mother simply
announced to us one night that Ted was married, and that there was
to be no open break, but that she and Dad were just about SICK! I
never saw Mother give way so! She said--and it's true--that if
ever there was a mother who deserved her children's confidence,
and so on! All the newspapers blazed about it--Ted's picture,
Bob's picture--and, as I say, society welcomed her with open arms.
They've got a gorgeous suite at the St. Francis, and Ted really
looks stunning, and acts as if she'd done something very smart.
Con says that when she called, it reminded her of the second act
of a bad play. Ted came here with Bob, one Saturday afternoon, but
Mother hasn't been near her!"

"It seems too bad," Julia said thoughtfully, "when your father and
mother are always so sweet!"

"There must be some reason for it," Barbara observed, "I suppose
we were all spoiled as kids, with our dancing schools and our
dresses from Paris, and so now when we want things we oughtn't
have, we just take 'em, from habit! I remember a governess once, a
nice enough little Danish woman, but Ned and I got together and
decided we wouldn't stand her, and Mother let her go. It seems
funny now. Mother used to say that never in her life did she allow
her children to want anything she could give them; but I'm not at
all sure that's a very wise ideal!"

"Nor I," said Julia earnestly. Barbara had parted and brushed her
dark hair now, and as she gathered it back, the ruthless morning
sunlight showed lines on her pretty face and faint circles about
her eyes.

"Because life gets in and gives you whacks," Barbara presently
pursued, "you're going to want a lot of things you can't have
before you get through, and it only makes it harder! Sally's
paying for her jump in the dark, poor old Ned is condemned to Yolo
City and Eva for the rest of his life, and somehow Ted's the
saddest of all--so confident and noisy and rich, boasting about
Bob's affection, buying everything she sees--and so YOUNG,
somehow! As for me," said Barbara, "my only consolation is that
nearly every family has one of me, and some have more--a nice-
looking, well-liked, well-dressed young woman, who has cost her
parents an enormous amount of money, to get--nowhere!"

"Why, Lady Babbie!" Julie protested. "It's not like you to talk
so!"

Barbara patted the hand that had been laid upon her knee, and
laughed.

"And the moral of that is, Ju," she said, "if you have children,
don't spoil them! You've had horribly hard times, but they've
given you some sense. As for Jim, he's an exception. It's a
miracle he wasn't ruined--but he wasn't!" And she gathered up her
towels and brushes to go back into her room. "But I needn't tell
you that, Julie!" said she.

"Ah, well, Jim!" Julia conceded, smiling.

Jim had no faults, of course. Yet the five-months wife sighed
unconsciously as she went back to her room. Jim had qualities that
had now and then caused a faint little cloud to drift across
Julia's life, but that sheer loyalty had kept her from defining,
even in her inmost heart. Now this talk with Barbara had suddenly
seemed to make them clear. Jim was--spoiled was too harsh a word.
But Jim wanted his own way, in little things and big--all the
time. The world just now for Jim held only Julia. What she wanted
he wanted, and, at any cost, he would have. If her gown was not
right for the special occasion, she should have a new gown; if the
motor car was out of order, telephone for another; if the steward
assured them that there was not another table in the dining-room--
tip him, tip everybody, make a scene, but see that the "Reserved"
card comes off somebody's table, and that the Studdifords are
seated there in triumph.

At first Julia had only laughed at her lord's masterful progress.
It was very funny to her to see how quickly his money and his
determination won him his way. A great deal of money was wasted,
of course, but then, this was their honeymoon, and some day they
would settle down and spend rationally. Jim, like all rich men,
had an absolute faith in the power of gold. The hall maid must
come in and hook Mrs. Studdiford's gown; oh, and would she be here
at, say, one o'clock, when Mrs. Studdiford came home? She went off
at twelve, eh? Well, what was it worth to her to stay on to-night,
until one? Good. And by the way, Mrs. Studdiford had torn a lace
gown and wanted it to-morrow; could the maid mend it and press it?
She didn't think so? Well, come, there must be somebody who would
rush it through for Mrs. Studdiford? Ah, that was fine, thank you
very much, that would do very nicely. Or perhaps it was a question
of theatre tickets, and Jim would stop his taxicab on Broadway at
the theatre's door. Here, boy! Boy, come here! Go up and ask him
what his best for to-night are? There's a line of people waiting,
eh?--well, go up and ask some fellow at the top of the line what
it's worth to him to get two seats for me. Oh, fine. Much obliged
to you, sir. Thank you. And here--boy!

"Do you think the entire world circles about your convenience,
Jim?" Julia asked amusedly one day, after some such episode.
"Sure," he answered, grinning.

"Jim, you don't think you can go through life walking over people
this way?"

"Why not, my good lady?"

"Well," said Julia gravely, "some day you may find you want
something you CAN'T buy!"

"There ain't no such animal," Jim assured her cheerfully.

Only a trifling cloud, after all, Julia assured herself hardily.
But there was a constant little sensation of uneasiness in her
heart. She tried to convince herself that the sweetness of his
nature had not been undermined by this ability to indulge himself
however fast his fancies shifted; she reasoned that because so
many good things were his, he need not necessarily hold them in
light esteem. Yet the thought persisted that he knew neither his
own mind nor his own heart; there had been no discipline there, no
hard-won battles--there were no reserves.

"I call that simply borrowing trouble!" said Kennedy Scott Marbury
healthily, one day when she and the tiny Scott were lunching with
Julia at the hotel. Kennedy was close to her second confinement,
and the ladies had lunched in Julia's handsome sitting-room.
"Lord, Julie dear! It seems sometimes as if you have to have
SOMETHING in this world," Kennedy went on cheerfully; "either
actual trouble or mental worries! Anthony and I were talking
finances half last night: we decided that we can't move to a
larger house, just now, and so on--and we both said WHAT would it
be like to be free from money worries for ten minutes--"

"But, Ken, don't you see how necessary you are to each other!"
said Julia, kneeling before the chair in which her fat godson was
seated, and displaying a number of gold chains and bracelets for
his amusement. "You have to take a turn at everything--cooking and
sewing and caring for old Sweetum here--Anthony couldn't get on
without you!"

"And I suppose you think Doctor Studdiford could find twenty wives
as pretty and clever and charming as you are, Ju?"

"Fifty!" Julia answered.

"Well, now, that just shows what a little idiot you are!" Mrs.
Marbury scolded. "Not but what most women feel that way sooner or
later," she added, less severely. "I remember that phase very
well, myself! But the thing for you to do, Julie, is to remember
that you're exactly the same woman he fell in love with, d'you
see? Just mind your own affairs, and be happy and busy, and try
not to fancy things!"

"What a sensible old thing you are, Ken!" said Julia gratefully.
And as Kennedy came over to stand near her, Julia gave her a
little rub with her head, like an affectionate pony. "I think it's
partly this hotel that's demoralizing me," Julia went on, a little
shamed. "I feel so useless--getting up, eating, dressing, idling
about, and going to bed again. Jim has his work, and I'll be glad
when I have mine again!"




CHAPTER II


In these days, the Studdifords were househunting in all of Jim's
free hours; confining their efforts almost entirely to the city,
although a trip to San Mateo or Ross Valley made a welcome change
now and then. It was not until late in October that the right
house was found, on Pacific Avenue, almost at the end of the
cable-car line. It was a new house, large and square, built of
dignified dark-red brick, and with a roomy and beautiful garden
about it. There was a street entrance, barred by an iron gate
elaborately grilled, and giving upon three shallow brick steps
that led to the heavily carved door. On the side street was an
entrance for the motor car and tradespeople, the slope of the hill
giving room for a basement kitchen, with its accompanying
storerooms and laundries.

Upstairs, the proportions of the rooms, and their exquisite
finish, made the house prominent among the city's beautiful homes.
Even Jim could find nothing to change. The splendid dark
simplicity of the drawing-room was in absolute harmony with the
great main hall, and in charming contrast to the cheerful library
and the sun-flooded morning-room. The dining-room had its own big
fireplace, with leather-cushioned ingle seats, and quaint,
twinkling, bottle-paned windows above. On the next floor the four
big bedrooms, with their three baths and three dressing-rooms and
countless closets, were all bright and sunny, with shining cream-
coloured panelling, cretonne papers in gay designs of flowers and
birds, and crystal door knobs. Upstairs again were maids' rooms,
storerooms lined in cedar, and more baths.

"Perfect!" said Jim radiantly, on the afternoon when, the
Studdifords first inspected the house. "It's just exactly right,
and I'm strong for it!" He came over to Julia, who was
thoughtfully staring out of a drawing-room window. Her exquisite
beauty was to-day set off by a long loose sealskin coat, for the
winter was early, and a picturesque little motor bonnet, also of
seal, with a velvet rose against her soft hair. "Little bit sad
to-day, sweetheart?" Jim asked, kissing the tip of her ear.

"No--o. I was just thinking what a lovely, sheltered backyard!"
Julia said sensibly, raising her blue eyes. But she had brightened
perceptibly at his tenderness. "I love you, Jim," she said, very
simply.

"And I adore you!" Jim answered, his arms about her. "I've been
thinking all day how rotten that sounded this morning!" he added
in a lower tone. "I'm so sorry!"

"As if it was your fault!" Julia protested generously. And a
moment later she charmed him by declaring herself to be entirely
satisfied with this enchanting house, and by entering vigorously
upon the question of furnishings.

The little episode to which Doctor Studdiford had made a somewhat
embarrassed allusion had taken place in their rooms at the hotel
that morning, while they were breakfasting. Plans for a little
dinner party were progressing pleasantly, over the omelette and
toast, when Jim chanced to suggest that a certain Mrs. Pope be
included among the guests.

"Oh, Jim--not Mrs. Jerry Pope?" Julia questioned, wide eyed.

"Yes, but she calls herself Mrs. Elsie Carroll Pope now. Why not?"

"Oh, Jim--but she's divorced!"

"Well, so are lots of other people!"

"Yes, I know. But it was such a horrid divorce, Jim!"

"Horrid how?"

"Oh, some other man, and letters in the papers, and Mr. Pope kept
both the children! It was awful!"

"Oh, come, Ju--she's a nice little thing, awfully witty and
clever. Why go out of your way to knock her!"

"I'm not going out of my way," Julia answered with dignity. "But
she was a great friend of Mary Chetwynde, who used to teach at The
Alexander, and she came out there two or three times, and she's a
noisy, yelling sort of woman--and her hair is dyed--yes, it IS,
Jim!"

"Lord, you women do love to rip each other up the back!" Jim
smiled lazily, as he wheeled his chair about, and lighted a
cigarette.

"I'm not ripping her up the back at all," Julia protested with
spirit. "But she's not a lady, and I hate the particular set she
goes with--"

"Not a lady--ha!" Jim ejaculated. "She was a Cowdry."

Julia leaned back in her chair, and opened a fat letter from Sally
Borroughs in Europe, that had come in her morning's mail.

"Ask her by all means to dinner," she said calmly. "Only don't
expect me to admire her and approve of her, Jim, for I won't do
it; I know too much about her!"

"It's just possible Mrs. Pope isn't waiting for your admiration
and approval, my dear," Jim said, nettled "But I doubt, whatever
she knew of you, if she would speak so unkindly about YOU!"

Julia turned as scarlet as if a whip had fallen across her face.
She stared at him for a moment with fixed, horrified eyes, then
crushed her letter together with a spasmodic gesture of the hands,
and let it fall as she went blindly toward the bedroom door. Jim
sat staring after her, puzzled at first, then with the red blood
surging into his face. He dropped his cigarette and his newspaper,
and for perhaps three minutes there was no sound in the apartment
but the coffee bubbling in the percolator, and the occasional
clank of the radiator.

Then Jim jumped up suddenly and flung open the door of the
bedroom. Julia was sitting at her dressing-table, one elbow
resting upon it, and her head dropped on her hand. She raised
heavy eyes and looked at him.

"Don't be a fool, Ju," Jim said, solicitous and impatient. "You
know I didn't mean anything by that. I wouldn't be such a cad. You
know I wouldn't say a thing like that--I couldn't. Come on back
and finish your coffee."

But he did not kiss her; he did not put his arm about her; and
Julia felt curiously weary and cold as she came slowly back to her
place. Jim immediately lighted a fresh cigarette, and began to
rattle away somewhat nervously of his plans for the day. He was
going over to the Oakland Hospital to look at his man with the
spine--better not try to meet for lunch. But how about that
Pacific Avenue house? If Julia took the motor and stopped at the
agent's for the key, he would meet her there at four--how about
it?

Agreed. Gosh! It was nearly ten o'clock, and Jim had to get out to
the Children's Hospital before he went to Oakland. Julia had a
quick kiss, and was advised to take good care of herself. Then Jim
was gone, and she could fling her arm across the table and sob as
if her heart would break.

Julia cried for a long time. Then she stopped resolutely, and
spent a long half hour in serious thought, her fingers absently
tracing the threads of the tablecloth with a fork, her thoughts
flying.

Presently she roused herself, telephoned Jim's chauffeur and the
agent of the Pacific Avenue house, bathed her reddened eyes, and
inspected her new furs, just home from the shop. Now and then her
breast rose with a long sigh, but she did not cry again.

"I'll wear my new furs," she decided soberly. "Jim loves me to
look pretty. And I MUST cheer up; he hates me to be blue! Who can
I lunch with, to cheer up? Aunt Sanna! I'll get a cold chicken and
some cake, and go out to The Alexander!"

So the outward signs of the storm were obliterated, and no one
knew of the scar that Julia carried from that day in her heart.
Only a tiny, tiny scar, but enough to remind her now and then with
cold terror that even into her Paradise the serpent could thrust
his head, enough to prove to her bitter satisfaction that there
was already something that Jim's money could not buy.

The furnishing of the Pacific Avenue house proceeded apace--it was
an eminently gratifying house to furnish, and Jim and Julia almost
wished their labours not so light. All rugs looked well on those
beautiful floors; all pictures were at their best against the dull
rich tones of the walls. Did Mrs. Studdiford like the soft blue
curtains in the library, or the dull gold, or the coffee-coloured
tapestry? Mrs. Studdiford, an exquisite little figure of
indecision, in a great Elizabethan chair of carved black oak,
didn't really know; they were all so beautiful! She wondered why
the blue wouldn't be lovely in the breakfast room, if they used
the gold here? Then she wouldn't use the English cretonne in the
breakfast room? Oh, yes, of course, she had forgotten the English
cretonne!

At last it was all done, from the two stained little Roman marble
benches outside the front door, to the monogrammed sheets in the
attic cedar closet. The drawing-room had its grand piano, its
great mahogany davenport facing the fire, its rich dark rugs, its
subdued gleam of copper and crystal, dull blue china and bright
enamel. The little reception room was gay with yellow-gold silk
and teakwood; Jim's library was severely handsome with its dark
leather chairs and rows of dark leather bindings. A dozen guests
could sit about the long oak table in the dining-room; the great
sideboard with its black oak cupids and satyrs, and its enormous
claw feet, struck perhaps the only pretentious note in the house.
A wide-lipped bowl, in clear yellow glass, held rosy pippins or
sprawling purple grapes on the table in the window, the sideboard
carried old jugs and flagons in blackened silver or dull pottery.

Upstairs the sunny perfection of the bedrooms was not marred by
the need of so much as a cake of violet soap. Julia revelled in
details here: flowers in the bedrooms must match the hangings;
there must be so many fringed towels and so many plain, in each
bathroom. She amused as well as edified Jim with her sedate
assurance in the matter of engaging maids; her cheeks would grow
very pink when interviews were afoot, but she never lost her air
of calm.

"We are as good as they are," said Julia, "but how hard it is to
remember it when you are talking to them!"

Presently Foo Ting was established supreme in the kitchen, Lizzie
secured as waitress, and Ellie, Lizzie's sister, engaged to do
upstairs work. Chadwick, Jim's chauffeur, was accustomed
occasionally to enact also the part of valet, so that it was with
a real luxury of service that the young Studdifords settled down
for the winter.

Julia had anticipated this settling as preceding a time of quiet,
when she and Jim should loiter over their snug little dinners,
should come to know the comforts of their own chairs, at each side
of the library fire, and laugh and cry over some old book, or talk
and dream while they stared into the coals. The months were racing
about to her first wedding anniversary, yet she felt that she
really knew Jim only in a certain superficial, holiday sense--she
knew what cocktail he liked best, of course, and what seats in the
theatre; she was quite sure of the effect of her own beauty upon
him. But she longed for the real Jim, the soul that was hidden
somewhere under his gay mask, under the trim, cleanshaven, smiling
face. When there was less confusion, less laughing and
interrupting and going about, then she would find her husband,
Julia thought, and they would have long silent hours together in
which to build the foundation of their life.

Her beautiful earnest face came to have a somewhat strained and
wistful look, as the weeks fled past without bringing the quiet,
empty time for which she longed. All about her now stretched the
glittering spokes of the city's great social wheel, every mail
brought her a flood of notes, every quarter hour summoned her to
the telephone, every fraction of the day had its appointed
pleasure. Julia must swiftly eliminate from her life much of the
rich feminine tradition of housewifery; it was not for her to darn
her husband's hose, to set exquisite patches in thinning table
linen, to gather flowers for jars and vases. Julia never saw Jim's
clothing except when he was wearing it, the table linen was
Ellie's affair, and Lizzie had the entire lower floor bright and
fragrant with fresh flowers before Jim and Julia came down to
breakfast. Young Mrs. Studdiford found herself readily assuming
the society woman's dry, brief mannerisms. Jim used to grin
sometimes when he heard her at the telephone:

"Oh, that would be charming, Mrs. Babcock," Julia would say, "if
you'll let me run away at three, for I must positively keep an
appointment with Carroll at three, if I'm to have my gown for dear
Mrs. Morton's bal masque Friday night. And if I'm just a tiny bit
late you won't be cross? For we all do German at twelve now, you
know, and it WILL run over the hour! Oh, you're very sweet! Oh,
no, Mrs. Talcott spoke to me about it, but we can't--we're both SO
sorry, but this week seems to be just FULL--no, she said that, but
I told her that next week was just as bad, so she's to let me know
about the week after. Oh, I know she is. And I DID want to give
her a little tea, but there doesn't seem to be a MOMENT! I think
perhaps I'll ask Mrs. Castle to let us dine with her some other
time, and give Betty a little dinner Monday--"

And so on and on, in the quick harassed voice of one who must meet
obligations.

"You're a great social success, Ju," Jim said, smiling, one
morning.

Julia made a little grimace over her letters.

"Oh, come off, now!" her husband railed good-naturedly. "You know
you love it. You know you like to dress up and trot about with me
and be admired!"

"I like to trot about with you," Julia conceded, sighing in spite
of her smile. "But I get very tired of dinners. Some other woman
gets you, and some other woman's husband gets me, and we say such
FLAT things, about motor cars, or the theatre--nothing friendly or
intimate or interesting!"

"Wait until you know them all better, Ju. Besides, you couldn't
get intimate at a dinner, very well. Besides"--Jim defended the
institutions of his class--"you didn't look very gay when young Jo
Coutts seemed inclined to get very friendly at dinner the other
night!"

"Jo Coutts was drunk," Julia asserted briefly. "As they very often
are," she added severely. "Not raging drunk, but just silly, or
sentimental and important, you know."

"I know," Jim laughed.

"And it makes me furious!" Julia said. "As for knowing them
better, they aren't one bit more interesting when they're old
friends. They're more familiar, I admit that, but all this cheeky
yelling back and forth isn't interesting--it's just tiresome! 'I'm
holding your husband's hand, Alice!' 'All right, then I'm going to
kiss your husband!'" Her voice rose in mimicry. "And then Kenneth
Roberts tells some little shady story, and every one screams, and
every one goes on telling it over and over! Why, that little silly
four-line verse Conrad Kent had last night--every one in the room
had to learn it by heart and say it six hundred times before we
were done with it!"

"You're a cynic, woman," Jim said, kissing his wife, who by this
time had come around to his chair. "It's all too easy for you,
that's the trouble! They've accepted you with open arms; you're
the rage! You ought to have been kept for a while on the anxious
seat, like the poor Groves, and Mrs. McCann; then you'd appreciate
High Sassiety!"

"Well, I wouldn't make myself ridiculous and pathetic like the
Groves, trying to burst into society, and giving people a chance
to snub me!" Julia said thoughtfully. "Never mind," she added,
"next month Lent begins, and then there must be some let-up!"

However, Lent had only begun when the Studdifords made a flying
trip to Honolulu, where Jim had a patient. The great liner was
fascinating to Julia, and, as usual, her beauty and charm, and the
famous young surgeon's unostentatious bigness, made them friends
on all sides, so that the life of cocktail mixing and card playing
and gossip went on as merrily as it had in San Francisco. Julia
could not spend the empty days staring dreamily out at the rolling
green Pacific; every man on board was anxious to improve her
acquaintance, from the Captain to the seventeen-year-old little
English lad who was going out to his father in India, and to not
one of them did it ever occur that lovely little Mrs. Studdiford
might prefer to be left alone.

But the sea air shook Julia into splendid health and energy, and
she was her sweetest self in Honolulu; she and Jim both seemed to
recapture here some of the exquisite tenderness of their honeymoon
a year ago. Neither would admit that there had been any drifting
apart, they had never been less than lovers, yet now they
experienced the delights of a reconciliation. Julia, in her
delicate linens and thin embroidered pongees, with a filmy parasol
shading her bright hair, seemed more wonderful than ever before,
and lovely Hawaii was a setting for one of their happiest times
together.

On the boat, coming home, however, there occurred a little
incident that darkened Julia's sky for a long time to come. On the
very day of starting she and Jim, with some other returning San
Franciscans, were standing, a laughing group on the deck, when a
dark, handsome young woman came forward from a nearby cabin
doorway, and held out her hand.

"Do you remember me, Julia?" said she, smiling.

Julia, whose white frock was draped with a dozen ropes of
brilliant flowers, and who looked like a little May Queen in her
radiant bloom, looked at the newcomer for a few moments, and then
said, with a clearing face:

"Hannah! Of course I know you. Mrs. Palmer, may I present Doctor
Studdiford?"

Jim smilingly shook hands, and as the rest of the group melted
away, Mrs. Palmer explained that her husband's business was in
Manila, but she was bringing up her two little children to visit
her parents in Oakland.

"She's extremely pretty," Jim said, when he and Julia were alone
in their luxurious stateroom. "Who is she?"

"I don't know why I supposed you knew that she is one of Mark's
sisters," Julia said, colouring. "I saw something of them all,
after--afterward, you know."

"Oh!" Jim's face, which he chanced to be washing, also grew red;
he scowled as he plunged it again into the towel. Julia proceeded
with her own lunch toilet in silence, humming a little now and
then, but the brightness was gone from the day for her; the swift-
flying green water outside the window had turned to lead, the
immaculate little apartment was bleak and bare. Jim did not speak
as they went down to lunch, nor was he himself when they met
again, after a game of auction, at dinner. In fact, this marked
Julia's first acquaintance with a new side of his character.

For Jim's sunny nature was balanced by an occasional mood so dark
as to make him a different man while it lasted. Barbara had once
lightly hinted this to Julia--"Jim was glooming terribly, and did
nothing but snarl"--and Miss Toland had confirmed the hint when
she asked him, at Christmas dinner, when he and Julia had been
eight months man and wife: "Well, Jim, never a blue devil once,
eh?"

"Never a one. Aunt Sanna!" Jim had responded gayly.

"What should he have blue devils about?" Julia had demanded on
this occasion, presenting herself indignantly to them, and looking
in her black velvet and white lace like a round-eyed child.

She thought of that happy moment this afternoon, with a little
chill at her heart. For there was no doubt that Jim had blue
devils now. When she came back to her stateroom at six o'clock, he
was already there, flung across the bed, his arms locked under his
head, his sombre eyes on the ceiling, where green water-lights
were playing.

"Jim, don't you feel well, dear?"

"Perfectly well, thank you!" Jim said coldly.

Slightly angered by his tone, Julia fell silent, busied herself
with her brushes, hooked on a gown of demure cherry colour and
gray, caught up a great silky scarf.

"Anything I can do for you, Jim?" she said then, politely.

"Just--LET ME ALONE!" Jim answered, without stirring.

Hurt to the quick, and with sudden colour in her face, Julia left
the room. She held her head high, but she felt almost a little
sick with the shock. Five minutes later she was the centre of a
chattering group on the deck. A milky twilight held the sea, the
skyline was no longer to be discerned in the opal spaces all about
them, the ship moved over a vast plain of pearl-coloured smooth
waters. Where staterooms were lighted, long fingers of rosy
brightness fell across the deck; here and there in the shelter of
a bit of wall were dark blots that were passengers, wrapped and
reclining, and unrecognizable in the gloom.

Julia and a young man named Manners began to pace the deck. Mr.
Manners was a poet, and absorbed in the fascinating study of his
own personality, but he served Julia's need just now, and never
noticed her abstraction and indifference. He described to Julia
the birth of his own soul, when he was what the world considered
only a clumsy, unthinking lad of seventeen, and Julia listened as
a pain-racked fever patient might listen with vague distress to
the noise of distant hammers.

Presently they were all at dinner; soup, but no Jim; fish, but no
Jim. Here was Jim at last, pale, freshly shaven, slipping into his
place with a muttered apology and averted eyes. With a sense of
impending calamity upon her, Julia struggled through her dinner;
after a while she found herself holding cards, under a bright
light; after a while again, she reached her stateroom.

Julia turned up the light. The room was close and empty, littered
with the evidences of Jim's hasty toilet. She opened a window, and
the sweet salt air filtered in, infinitely soothing and
refreshing. She began to go about the room, picking up Jim's
clothes, and putting the place in order. Once or twice her face
twitched with pain, and once she stopped and pressed Jim's coat to
her heart with both hands, as if to stop a wound, but she did not
cry, and presently began her usual preparations for bed in her
usual careful fashion. The cherry-coloured gown had been put away,
and Julia, in an embroidered white kimono almost stiff enough to
stand alone, was putting her rings into their little cases when
Jim came in. She looked at him over her shoulder.

"Where have you been, Jim?" she asked quietly, noticing his white
face, his tumbled hair, and a certain disorder in his appearance.
Jim did not answer, and after a puzzled moment Julia repeated her
question.

"Up on deck," Jim said, a bitter burst of words breaking through
his ugly silence. He dropped into a chair, and put his head in his
hands.

Julia watched him for a few moments in silence, while she went on
with her preparations. She wound her little watch and put it under
her pillow; she folded the counterpanes neatly back from both
beds, and got out her slippers. Then she sat down to put trees
into the little satin slippers she had been wearing, and carried
them to the closet.

Suddenly Jim sat up, dropped his hands, and stared at her
haggardly.

"Julia," said he hoarsely, "I've been up there thinking--I'm going
mad, I guess--"

He stopped, and there was silence. Julia stood still, looking at
him.

"Tell me," Jim said, "was it Mark?"

The hideous suddenness of it struck Julia like a bodily blow; she
stood as if she had been turned to ice. A great weight seemed to
seize her limbs, a sickening vertigo attacked her. She had a
suffocating sense that time was passing, that ages were going by
in that bright, glaring room, with the sea air coming in a
shuttered window, and the two beds, with their smooth white
pillows, so neatly turned down--Still, she could not speak--not
yet.

"Yes, it was Mark," she said tonelessly and gently, after a long
silence. "I thought you knew."

"Oh, my God!" Jim said, choking. He flung his hands madly in the
air and got on his feet. Then, as if ashamed, through all the
boiling surge of his emotions, at this loss of control, he rammed
his hands into the pockets of his light overcoat, and began to
pace the room. "You--you--you!" he said, in a sort of wail, and in
another moment, muttering some incoherency about air, he had
snatched up his cap and was gone again.

Julia slowly crossed the room, and sat down on her bed. She felt
as a person who had swallowed a dose of poison might feel: agonies
were soon to begin that would drive the life from her body, but
she could not feel them yet. Instead she felt tired, tired beyond
all bearing, and the lights hurt her eyes. She slipped her kimono
from her, stepped out of her slippers, and plunged the room into
utter darkness. Like a tired child she crept into bed, and with a
great sigh dropped her head on the pillow.

The ship plowed on, its great lights cutting a steady course over
the black water, its whole bulk quivering to the heartbeat of the
mighty engines; whispered good-nights and laughing good-nights
were said in the narrow, hot hallways. Lights went out in cabin
after cabin. The decks were dark and deserted. Below stairs the
world that never slept hummed like a beehive; squads of men were
washing floors, laying tables; the kitchen was as hot and busy as
at midday; the engine rooms were filled with silhouetted forms
briskly coming and going. Up on one of the dark decks, with the
soft mist blowing in his face, Jim spent the long night, his
folded arms resting on the rail, his sombre eyes following the
silent rush of waters, and in her cabin Julia lay wide awake and
battling with despair.

She had thought the old dim horror over and done with. Now she
knew it never would be that; now she knew there was no escape. The
happy little castle she had builded for herself fell about her
like a house of cards; she was dishonoured, she was abased, she
was powerless. In telling Jim her whole history, on that terrible
night at the settlement house, she had flung down her arms; there
was no new extenuating fact to add to the story; it was all stale
and unchangeable; it must stand before their eyes forever, a
hideous fact. And it seemed to Julia, tossing restlessly in the
dark, that a thousand sleeping menaces rose now to terrify her.
Perhaps Hannah Palmer knew! Julia's breath stopped, her whole body
shook with terror. And if Hannah, why not others? A letter of
Mark's to some one--to any one--might be in existence now, waiting
its hour to appear, and to disgrace her, and Jim, and all who
loved them!

And was it for this, she asked herself bitterly, that she had so
risen from the past, so studied and struggled and aspired? Had she
been mad all these years to forget the danger in which she stood,
to imagine that she had buried her tragedy too deep for discovery?
Had she been mad to marry Jim, her dear, sweet, protecting old
Jim, who was always so good to her?

But at the thought of him, and of her bitter need of him in this
desolate hour, Julia fell to violent crying, and after her tears
she drifted into a deep sleep, her lashes wet, and her breast
occasionally rising with a sharp sigh as a child's might.

When she awakened, dawn was breaking, the level waste of the sea
was pearl colour and rose under a slowly rising mist. Julia bathed
and dressed, and went out to the deck, where, with a great plaid
wrapped about her, she might watch the miracle of the birth of
day. And as the warming rays of the sun enveloped her, and the
newly washed decks dried under its touch, and as signs of life
began to be heard all about, slamming doors and gay greetings,
laughter and the crisp echoes of feet, hope and self-confidence
crept again into her heart. She was young, after all, and pretty,
and Jim's very agony of jealousy only proved that he loved her.
She had never deceived him, he could not accuse her of one
second's weakness there. He had only had a sudden, terrible
revelation of the truth he had known so long; it could not affect
him permanently.

"Going down?" said a voice gayly.

Julia turned to smile upon a group of cheerful acquaintances.

"Thinking about it," she smiled.

"Where's Himself?" somebody asked.

"Still asleep--the lazy bones!" Julia answered calmly. They all
went downstairs together, and Julia was perhaps a little ashamed
to find the odours of coffee and bacon delightful, and to enjoy
her breakfast.

Afterward she went straight to her room, not at all surprised to
find Jim there, flung, dressed as he was, across his bed, and
breathing heavily. Julia studied him for a moment in silence. Then
she set about the somewhat difficult task of rousing him, quite
her capable wifely little self when there was something she could
do for him.

"Jim! You'll have to get these damp things off, dear! Come, Jim,
you can't sleep this way. Wake up, Jim!"

Drowsily, heavily, he consented to be partially undressed, and
covered with a warm rug. Julia grew quite breathless over her
exertions, tucked him in carefully.

"I'm going to tell the chambermaid not to come in until I ring,
Jim. But shall I send you in a cup of coffee?"

"Ha!" Jim said, already asleep.

"Do you want some coffee, Jim?"

"No--no coffee!"

Julia tiptoed about the room a moment more, took her little sewing
basket and a new magazine, and giving a departing look at her
husband, found his eyes wide open and watching her. Instantly a
rush of tears pressed behind her eyelids, and she felt herself
grow weak and confused.

"Thank you for fixing me up so nicely, darling," Jim said meekly.

"Oh, you're welcome!" Julia answered, with a desperate effort to
appear calm.

"Will you kiss me, Julie?" Jim pursued, and a second later she was
on her knees beside him, their arms were locked together, and
their lips met as if they had never kissed each other before.

"You little angel," Jim said, "what a beast I am! As if life
hadn't been hard enough for you without my adding to it! Oh, but
what a night I've had! And you'll forgive me, won't you,
sweetheart, for I LOVE you so?"

Julia put her face down and cried stormily, her wet face pressed
against his, his arms holding her close. After a while, when the
sobs lessened, they began to talk together, and then laugh
together in the exquisite relief of being reconciled. Then Jim
went to sleep, and Julia sat beside him, his hand in hers, her
eyes idly following the play of broken bright lights that quivered
on the wall.

She leaned back in her big chair, feeling weary and spent, broken,
but utterly at peace. From that hour life was changed to her, and
she dimly felt the change, accepted it as stoically as an Indian
might the loss of a limb, and adjusted herself to all it implied.
If Jim was a little less her god, he was still hers, hers in some
new relationship that appealed to what was protective and maternal
in her. And if the burden of her secret had grown inconceivably
heavy for her to bear, she knew by some instinct that this burst
of jealous frenzy had somehow lightened its weight for Jim; she,
not he, would henceforth pay the price.

"And life isn't easy and gay, say what you will," thought Julia
philosophically. "There is no use grumbling and groaning, and
saying to yourself, 'Oh, if only it wasn't just this or that thing
worrying me!' for there is always this or that. Kennedy and Bab
think I am the most fortunate girl in the world, and yet, to be
able to go back ten years, and live a few weeks over again, I'd
give up everything I have, even Jim. Just to start SQUARE! Just to
feel that wretched thing wasn't there like a layer of mud under
everything I do, making it a farce for me to talk of uplifting
girls by settlement work, as people are eternally making me talk!
Or if only every one KNEW it, it would be easier, for then I would
feel at least that I stood on my own feet! But now, of course,
that's impossible, on Jim's account. What a horrible scandal it
would be, what a horrible thing it IS, that any girl can cloud her
own life in this way!

"As for boys, I suppose mighty few of them are pure by the time
they're through college, by the time they're through High School,
perhaps! It's all queer, for that involves girls and women, too,
thousands of them! And how absurd it would be to bring such a
charge as this against a man, ten years after it happened, when he
was married and a respectable citizen!

"Well, society is very queer; civilization hasn't got very far;
sometimes I think virtue is a good deal of an accident, and that
people take themselves pretty seriously!" And so musing, Julia
dozed, and wakened, and dozed again. But in her heart had been
sowed the seed that was never to be uprooted, the little seed of
doubt: doubt of the social structure, doubt of its grave
authorities, its awe-inspired interpreters. What were the mummers
all so busy about and how little their mummery mattered! This
shall be permitted, this shall not be permitted; what is in your
heart and brain concerns us not at all; where your soul spends its
solitudes is not our affair; so that you keep a certain surface
smoothness, so that you dress and talk and spend as we bid you,
you--for such time as we please--shall be one of us!




CHAPTER III


Nevertheless, the young Studdifords, upon their return to San
Francisco, entered heartily upon the social joys of the hour.
Barbara had been only waiting their arrival to demurely announce
her engagement, and Julia's delight immediately took the form of
dinners and theatre parties for the handsome Miss Toland and her
fiance. A new and softened sweetness marked Barbara in these days;
she was more gentle and more charming than she had ever been
before. Captain Edward Francis Humphry Gunther Fox was an officer
in the English army, a blond, silent man of forty, with kind eyes
and a delightfully modulated voice. He had a comfortable private
income, a "place" in Oxfordshire, an uncle, young and healthy to
be sure, but still a lord, and an older sister who had married a
lord, so that his credentials were unexceptionable, and Mrs.
Toland was nearly as happy as her daughter was.

"It's curious," said Barbara to Julia, in one of their first hours
alone, "but there IS a distinction and an excitement about getting
engaged, and you enjoy it just as much at thirty as at twenty--
perhaps more. People--or persons, as Francis says--who have never
paid me any attention before, are flocking to the front now with
presents and good wishes, and some who never have seen Captain Fox
congratulate me--it amounts to congratulation--as if ANY marriage
were better than none!"

"Well, there is a something about marriage," Julia admitted; "you
may not have any reason for feeling so, but you DO feel superior,
'way down in your secret heart! And yet, Babbie," and a little
shadow darkened her bright face, "and yet, once you ARE married,
you see a sort of--well, a sort of uncompromising brightness about
girlhood, too! When I go out to The Alexander now, and remember my
old busy days there, and walking to chapel with Aunt Sanna, in the
fresh, early mornings--I don't know--it makes me almost a little
sad!"

"Don't speak of it," said Barbara. "When I think of leaving Dad,
and home, and going off to England, and having to make friends of
awful women with high cheek bones, and mats of crimps coming down
to their eyebrows, it scares me to death!"

And both girls laughed gayly. They were having tea in Julia's
drawing-room on a cold bright afternoon in May.

"I'll miss Dad most," pursued Barbara seriously. "Mother's so much
with Ted now, anyway." She frowned at the fire. "Mother's curious,
Ju," she added presently. "Every one says she's an ideal mother,
and so on, and I suppose she is, but--"

"You're more like your father, anyway," Julia suggested in the
pause.

"It's not only that," said Barbara slowly, "but Mother has never
been in sympathy with any one of us! Ned deceived her, Sally
deceived her, Theodora went deliberately against her advice, and
broke her heart, and Con and Jane don't really respect her opinion
at all! I'm the oldest, her first born--"

"And she loves you dearly," Julia said soothingly.

"Used to Ju, when I was a baby. And loves me theoretically now.
But she has taken my not marrying to heart much more than the
curious marriages Ned and the girls have made! Hints about old
maids, and stories about her own popularity as a girl, regardless
of the fact that no one wanted me--"

"Oh, Babbie!"

"Well, no one did!" Barbara laughed a little dryly. "Why, not two
months ago," she went on, "that little sprig of a Paul Smith
called on Con, and Mother engineered me out of the room, and said
something laughingly to Richie and Ted about not wanting to stand
in Con's way, 'one old maid was enough in a family!'"

"Maddening! Yes, I know," Julia said, laughing and shaking her
head. "I've heard her a hundred times!"

"Of course it's all love and kisses, now," Barbara added, "and
Francis is a bold, big thief, and how can she give up her dear big
girl--"

"Oh, Barbara, don't be bitter!"

"Well," Barbara flung her head back as if she tossed the subject
aside, "I suppose I am bitter! And why you're not, Ju, I can't
understand, for you never had one tenth the chance I did!"

"No," Julia assented gravely, "I never did. If my mother had kept
me with her--and she could have done it--if she hadn't left my
father--he loved me so--it would all have been different. Mothers
are strange, Babby, they have so much power--or seem to! It seems
to me that one could do so much to straighten things out for the
poor little baby brains; this is worth while, and this isn't worth
while, and so on! Suppose"--Julia poured herself a fresh cup of
tea, and leaned back comfortably in her chair--"suppose you had
young daughters, Bab," said she, "what would you do, differently
from your mother, I mean?"

"Oh, I don't know!" Barbara said, "only it seems funny that
mothers can't help their daughters more. Half my life is lived
now, probably, yet Mother goes right on theorizing, she--she
doesn't get down to FACTS, somehow! I don't know--"

"It all comes down to this," Julia said briskly, as Barbara's
voice trailed into silence, "sitting around and waiting for some
one to ask her to marry him is not a sufficiently absorbing life
work for the average young woman!"

"She isn't expected to do anything else," Barbara added, "except--
attract. And it isn't as if she could be deciding in her own mind
about it; the decision is in HIS mind: if he chooses he can ask
her; if he doesn't, all right! It's a SHAME--it's a shame, I say,
not to give her a more dignified existence than that!"

"Yes, but, Bab, your mother couldn't have put you into a shop to
sell ribbons, or made a telephone girl of you!"

"No; my brothers didn't sell ribbons, or go on a telephone board,
either. But I don't see why I shouldn't have studied medicine,
like Jim and Richie, or gone into the office at the works in Yolo
City, like Ned."

"Yes, but, Babby, you've no leaning toward medicine!"

"Well, then, something else, just as Jim would have done something
else, in that case! Office hours and responsibility, and meeting
of men in some other than a social way. You and I have somehow
dragged a solution out of it, Julie: we are happy in spite of all
the blundering and stumbling, but I've not got my Mother to thank
for it, and neither have you!"

"No, neither have I!" Julia said, with a long sigh, and for a few
moments they both watched the coals in silence. The room was quite
dark now; the firelight winked like a drowsy eye; here and there
the gold of a picture frame or the smooth curve of a bit of copper
or brassware twinkled. The windows showed opaque squares of dull
gray; elsewhere was only heavy shadow, except where Barbara's
white gown made a spot of dull relief in the gloom, and Julia's
slipper buckles caught the light. A great jar of lilacs, somewhere
in the room, sent out a subtle and delicious scent.

"Funny world, isn't it, Julie?"

"Oh, FUNNY!" Julia put out her hand, and met Barbara's, and their
fingers pressed. "Nothing better in it, Barbara, than a friend
like you!" she said affectionately.

"That's what I was thinking," said Barbara.

The Studdifords went to San Mateo after the wedding, and Julia,
who had taken herself seriously in hand, entered upon the social
life of the summer with a perfectly simulated zest. She rode and
drove, played golf and tennis and polo, gossiped and spent hours
at bridge, she went tirelessly from luncheon to tea, from dinner
to supper party, and when Jim was detained in town, she went
without him; a little piece of self-reliance that pleased him very
much. If society was not extremely popular with Julia, Julia was
very popular with society; her demure beauty made her conspicuous
wherever she went, and in July, prominent in some theatricals at
the clubhouse, she earned all honours before her.

Julia found the theatricals perilously delightful; the grease
paint and the ornate costume seemed like old friends; she was
intoxicated and enchanted by the applause. For several days after
her most successful performance she was thoughtful: what if she
had never joined the "Amazon" caste, never gone to Sausalito,
followed naturally in the footsteps of Connie Girard and Rose
Ransome? She might have been a great actress; she would have been
a great beauty.

San Mateo, frankly, bored her, although she could not but admire
the beautiful old place, the lovely homes set in enchanting old
gardens, the lawns and drives stretching under an endless vista of
superb oaks. There, alone with Jim, in a little cottage--ah, there
would have been nothing boring about that!

But the Hardesty cottage never seemed like home to her, they had
rented the big, shingled brown house for only three months, and
Jim was anxious that she should not tire herself with altering the
arrangement of furniture and curtains for so casual a tenancy. The
Hardesty's pictures looked down from the wall, their chairs were
unfriendly, their books under lock and key. Not a lamp, not a cup
or saucer was familiar to Julia; she felt uncomfortable in giving
dinner parties with "H" on the silver knives and forks; she never
liked the look of the Hardesty linen. Life seemed unreal in the
"Cottage"; she seemed to be pushed further and further away from
reassuring contact with the homely realities of love and
companionship; chattering people were always about her,
pianoplayers were rippling out the waltz from "The Merry Widow,"
ice was clinking in cocktail shakers, the air was scented with
cigarettes, with the powder and perfumery of women. She and Jim
dined alone not oftener than once a week, and their dinner was
never finished before friendly feet crisped on the gravel curve of
the drive, and friendly invaders appeared to invite them to do
something amusing: to play cards, to take long spins in motor
cars, or to spend an idle hour or two at the club. Sometimes they
were separated, and Julia would come in, chilled and tired after a
long drive, to find Jim ahead of her, already sound asleep.
Sometimes she left him smoking with some casual guest, and fell
asleep long before the voices downstairs subsided. Even if they
went upstairs together, both were tired; there was neither time
nor inclination for confidences, for long and leisurely talk.

"Happy?" Jim said to his wife one day, when Julia, looking the
picture of happiness, had come downstairs to join him for some
expedition.

"Happy enough," Julia said, with her grave smile. She took the
deep wicker chair next his, on the porch, and sat looking down the
curve of the drive to the roadway beyond a screen of trees.

"Heavenly afternoon," she said. "Just what are we doing?"

"Well, as near as I got it from Greg," Jim informed her a little
uncertainly, "we go first to his place, and then split up into
about three cars there; Mrs. Peter and Mrs. Billings will take the
eats, Peter will have a whole hamper of cocktails and things, and
we go up to the ridge for a sort of English nursery tea, I think."

"Doing it all ourselves?" Julia suggested, brightening.

"Well, practically. Although Greg's cook is going ahead with a
couple of maids in the Peters' car. They're going to broil trout
or something; anyway, I know Greg has been having fits about
seeing that enough plates go, and so on. I know Paula Billings is
taking something frozen--"

"Oh, Lord, what a fuss and what a mess!" Julia said ungratefully.

"Well, you know how the Peters always do things. And then, after
tea, if this glorious weather holds, we'll send the maids and the
hampers home, and all go on down to Fernand's."

"Fernand's! Forty miles, Jim?"

"Oh, why not? If we're having a good time?"

"Well, I hope Peter Vane and Alan Gregory keep sober, that's all!"
Julia said. "The ride will be lovely, and it's a wonderful day.
But Minna Vane always bores me so!"

"Why, you little cat!" Jim laughed, catching her hand as it hung
loose over the arm of her chair.

"They've no brains," complained Julia seriously; "they were born
doing this sort of thing, they think they like it! Buying--buying-
-buying--eating--dancing--rushing--rushing--rushing! It's no life
at all! I'd rather pack a heavy basket, and lug it over a hot
hill, and carry water half a mile, when I picnic, instead of
rolling a few miles in a motor car, and then sitting on a nice
camp-chair, and having a maid to pass me salads and ices and toast
and broiled trout!"

"Well, if you would, I wouldn't!" Jim said good-naturedly.

"I wasn't born to this," Julia added thoughtfully; "my life has
always been full of real things; perhaps that's the trouble. I
think of all the things that aren't going right in the world, and
I CAN'T just turn my back on them, like a child--I get thinking of
poor little clerks whose wives have consumption--"

"Oh, for heaven's sake!" Jim protested frowningly, biting the end
from his cigar with a clip of firm white teeth.

"It isn't as if I had never been poor," Julia pursued uncertainly.
"I know that there are times when a new gown or a paid bill
actually would affect a girl's whole life! I think of those poor
little girls at St. Anne's--"

"I would like to suggest," Jim said incisively, "that the less you
let your mind run on those little girls from St. Anne's, the
better for you! If you have no consideration for my feelings in
this matter, Julie, for your own I should think you would consider
such topics absolutely--well, absolutely in poor taste!"

Silence. Jim puffed on his cigar. Julia sat without stirring,
feeling that every drop of blood in her body had rushed to her
head. The muscles of her temples and throat ached, her eyes saw
only a green-and-gold dazzle, her wet little hands gripped the
arms of her chair.

"It is all very well to criticise these people," pursued Jim
sententiously, after a long silence, "although they have all been
kindness and graciousness itself to you! They may be shallow, they
may be silly; I don't hold any brief for Minna Vane and Paula
Billings. But I know that Minna is on the Hospital Board, and
Paula a mighty kind-hearted, good little woman, and they don't sit
around pulling long faces, and wishing they were living south of
Market Street!"

Julia sat perfectly still. She could not have battled with the
lump in her throat if life had depended upon her speaking. She
felt her chest strain with a terrible rush of sobbing, but she
held herself stiffly, and only prayed that her tears might be kept
back until she was alone.

"Hello! Here's Greg," Jim said cheerfully, after another silence.
And here, truly, was Alan Gregory, a red-faced, smooth-shaven
young man, already slightly hilarious and odorous of drink, and
very gallant to beautiful Mrs. Studdiford. A great silky veil must
be tied over Julia's hat; sure she was warm enough? Might be late,
might get cold, you know.

"Shall I get you your white coat, dear?" Jim asked solicitously.

"Oh, no, thank you, Jim!"

Then they were off, and Julia told herself that men and their
wives often quarrelled this way; it was a common enough thing to
have some woman announce, with a casual laugh, that she and her
husband had had a "terrible scene," and "weren't speaking." Only,
with Jim it seemed so different! It seemed so direfully, so
hopelessly wrong!

She felt a hypocrite when they joined the others, and when she
presently found herself laughing and talking with them all, even
with Jim. And through the jolly afternoon and noisy evening she
found herself watching her husband, when she could do so
unobserved, with gravely analytical eyes. No barbed sentence of
his could long affect her, for Julia had pondered and prayed too
long over this matter to find any fresh distress in a reminder of
it. Her natural simple honesty very soon adjusted the outraged
sensibilities. But Jim could hurt himself with his wife, and this
afternoon he had done so. Unconsciously Julia said to herself,
over and over, "Oh, he should not have said that! That was not
kind!"

Mrs. Vane had a great favour to ask the men of the party to-night.
She proffered it somewhat doubtfully, like a spoiled child who is
almost sure of being denied, yet risks its little charms in one
more entreaty. She and Paula, yes, and Mrs. Jerome, and little
Julia--wasn't that so, Julia?--wanted to see a roadhouse. No--no--
no--not the sort of place where nice women went, but a regular
roadhouse--oh, please, please, please! They had their veils to tie
over their faces, and they would keep very unobtrusively in the
background, and there was a man apiece and two men over to protect
them.

"All the girls in town are doing it!" argued Mrs. Vane, "and they
say it's perfectly killing! Dancing, you know, and singing. You
have to keep your veil down, of course! Betty said they'd been
three times!"

"Nothing doing," Jim said good-naturedly, shaking his head.

"Oh, now, don't say that, Doctor!" Mrs. Vane commanded animatedly;
"it's too MEAN! Well, if you couldn't take us to the very worst,
where COULD you take us--Hunter's?"

"Hunter's!" the three men echoed, laughing and exchanging glances.

"Well, where then?" the lady pursued.

"Look here, Min," said her husband uneasily, "there's nothing to
it. And you girls might get insulted and mixed into something--"

"Oh, divine!" Mrs. Billings said; "now I WILL go!"

"White's, huh, Jim?" Greg suggested tentatively.

"White's?" Jim considered it, shook his head. "Nothing doing
there, anyway!" was his verdict.

"Larry's, where the pretty window boxes are," suggested Mrs. Vane,
hopeful eyes upon the judges. "Come on! OH, COME ON! You see such
flossy ladies getting out of motor cars in front of Larry's!"

"There's this about Larry's," Mr. Billings contributed; "we could
get one of those side places, and then, if things got too hot,
just step out on to the porch, d'ye see, and get the girls away
with no fuss at all."

"That's so," Jim conceded; "but I'll be darned if I know why they
want to do it. However--"

"However, you're all angels!" sang Mrs. Vane, and catching Julia
about the waist, she began to waltz upon the pleasant meadow grass
where they had just had their high tea. "Come on, everybody! We
won't be at Fernand's until nearly night, then dinner, and then
Larry's!"

"Mind now," growled one of the somewhat unwilling escort, "you
girls keep your veils down. Nix on the front-page story to-
morrow!"

"Oh, we'll behave!" Mrs. Billings assured him. And slipping an
affectionate arm about Julia's waist, as they walked to the motor
cars, she murmured: "My dear, there isn't one decent woman in the
place! Isn't this fun!"

Julia did not answer. She got into the car and settled herself for
the run; so much of the day at least would be pleasant. It was the
close of a lovely summer afternoon, the long shadows of the trees
lay ahead of them on the road, the sky was palest blue and palest
pink, a flock of white baby clouds lay low against the eastern
horizon. The warm air bore the clean good scent of wilting grass
and hot pine sap. The car rolled along smoothly, its motion
stirring the still air into a breeze. Mr. Billings, sitting next
to Julia, began an interested disquisition upon the difficulties
of breeding genuine, bat-eared, French bulldogs. Julia scarcely
heard him, but she nodded now and then, and now and then her blue
eyes met his; once she gratified him with a dreamy smile. This
quite satisfied Morgan Billings, to whom it never occurred that
Julia's thoughts might be on the beauties of the rolling
landscape, and her smile for the first star that came prickling
through the soft twilight.

And after a while some aching need of her soul grew less urgent,
and some of the wistfulness left her face. She forgot the ideals
that had come with her into her married life, and crushed down the
conviction that Jim, like all men, liked his wife to slip into the
kitchen and concoct some little sweet for his supper, even with an
artist like Foo Ting at his command. She realized that when she
declined old Mrs. Chickering's luncheon invitation for the mere
pleasure of rushing home to have lunch with Jim, her only reward
might be a disapproving: "My Lord! Julia, I hope you didn't offend
Mrs. Chickering! She's been so decent to us!"

It was as if Julia, offering high interest on her marriage bond,
had at last learned that one tenth of what she would pay would
satisfy Jim. Feeling as she did that no demonstration on his part,
no inclination to monopolize her, would do more than satisfy her
longing to be all in all to him, it was not an easy lesson. For a
while she could not believe that he knew his own happiness in the
matter, and a dispassionate onlooker might have found infinitely
pathetic the experimental temerity with which she told him that
this invitation had been accepted, this social obligation
incurred, this empty Sunday filled to overflowing with
engagements.

And now Jim approved, and Julia had to hide in the depth of her
hurt soul the fact that she had never dreamed he COULD approve.
However tired, he liked to come home to the necessity of
immediately assuming evening dress, and going out into the night
again. He and Julia held a cheerful conversation between their
dressing-rooms as they dressed; later they chattered eagerly
enough in the limousine, Jim enthusiastic over his wife's gown,
and risking a kiss on her bare shoulder when the car turned down a
dark street. Jim, across a brilliant table, in a strange house,
did not seem to Julia to belong to her at all; but it was almost
as if he found his wife more fascinating when the eyes of
outsiders were upon her, and admired Julia in a ballroom more than
he did when they had the library and the lamplight to themselves,
at home.

They would come home together late and silent. Ellie would come in
to help her lovely mistress out of the spangled gown, to lift the
glittering band from her bright hair. And because of Ellie, and
because Jim usually was dressed and gone before she was up in the
morning, Julia had a room to herself now. She would have much
preferred to breakfast with her lord, but Jim himself forbade it.

"No, no, no, Ju! It's not necessary, and you're much better off in
bed. That's the time for you to get a little extra rest. No human
being can stand the whole season without making some rest up
somehow! You'll see the girls begin to drop with nervous
prostration in January; Barbara used to lose twenty pounds every
winter. And I won't HAVE you getting pale. Just take things easy
in the morning, and sleep as late as you can!"

Julia accepted the verdict mildly. With the opening of her second
winter in San Francisco's most exclusive set, she had tried to
analyze the whole situation, honestly putting her prejudices on
one side, and attempting to get her husband's point of view. It
was the harder because she had hoped to be to Jim just what
Kennedy Marbury was to Anthony, united by a thousand needs, little
and big, by the memory of a thousand little comedies and
tragedies. Kennedy, who worried about bills and who dreaded the
coming of the new baby, could stop making a pie to administer
punishment and a lecture to her oldest son, stop again to answer
the telephone, stop again to kiss her daughter's little bumped
nose, and yet find in her tired soul and body enough love and
energy to put a pastry "A. M." on the top of her pie, to amuse the
head of the house when he should cut into it that night.

But this mixture of the ridiculous and the sublime was not for
Julia. And just as Kennedy had adjusted herself to the life of a
poor man's wife, so Julia must adjust herself to her own so
different destiny.

And adjust herself she did. Nobody dreamed of the thoughts that
went on behind the beautiful blue eyes, nobody found little Mrs.
Studdiford anything but charming. With that steadfast, serious
resolution that had marked her all her life, Julia set herself to
the study of gowns, of dinners, of small talk. She kept a slim
little brown Social Register on her dressing-table, and pored over
it at odd moments; she listened attentively to the chatter that
went on all about her. She drew infinitely less satisfaction from
the physical evidences of her success--her beauty, her wealth, her
handsome husband, and her popularity--than any one of the women
who envied her might have done, yet she did draw some
satisfaction, loved her pretty gowns, the freedom of bared white
neck and shoulders, the atmosphere of perfumed drawing-rooms and
glittering dinner tables. She wrote long letters to Barbara, was a
devoted godmother to Theodora Carleton's tiny son, loved to have
Miss Toland with her for an occasional visit, and perhaps once a
month went over to Sausalito, to spoil the old doctor with her
affectionate attentions, hold long conferences with their mother
on the subject of the girls' love affairs, and fall into deep
talks with Richie--perhaps the happiest talks in her life, for
Richie, whose mind and body had undergone for long years the
exquisite discipline of pain, was delightfully unexpected in his
views, and his whole lean, ungainly frame vibrated with the eager
joy of expressing them.

Perhaps once a month, too, Julia went to see her own mother, calls
which always left her definitely depressed. Emeline was becoming
more and more crippled with rheumatism, the old grandmother was
now the more brisk of the two. May's two younger girls, Muriel and
Geraldine, were living there now, as Marguerite and Evelyn had
done; awkward, dark, heavy-faced girls who attended the High
School. Julia's astonishing rise in life had necessarily affected
her relatives, but much less, she realized in utter sickness of
spirit, than might have been imagined. She and Jim were paying for
the schooling of two of May's boys, and a substantial check, sent
to her mother monthly, supposedly covered the main expenses of the
entire household. Besides this, Chess was working, and paying his
mother something every week for board.

It had been Julia's first confident plan to move the family from
the Mission entirely. There were lovely roomy flats in the Western
Addition, or there were sunny houses out toward the end of Sutter
Street, where her mother and grandmother would be infinitely more
comfortable and more accessible. She was stunned when her
grandmother flatly refused. Even her mother's approval of the plan
was singularly wavering and half hearted. Mrs. Cox argued shrilly
that they were poor folks, and poor folks were better off not
trapesing all over the city, and Emeline added that Ma would feel
lost without her backyard and her neighbours, to say nothing of
the privilege of bundling up in a flat black bonnet and brown
shawl, hot weather or cold, and trotting off to St. Charles's
Church at all hours of the day and night.

"I don't care, Julie," Mrs. Page made her daughter exquisitely
uncomfortable by saying very formally, "but there's no girl in
God's world that wouldn't think of asking her mother to stay with
her for a while--till things got settled, anyway. You haven't done
it!"

"Well, I'll tell you, Mama--" Julia began, but Emeline interrupted
her.

"You haven't done it, Julie, and let me tell you right now, it
looks queer. I'm not the one that says it; every one says it. I
don't want to force myself where I'm not--"

"But, Mama DEAR, we're only at the hotel now!" Julia protested,
feeling a hypocrite.

"I see," said Emeline, "and I'm not good enough, of course. I
couldn't meet your friends, of course!" She laughed heartily.
"That's GOOD!" she said appreciatively.

Julia used to flush angrily under these withering comments, at
first; later, her poor little mother's attitude filled her only
with a great pity. For Emeline was suffering a great deal now, and
Julia longed to be able to take her with her to the Pacific Avenue
house, if only to prove that its empty splendour held no
particular advantages over the life on Shotwell Street, for
Emeline. She was definitely better off in her mother's warm
kitchen, gossiping and idling her days away, than she would have
been limping aimlessly about in Julia's house, and catching
glimpses of Julia only between the many claims of the daughter's
day.

More than this, Jim would not hear of such a visit; it never even
came to a discussion between husband and wife; he would have been
frankly as much surprised as horrified at the idea. So Julia did
what was left to her, for her mother: listened patiently to long
complaints, paid bills, and supplemented Jim's generous cheque
with many a gold piece pressed into her mother's hand or slipped
into her grandmother's dreadful old shopping-bag. She carried off
her young cousins to equip them with winter suits and sensible
shoes, aware all the while that their high-heeled slippers and
flimsy, cheap silk dresses, the bangles that they slipped over
dirty little hands, and the fancy combs they pushed into their
untidy hair, were infinitely more prized by them.

The Shotwell Street house was still close and stuffy, the bedrooms
as dark and horrible as Julia remembered them, and no financial
aid did more than temporarily soften the family's settled opinion
that poor folks were poor folks, and predestined to money trouble.
Julia knew that when the clothes she bought her cousins grew dirty
they would not be cleaned; she knew that her grandmother had never
taken a tub bath in her life and rather scorned the takers of tub
baths; she knew that such a thing as the weekly washing of
clothes, the transformation of dirty linen into piles of fragrant
whiteness, never took place in the Shotwell Street house. Mrs. Cox
indeed liked to keep a tub full of gray suds standing in the
kitchen, and occasionally souse in it one of her calico wrappers,
or a shirt waist belonging to the girls. These would be dried on a
rope stretched across the kitchen, and sooner or later pressed
with one of the sad irons that Julia remembered as far back as she
remembered anything; rough-looking old irons, one with a broken
handle, all with the figure seven stamped upon them with a mould.
Mrs. Cox had several ironholders drifting about the kitchen, folds
of dark cloth that had been so often wet and singed that the
covering had split, and the folded newspaper inside showed its
burned edges, but she never could find one when she wanted it, and
usually improvised a new one from a grocery bag or the folds of
her apron, and so burned her veined old knotted hands.

Julia came soon to see that her actual presence did them small
good, and did herself real harm, and so, somewhat thankfully,
began to confine her attentions more and more to mere financial
assistance. She presently arranged for the best of medical care
for her mother, even for a hospital stay, but her attitude grew
more and more that of the noncommittal outsider, who helps without
argument and disapproves without comment. Evelyn had made a great
success of her dressmaking, but such aid as she could give must be
given her sister, for Marguerite's early and ill-considered
marriage had come to the usual point when, with an unreliable
husband, constantly arriving and badly managed babies, and bitter
poverty and want, she found herself much in the position of her
mother, twenty years before. May was still living in Oakland,
widowed. Her two sons were at home and working, and with a small
income from rented rooms as well, the three and her youngest
daughter, Regina, somehow managed to maintain the dreary cottage
in which most of the children were born.

"They all give me a great big pain!" Evelyn said one day frankly,
when Julia was at Madame Carroll's for a fitting, and the cousins-
-one standing in her French hat and exquisite underlinen, and the
other kneeling, her gown severely black, big scissors in hand, and
a pincushion dangling at her breast--were discussing the family.
"Gran'ma isn't so bad, because she's old, but Aunt Emeline and
Mama have a right to get next to themselves! Mama had a fit
because I wouldn't take a flat over here, and have her and Regina
with me; well, I could do it perfectly well; it isn't the money!"
Evelyn stood up, took seven pins separately and rapidly from her
mouth, and inserted them in the flimsy lining that dangled about
Julia's arm. "You want this tight, but not too tight, don't you,
Julie?" said she. "That can come in a little, still. No," she
resumed aggrievedly, "but I board at a nice place on Fulton
street; the Lancasters, the people that keep it, are just lovely.
Mrs. Lancaster is so motherly and the girls are so jolly; my wash
costs me a dollar a week; I belong to the library; I've got a
lovely room; I go to the theatre when I want to; I buy the clothes
I like, and why should I worry? I know the way Mama keeps house,
and I've had enough of it!"

"It's awfully hard," Julia mused, "Marguerite's just doing the
same thing over again. It's just discouraging!"

"Well, you got out of it, and I got out of it," Evelyn said
briskly, "and they call it our luck! Luck? There ain't any such
thing," she went on indignantly. "I'm going to New York for Madame
next year--me, to New York, if you please, and stay at a good
hotel, and put more than twenty thousand dollars into materials
and imported wraps and scarfs and so on--is there any luck to
that? There's ten years' slavery, that's what there is! How much
do you suppose you'd have married Jim Studdiford if you hadn't
kept yourself a little above the crowd, and worked away at the
settlement house for years and years?" she demanded. "I can put a
little hook in here, Ju, where the lace comes, to keep that in
place for you!" she added, more quietly.

"Well, it's true!" Julia said, sighing. She looked with real
admiration at the capable, black-clad figure, the clear-skinned,
black-eyed face of Madame Carroll's chief assistant. "Why don't
you ever come and have lunch with me, Evelyn?" she demanded
affectionately.

"Oh, Lord, dearie!" Evelyn said, in her most professional way, as
she pencilled a list of young Mrs. Studdiford's proportions on a
printed card, "this season Madame has our lunches, and even our
dinners, sent in--simply one rush! But some time I'd love to."

"You like your work, don't you, Evelyn?" Julia said curiously.

"You go tell Madame I'm ready for Mrs. Addison," Evelyn said
capably to a small black-clad girl who answered her bell, "and
then carry this to Minnie and tell her it's rush--don't drop the
pins out. I love my work," she added, when she and Julia were
alone again; "I'm crazy about it! The girls here are awfully nice,
and some of the customers treat me simply swell--most of them do.
This way, Julia. Christmas time we get more presents than you
could shake a stick at!" said Evelyn, opening a door. "Good
afternoon, Mrs. Addison, I'm all ready for you."

"That's a good girl!" the woman who was waiting in Carroll's
handsome parlour said appreciatively; she recognized Julia. "Well,
how do you do, Mrs. Studdiford?" she smiled, "so sorry not to see
you on Saturday, you bad little thing!"

Julia gave her excuse. "You know Evelyn here is my cousin?" she
said, in her quiet but uncompromising way, as she hooked her
sables together.

"About eleven times removed!" Evelyn said cheerfully. "Right in
here, please, Mrs. Addison! At the same time to-morrow, Mrs.
Studdiford. Thank you, good-night."

"Good-night!" Julia said, smiling. For some reason she could not
fathom, Evelyn never seemed willing to claim the full
relationship; always assumed it to be but a hazy and distant
connection. It was as if in her success the modiste wished to
recognize no element but her own worth; no wealthy or influential
relative could claim to have helped HER! Julia always left her
with a certain warmth at her heart. It was good to come in contact
now and then with such self-confidence, such capability, such
prosperity. "I could almost envy Evelyn!" thought Julia, spinning
home in the twilight.




CHAPTER IV


The Studdifords, with some four hundred other San Francisco
society folk, regarded the Browning dances as quite the most
important of the winter's social affairs, and Julia, who
thoroughly liked the host and the brilliant assembly, really
enjoyed them more than the smaller and more select affairs. The
Brownings were a beloved and revered institution; very few new
faces appeared there from year to year, except the very choice of
the annual crop of debutantes. Little Mrs. Studdiford had made a
sensation when she first came, at her handsome husband's side, a
year ago, her dazzling prettiness set off by the simplest of milk-
white Paris gowns, her wonderful crown of hair wound about with
pearls. Now she was a real favourite, and at the January ball, in
her second winter in society, a score of admirers assured her that
her gown was the prettiest in the room.

"That pleases you, doesn't it, Jim?" she smiled, as he put her
into a red velvet armchair, at the end of the long ballroom, and
dropped into a chair beside her.

"Well, it's true," Jim assured her, "and, what's more, you're the
most beautiful woman in the room, too!"

"Oh, Jeemy! What a story! But go get your dances, dear, if we're
not going to stay for supper. Here's Mrs. Thayer to amuse me,"
said Julia, as a magnificent old woman came toward her with a
smile.

"Not dancing, dear?" said the dowager, as she sank heavily into
the seat Jim left. "Whyn't you dancing with the other girls? I"--
she panted and fanned, idly scanning the room--"I tell Brownie I
don't know how he gets the men!" she added, "lots of 'em; supper
brings 'em, probably! Whyn't you dancing, dear?"

"She's implying that her ankle was sprained," Jim grinned,
departing. Julia dimpled. The dowager brought an approving eye to
bear upon her.

"Well--well, you don't say so? Now that's very nice indeed," she
said comfortably; "well, I declare! I hadn't heard a word of it--
and you're glad, of course?"

"Oh, very glad!" Julia assured her, colouring.

"That's nice, too!" Mrs. Thayer rumbled on, her eyes beginning
again to rove the room. "Fuss, of course, and lots of trouble, but
you forget all that! Yes, I love children myself, used to be the
most devoted mother alive, puttin' 'em to bed, and all that, yes,
indeed!"

"You had two?" Julia hazarded. The dowager gave her a surprised
glance.

"I, me dear? I had five--Rose there, that's Mrs. St. John, and
Kate, you know her? Mrs. Willis, and my boy that's in Canada now,
and the boy I lost, and Lillian--Lily we called her, she was only
three. Diphtheria."

"Oh!" Julia said, shocked.

"Yes, indeed, I thought it would break Colonel Thayer's heart,"
pursued Mrs. Thayer, fanning regally, and watching the room. "She
was the first--Lily would be nearly forty now! Look, Julia, who is
that with Isabel Wallace? Who? Oh, yes, Mary Chauncey. See if you
can see her husband anywhere. I'd give a good deal to know if she
came with him!"

"Mrs. Thayer," said Julia presently, "how long have you been
coming to the Brownings?"

"I? Oh, since they were started, child. There was a little group
of us that used to dance round at each other's houses, then some
of the men got together and formed a little club--Brownie was one
of them. The Saunders used to come. Ella was about eighteen, and
Sally and Anna Toland, and the Harts, and the Kirkwoods. Who's
that with young Brice, Julia, me dear? Peter Coleman, is it?"

"Talking to Mr. Carter, yes, that's Mr. Coleman. He's a beautiful
dancer," said Julia.

"Peter is? Yes, well, then, why don't you--But you're not dancing,
of course, "Mrs. Thayer said. "There's Gordon Jones and his wife!
Why Brownie ever let them in I don't--Ah, Ella, how are you,
dear?"

"Fine, thank you!" said the newcomer, a magnificent woman of
perhaps forty, in a very beautiful gown. "How do you do, Mrs.
Studdiford?" she added cordially, as she sat down. "Dancing,
surely?"

"Now she's got the best reason in the world for not dancing," said
old Mrs. Thayer, with a protective motion of her fan.

"Oh--so?" Miss Saunders said, after a quick look of interrogation.
"Well, that's--dutiful, isn't it?" She raised her eyebrows, made a
little grimace, and laughed.

"Now, Ella, don't ye say anything wicked!" Mrs. Thayer warned her,
and the fan was used to tap Miss Saunders sharply on her smooth,
big arm.

"Wicked!" Miss Saunders said negligently, watching the dancers, "I
think it's fine. I always said I'd have ten. Is Jim pleased?"

"He's perfectly delighted--yes," Julia assented, suddenly feeling
that this careless talk, in this bright, hot room, was not fair to
the little one she already loved so dearly.

"Is that Mrs. Brock or Vera?" Mrs. Thayer asked. "I declare they
look alike!"

"That's Alice," Ella answered, after a glance, "don't you know
that blue silk? They've got the Hazzards with them."

"Gets worse every year, absolutely," the old lady declared,
"doesn't it, Ella? Emily here?"

"No, she's wretched, poor kid. But Ken's here somewhere. There are
the Geralds," Miss Saunders added, leaning toward the old woman
and sinking her tone to a low murmur. "Have you heard about Mason
Gerald and Paula Billings--oh, HAVEN'T you? Not about the car
breaking down--HAVEN'T you? Well, my DEAR--"

Julia lost the story, and sat watching the room, a vague little
smile curving her lips, her blue eyes moving idly to and fro. She
saw Mrs. Toland come in with her two lovely daughters. Julia had
had tea with them that afternoon at the hotel, where they would
spend the night. The orchestra was silent just now, and the
dancers were drifting about the room, a great brilliant circle.
Some of the men were clapping their hands, all of them were
laughing as they bent their sleek heads toward their partners, and
all the girls were laughing, too, and talking animatedly as they
raised wide-open eyes. Julia admired the gowns: shining pink and
cloudy pink, blue with lace and blue with spangles, white alone,
and white with every colour in the world; a yellow and black gown
that was indescribably dashing, and a yellow and black gown that
somehow looked very flat and dowdy. She noticed the Ripley pearls
on Miss Dolly Ripley's scrawny little lean neck, and that charming
Isabel Wallace danced a good deal with her own handsome, shy young
brothers, and seemed eager that they should enjoy what was
evidently their first Browning. She studied the old faces, the
hard faces, the faded faces, the painted cheeks and powdered
necks; she read the tragedy behind the drooping head of some
debutante, the triumph in the high laugh of another. There was
poor Connie Fox, desperately eager and amiable, dancing with the
youngest men and the oldest men, glittering and jolly in her dingy
blue silk; and Connie's mother, who was her chaperon, a little
fluttering fool of a woman, nervously eager to ingratiate, and
nervously afraid to intrude her company upon these demi-gods and
goddesses; and Theodora Carleton, handsome in too low cut a gown,
laughing with Alan Gregory, and aware, as every one in the room
was aware, that her husband's first wife was also at the dance.
The room grew warm, the air heavy with delicate perfumes. Men were
mopping their faces; some of the debutantes looked like wilting
roses; the faces of some of the older women were shining. It was
midnight, the latest comers had arrived, the floor was well
filled.

"I wonder if I will be doing this twenty years from now," thought
Julia. "I wonder if my daughter will come to the Brownings, then?"

"... which I call disgraceful, don't you, Mrs. Studdiford?" asked
Miss Saunders suddenly.

"I beg your pardon!" Julia said, startled into attention, "I
didn't hear you!"

"I know you didn't," the other said, laughing, "nevertheless, it
was a low trick," she added to Mrs. Thayer, "and Leila Orvis can
wait a long time before she makes the peace with ME! Charity's all
very well, but when it comes to palming off girls like that upon
your friends, it's just a little too MUCH!"

"How's it happen ye didn't ask the girl for any references, me
dear?" asked Mrs. Thayer.

"Because Leila told me she knew all about her!" snapped Miss
Saunders.

"What was she, a waitress?" Julia asked, amused.

"No, she was nothing!" Miss Saunders said in high scorn; "she'd
had no training whatever--not that I mind THAT. She was simply
supposed to help with the pantry work and make herself generally
useful. Well, one day Carrie, a maid Mother's had for YEARS, told
Mother that something this Ada had said she fancied Ada had been
in some sort of reform school--imagine! Of course poor Mother
collapsed, and Emily telephoned for me--the kid always rises to an
emergency, I will say that. So I rushed home, and got the whole
story out of Ada in five minutes. At first she cried a good deal,
and pretended it was an orphans' home; orphans' home--ha! Finally
I scared her into admitting that it was a place just for girls of
her sort--"

"Fancy!" said Mrs. Thayer, fanning. Julia had grown a little pale.

"What did you do, Miss Saunders?" said she.

"Do? I sent her packing, of course!" said that lady, smiling as
she bowed to an acquaintance across the room. "I told her to go
straight back to Mrs. Orvis, and say I sent her. However, she
didn't, for I telephoned Leila at once--Lucy Bacon is trying to
bow to you, Mrs. Studdiford--over there, with your husband!"

"I wonder where she did go?" pursued Julia.

"I really have no idea!" Miss Saunders said.

"You may be sure she knew just where to go, a creature like that!"
old Mrs. Thayer said wisely. "How de do, Peter, Auntie here?" she
called to a smiling man who went by.

"Oh, she wouldn't go utterly bad," Julia protested; "you can't
tell, she may have been decent for years. It may have been years
ago--"

"Still, me dear," old Mrs. Thayer said comfortably, "one doesn't
like the idea--one can't overlook that, ye know."

"Of course, it's too bad," Miss Saunders added briskly, "and it's
a great pity, and things ought to be different from what they are,
and all THAT; but at the same time you couldn't have a girl like
that in the house, now could you?"

"Oh, yes, I could!" said Julia, scarlet cheeked, "I was just
thinking how glad I would be to give her a trial!"

She stopped because Jim, very handsome in evening dress and with
his pretty partner beside him, had come up to them.

"Tired, dear?" Jim said, smiling approval of the little figure in
white lace, and the earnest eyes under loosened bright hair.

"Just about time you came up, Jim!" Ella Saunders said cheerfully,
"here's your wife championing the cause of unfortunate girls--SHE
wouldn't care what they'd done, she'd take them right into her
home!"

"And very sweet and nice of her," Mrs. Thayer observed, with a
consolatory pat on Julia's arm, "only it isn't quite practical, me
dear, is it, Jim?"

"Julia'd like to take in every cat and dog and beggar and newsboy
she sees," said Jim, with his bright smile. But Julia knew he was
not pleased. "Do you want to come speak to Mother and the girls,
dear, before I take you home?" he added, offering his arm. Julia
stood up and said her good-nights, and crossed the room, a slender
and most captivating little figure, at his side. It was not until
she was bundled into furs and in the motor car that she could say,
with an appealing hand on his arm:

"Don't blame me, Jimmy. I didn't start that topic. Miss Saunders
happened to tell of a poor girl who--"

"I don't care to discuss it," Jim said, removing her hand by the
faintest gesture of withdrawing.

Julia sighed and was silent. The limousine ran smoothly past one
lighted corner after another; turned into Van Ness Avenue. After a
while she said, a little indignation burning through her quiet
tone:

"I've said I was not responsible for the conversation, Jim. And it
seems to me merely childish in you to let a casual remark affect
you in this way!"

"All right, then, I'm childish!" Jim said grimly, folding his arms
as he leaned back in his seat.

Julia sighed again. Presently Jim burst out:

"I'm affected by a casual remark, yes, I admit it. But my God,
doesn't it mean anything to you that I have my pride, that when I
think of my wife I want to feel that she is more perfect in every
way--in EVERY way--than all the other women in the world?" He
stopped, breathing hard, and resumed, a little less violently:
"All I ask is, Julia, that you let such subjects ALONE. You're not
called upon to defend such girls! Surely that's not too much to
ask!"

Julia did not answer; she sat silent and sick. And as Jim did not
speak again, except to mutter "My God!" once or twice, they
reached the house in silence, and separated with a brief "Good-
night." Ellie was waiting for Julia, eager to hear what Miss Jane
wore, and Miss Constance wore, and how "Miss Teddy" looked.

"I am absolutely done, Ellie," said the mistress, when the filmy
lace gown was back in its box, and she was comfortably settled on
her pillows, "so don't come in until I ring."

"And I hope you'll get a long sleep," Ellie said approvingly,
"you've got to take care of yourself now!"

Julia's little daughter was born on a June day in the lovely Ross
Valley house the Studdifords had taken for the summer.

They had moved into the house in April, because Julia's hopes made
a later move unwise, and, delighted to get into the sweet green
country so early in the year, and to have the best of excuses for
leading the quiet life she loved, she bloomed like a rose. She was
in splendid health and in continual good spirits; her exultant
confidence indeed lasted until the very day of the baby's birth.

The day was late, and the pretty nurse, Miss Wheaton, had been in
the house for nearly two weeks before Julia herself came to her
door, in the first pearl dawning to say, still laughingly, that
the hour had come. A swift, well--ordered period of excitement
ensued; the maids were silent, awed, efficient; Miss Wheaton
authoritative, crisp, ready with technical terms; and Jim as
nervous and upset as if he were absolutely ignorant of all things
physiological, utterly dependent upon the skill and knowledge of
the nurse, humbly obedient to her will. The telephone rang and
rang. Julia, the centre of this whole thrilling drama, wandered
about in her great plum-coloured silk dressing-gown, commenting
cheerfully enough upon the various rapid changes that were being
made in her room. She picked up the little pink blanket that had
been hung upon a white-enamelled clothes-horse, by the fire, and
pressed it to her cheek. But now and then she stopped walking, and
put her hand out toward the back of a chair as if she needed
support, and then an expression crossed her face that made Jim's
soul sicken within him: an expression of fear and wonderment and
childish surprise. At nine o'clock Miss Toland came in, a little
pale, but very cheerful and reassuring.

"I'm afraid--my nerve--will give out, Aunt Sanna!" Julia said,
beginning her restless march again, after a hot quick kiss.

"Hear her!" said the nurse, with a laugh of bright scorn. "Don't
talk any nonsense like that, Mrs. Studdiford. Why, she's the
coolest of us all!"

"Oh, no--I'm not--oh, no--I'm not!" Julia moaned.

"Your doctor says you're doing splendidly, and that another two
hours ought to see everything well over!" Miss Toland said, trying
to keep the acute distress she felt out of her tone.

"I feel so--nauseated!" Julia complained. "So--uncertain!"

"Yes, I know," the nurse said soothingly, whisking out of the
room. Miss Toland followed her into the hall.

"She's in great pain, she won't have much of this?" asked the
older woman anxiously.

"She's not suffering much," the nurse said brightly, after a
cautious glance at Julia's closed door. "This isn't much--yet.
She's a little scared, that's all!"

Hating the nurse from the depth of her heart, Miss Toland went
downstairs to see the doctor. Jim was sitting with a newspaper on
the porch, trying to smoke. He jumped up nervously.

"Where's Doctor Lippincott?" demanded Miss Toland. "He ran in to
San Rafael. Back directly."

"Ran in to San Rafael? And you let him! Why, I don't see how he
dared, Jim!"

"Oh, I guess he knows his business, Aunt Sanna!" Jim said
miserably. "Do you suppose I can go up for a while?"

"Yes, go," said Miss Toland. "I think she wants you, God bless
her!"

But Julia wanted nobody and nothing. Jim's presence, his concerned
voice and sympathetic eyes, only vaguely added to her distress.
She was frightened now, terrified at the recurring paroxysms of
pain; she recoiled from the breezy matter-of-factness of the
doctor and the nurse; the elaborate preparations for the crisis
offended every delicate instinct of her nature. She felt that the
room was hot, and complained of the fire; but a few moments later
her teeth chattered with a chill, and Miss Wheaton closed the wide
windows through which a June breeze was wandering.

The day dragged on. The doctor came back, talked to Jim and Miss
Toland during luncheon about mushroom-raising, went upstairs to
send Miss Wheaton down to her lunch, and to watch the patient a
little while for himself. Jim went up, too, but was sent down to
reassure Mrs. Toland, who had arrived, and with Miss Sanna was
holding a vigil in the pretty cretonne-hung drawing-room. He was
crossing the hall to go upstairs again, when a sound from above
held him rigid and cold. A long low moan of utter weariness and
anguish drifted through the pleasant silence of the house, died
away, and rose again.

Slowly the sense of tragedy deepened about them. Mrs. Toland was
white; Miss Toland's face was streaked with tears. The moaning was
almost incessant now, but Jim in the hall could hear the nurse
murmur above it, and now and then the doctor's voice, short and
sharp.

"I wonder if you could come in and give her a little chloroform,
Jim?" said Doctor Lippincott, a pleasant, middle-aged man in a
white linen suit and cap, appearing suddenly in the door of
Julia's room. "I think we can ease her along a little now, and I
need Miss Wheaton."

Jim pushed his hair back with a wet hand; cleared his throat.

"Sure. D'you want me to scrub up?" he asked huskily.

"Oh, no--no, my dear boy! Everything's going splendidly." The
doctor beckoned him in, and shut the door. "Now, Mrs. Studdiford,"
said he, "we'll be all right here in no time!"

Julia did not answer; she did not open her eyes even when Jim took
her moist hot hand in one of his, and brushed back the lovely
tumbled hair from her wet forehead. She was breathing deep and
violently, as if she had been running. Presently she beat upon the
bed with one clenched fist, and began to toss her head from side
to side. Then the stifled moan began to escape from her bitten
lips again, her face worked pitifully, and she began to cry.

"Now, crowd it on, Jim!" Doctor Lippincott said, nodding toward
the chloroform.

"Breathe deep, breathe it in, my darling!" Jim urged, pouring the
sweet, choking stuff upon the little mask he held above the
tortured face.

"You aren't--helping me--at all!" Julia muttered, in a deep hoarse
voice. But her shrill thin cry sank to a moan again; she stammered
incoherent words.

So struggling and sobbing, now quieter under the anaesthetic, now
crying aloud, the next long hour somehow passed for the helpless,
suffering little animal that was Julia. A climax came, and the
kindly chloroform smothered the last terrible cry.

Julia awoke to a realization that something was snapping brightly,
like wood on a fire; that the cottony fumes in her head were
breaking, drifting away; that commonplace cheerful voices were
saying things very near her. She seemed to have fallen from
infinite space to this wretchedly uncomfortable bed and this
wretchedly uncomfortable position. She wanted a pillow; her head
was rocking with pain, and her forehead was sticky with moisture.
Yet under and over all other sensations was the heavenly relief
from the familiar agonies of the day. She felt so tired that the
mere thought of beginning to rest distressed her; she would not
open her eyes; her lids seemed sealed. She felt faintly worried
because she could not seem to intelligently grasp the subject of
Honolulu.

"Honolulu? Honolulu?" This was the doctor's pleasant drawl. "No. I
haven't. Mrs. Lippincott's people live in New York, so our
junketings are usually in that direction."

"Ah, well, you'd like Honolulu," Miss Wheaton's voice answered. A
pause. Then she said, "I put some wood on. It's not so warm to-day
as it was yesterday."

Julia strove in vain to pierce the meaning of these cryptic words.
Presently the doctor said, "Perfectly normal?" more as a statement
than a question, and Miss Wheaton answered in a matter-of-fact
voice, "Oh, absolutely."

Julia opened her eyes, looked up into the nurse's face, and with
returning consciousness came self-pity.

"I couldn't do it, Miss Wheaton," she whispered pitifully, with
trembling lips.

"Hello, little girlie, you're beginning to feel better, aren't
you?" Miss Wheaton said. "Here she is, Doctor, as fine as silk."

Julia's languid eyes found the doctor's kindly face.

"But the baby?" she faltered, with a rush of tears.

"The baby is a very noisy young woman," said Doctor Lippincott
cheerfully. "I wrapped her in her pink thingamagig, and she's
right here in Jim's room, getting her first bath from her granny."

"Really?" Julia whispered. "You wouldn't--fool me?"

"Listen to her!" Miss Wheaton said. "Now, my dear, don't you be
nervous. You've got a perfectly lovely little girl, and you've
come through SPLENDIDLY, and everything's fine. If you want to go
look at that baby, Doctor," she added, "ask Doctor Studdiford to
send Ellie in here to me and we'll straighten this all out. Then
we can let him in here to see this young lady!"

Presently Jim came in, to kneel beside Julia's bed, and gather her
little limp hands to his lips, and murmur incoherent praise of his
brave girl, his darling little mother, his little old sweetheart,
dearer than a thousand babies. Julia heard him dreamily, raised
languid eyes, and after a little while stroked his hair. She was
spent, exhausted, hammered by the agony of a few short hours into
this pale ghost of herself, and he was strong and well, the red
blood running confident and audacious in his veins. Their spirits
could not meet to-night. But she loved his praise, loved to feel
his cheek wet against her hand, and she began to be glad it was
all over, that peace at last had found the big pleasant room,
where firelight and the last soft brightness of the June day
mingled so pleasantly on rosy wall paper and rosy curtains.

"She's a little darling," said Jim. "Mother says she's the
prettiest tiny baby she ever saw. Poor Aunt Sanna and Mother had a
great old cry together!"

"Ah!" said Julia hungrily. For Miss Toland had come stepping
carefully in, the precious pink blanket in her arms.

"I'm to bring her to say 'Good-night' to her mother!" said Miss
Toland. "How are you, dear? All forgotten now?"

The pink miracle was laid beside Julia; she shifted her sore body
just a trifle to make room, and spread weak fingers to raise the
blanket from the baby's face. A little crumpled rose leaf of a
face, a shock of soft black hair, and two tiny hands that curved
warmly against Julia's investigating finger. All the rest was
delicate lawn and soft wool.

The baby wrinkled her little countenance, her tiny mouth opened,
and Julia heard for the first time her daughter's rasping,
despairing, bitter little cry. A passion of ecstasy flooded her
heart; she dropped her soft pale cheek close to the little creased
one.

"Oh, my darling, my DARLING!" she breathed. "Oh, you little
perfect, helpless, innocent thing! Oh, Jim, she's crying, the
angel! Oh, I do thank God for her!" she ended softly.

"I thank God you're so well," said Miss Toland. "Here, you can't
keep her!"

"Anna, go with Aunt Sanna," Julia said weakly.

"Anna, eh?" Miss Toland said, wrapping up the pink blanket.

"Anna Toland Studdiford," Jim answered. "Julia had that all fixed
up weeks ago!"

"Well--now--you children!" Miss Toland said, looking from one to
the other, with her half-vexed and half-approving laugh. "What do
you want to name her that for?"

"_I_ know what for," Julia smiled, as she watched the pink blanket
out of sight.

A little later Mrs. Toland crept in, just for a kiss, and a
whimpered, "And now you must forget all the pain, dear, and just
be happy!"

Then Julia was left to her own thoughts.

She watched Miss Wheaton come and go in the soft twilight. A
shaded light bloomed suddenly, where it would not distress her
eyes. The curtains were drawn, and Ellie came softly in with a
pitcher of hot milk on a tray. Now and then the baby's piercing
little "Oo-wah-wah!" came in from the next room, and when she
heard it, Julia smiled and said faintly, "The darling!"

And as a ship that has been blown seaward, to meet the gales and
to be battered upon rocks, might be caught at last by friendlier
tides and carried safely home, so Julia felt herself carried, a
helpless little wreck, too tired to care if the waves flung her
far up on shore or drew her out to their mad embraces again.

"All forgotten?" Miss Toland had asked, from her fifty years of
ignorance, and "Now you must forget all the pain," Mrs. Toland had
said, with her motherly smile.

Queer, drifting thoughts came and went in her active brain during
these quiet days of convalescence. She thought of girls she had
known at The Alexander, girls who had cried, and who had been
blamed and ostracised, girls who had gone to the City and County
Hospital for their bitter hour, and had afterward put the babies
in the Asylum! Julia's thoughts went by the baby in the next room,
and at the picture of that tender helplessness, wronged and
abandoned, her heart seemed to close like a closing hand.

Anna Toland Studdiford would never be abandoned, no fear of that.
Never was baby more closely surrounded with love and the means of
protection. But the other babies, just as dear to other women,
what of them? What of mother hearts that must go through life
knowing that there are little cries they will never hear, tears
they may never dry, tired little bodies that will never know the
restfulness of gentle arms? The terrible sum of unnecessary human
suffering rose up like a black cloud all about her; she seemed to
see long hospital wards, with silent forms filling them day and
night, night and day, the long years through; she had glimpses of
the crowded homes of the poor, the sick and helpless mothers, the
crying babies. She suddenly knew sickness and helplessness to be
two of the greatest factors in human life.

"What if Heaven is only this earth, clean and right at last,"
mused Julia, "and Hell only the realization of what we might have
done, and didn't do--for each other!" And to Jim she said,
smiling, "This experience has not only given me a baby, and given
me my own motherhood, but it seems to have given me all the
mothers and the babies in the world as well! I wish you were a
baby doctor, Jim--the preservation of babies is the most important
thing in the world!"

Slowly the kindly tides brought her back to life, and against her
own belief that it would ever be so, she found herself walking
again, essaying the stairs, taking her place at the table. Miss
Wheaton went away, the capable Caroline took her place, and Julia
was well.

Caroline was a silent, nice-looking, efficient woman of forty. She
knew everything there was to know about babies, and had more than
one book to consult when she forgot anything. She had been
married, and had two handsome sturdy little girls of her own, so
that little Anna's rashes and colics, her crying days and the days
in which she seemed to Julia alarmingly good, presented no
problems to Caroline. There was nothing Julia could tell her about
sterilizing, or talcum powder, or keeping light out of the baby's
eyes, or turning her over in her crib from time to time so that
she shouldn't develop one-sidedly.

More than this, Anna was a good baby; she seemed to have something
of her mother's silent sweetness. She ran through her limited
repertory of eating, sleeping, bathing, and blinking at her
friends with absolute regularity.

"I'd just like you to leave the door open so that if she SHOULD
cry at night--" Julia said.

"But she never DOES cry at night!" Caroline smiled.

Julia persisted for some time that she wanted to bathe the baby
every day, but before Anna was two months old she had to give up
the idea. It became too difficult to do what nobody in the house
wanted her to do, and what Caroline was only too anxious to
perform in her stead. Jim liked to loiter over his breakfast, and
showed a certain impatience when Julia became restive.

"What is it, dear? What's Lizzie say? Caroline wants you?"

"It's just that--it's ten o'clock, Jim, and Caroline sent down to
know if I am going to give Anna her bath this morning!"

"Oh, bath--nothing! Let Caroline wait--what's the rush?"

"It's only that baby gets so cross, Jim!" Julia would plead.

"Well, let her. You know you mustn't spoil her, Julie. If there's
one thing that's awful it's a house run by a spoiled kid! Do let's
have our breakfast in peace!"

Julia might here gracefully concede the point, and send a message
to Caroline to go on without her. Or she might make the message a
promise to perform the disputed duty herself, "in just a few
minutes."

She would run into the nursery breathlessly, and take the baby in
her arms. Everything would be in readiness, the water twinkling in
the little bathtub, soap and powder, fresh little clothes, and
woolly bath apron all in order.

"But HUSH, Sweetest! How cross she is this morning, Caroline!"

"Yes, Mrs. Studdiford. You see she ought to be having her bottle
now, it's nearly eleven! Dear little thing, she was SO good and
patient."

"Well, darling, Mudder'll be as quick as she can," Julia might
console the baby, and under Caroline's cool eye, and with Anna
screaming until she was scarlet from her little black crown to the
soles of her feet, the bath would somehow proceed. Ellie might put
her head in the door.

"Well--oh, the poor baby, were they 'busing Ellie's baby?" she
would croon, coming in. "Don't you care, because Ellie's going to
beat 'em all with sticks!"

Caroline anticipated Julia's every need on these occasions: the
little heap of discarded apparel was whisked away, band and powder
were promptly presented, the bath vanished, the clothes-rack with
its tiny hangers was gone, and Julia had a moment in which to hug
the weary, sleepy, hungry, fragrant little lump of girlhood in her
arms.

"Bottle ready, Caroline?"

"Yes, Mrs. Studdiford. She goes out on the porch now, for her nap.
Come to Caroline, darling, and get something goody-good."

And so Julia had no choice but to go, wandering a little
disconsolately to her own room, and wishing the baby took her nap
at another hour and could be played with now.

Presently outside interests began to claim her again, dressmakers
and manicures, shopping and the essential letter writing filled
the mornings, luncheons kept her late into the afternoons, there
were calls and card playing and teas. Julia would have only a few
minutes in the nursery before it was time to dress for dinner;
sometimes Jim came in to feast his eyes on the beautiful, serene
little Anna, in her beautiful mother's arms; more often he was
late, and Julia, trailing her evening gown behind her, would fly
for studs, and pull the boot-trees from Jim's shining pumps.

In September they went to Burlingame for the polo tournament, and
here, on an unseasonably hot day, Jim had an ugly little touch of
the sun, and for two or three days was very ill. They were
terrible days to Julia. Richie came to her at once, and they took
possession of the house of a friend, where Jim had chanced to be
carried, and sent to San Rafael for Julia's servants; but two
splendid nurses kept her out of the sickroom, and the baby was in
San Rafael, so that Julia wandered about utterly at a loss to
occupy heart or hands.

On the third day the fever dropped, and Julia crept in to laugh
and cry over her big boy. Jim got well very quickly, and just a
week from the day of the accident he and Julia went home to the
enchanting Anna, and began to plan for a speedy removal to the
Pacific Avenue house, so that the little episode was apparently
quite forgotten by the time they were back in the city and the
season opened.

But looking back, months later, Julia knew that she could date a
definite change in their lives from that time. Whether his slight
sunstroke had really given Jim's mind a little twist, or whether
the shock left him unable to throw off oppressing thoughts with
his old buoyancy, his wife did not know. But she knew that a
certain sullen, unresponsive mood possessed him. He brooded, he
looked upon her with a heavy eye, he sighed deeply when she drew
his attention to the lovely little Anna.

Julia knew by this time that marriage was not all happiness, all
irresponsible joy. She had often wondered why the women she knew
did not settle themselves seriously to a study of its phases, when
the cloudless days inevitably gave place to something
incomprehensible and disturbing. Even lovers like Kennedy and her
husband had their times of being wholly out of sympathy with each
other, she knew, and she and Jim were not angels; they must only
try to be patient and forbearing until the dark hour went by.

With a sense of unbearable weight at her heart she resigned
herself to the hard task of endurance. Sometimes with a bitter
rush would come the memory of how they had loved each other, and
then Julia surrendered herself to long paroxysms of tears; it was
so hard, so bewildering, to have Jim cold and quiet, to live in
this painful alternation of hope and fear. But she never let Jim
see her tears, and told herself bravely that life held some secret
agony for every one, and that she must bear her share of the
world's burden. How had it all come about, she wondered. Her
thoughts went back to the honeymoon, and she had an aching memory
of Central Park in its fresh green, of Jim laughing at her when
she tried to be very matronly, in her kimono, over their breakfast
tray. Oh, the exquisite happy days, the cloudless, wonderful time!

She left the thought of it for the winter that followed. That had
been happy, too. Not like the New York months, not without its
grave misgivings, not without its hours of bitter pain, yet happy
on the whole. Then Honolulu, all so bright a memory until that
hour on the ship--that first horrible premonition of so much
misery that was to follow. The San Mateo summer had somehow
widened the wordless, mysterious gap between them, and the winter!
Julia shuddered as she thought of the winter. Where was her soul
while her body danced and dressed and dined and slept through
those hot hours? Where was any one's soul in that desperate whirl
of amusement?

But she had found her soul again, on the June day of Anna's
coming. And with Anna had come to her what new hopes and fears,
what new potentialities and new sensibilities! She had always been
silent, reserved, stoical by nature, accepting what life brought
her uncomprehendingly, only instinctively and steadily fighting
toward that ideal that had so long ago inspired her girlhood. Now
she was awake, quivering with exquisite emotions, trembling with
eagerness to adjust her life, and taste its full delicious savour.
Now she wanted to laugh and to talk, to sit singing to her baby in
the firelight, to run to meet her husband and fling herself into
his arms for pure joy in life, and joy that she was beautiful and
young and mother of the dearest baby in the world, and wife of the
wisest and best of men. The past was blotted out for Julia now;
her place in society was undisputed, not only as the wife of the
rich young consulting surgeon, but for herself as well, and she
could make as little or as much as she pleased of society's claim.
From her sickness she felt as if she had learned that there is
suffering and sorrow enough in the world without the need of
deliberately sustaining the old and long-atoned wrongs. More than
that, she had come to regard her own fine sense of right as a
safer guide than any other, and by this she was absolved of the
shadowy sin of her girlhood: the years, the hours she had prayed,
the long interval, absolved her. Julia felt as if she had been
born again.

In this mood Jim did not join her. As the weeks went by his aspect
grew darker and more dark, and life in the Pacific Avenue house
became a thing of long silences and rare and stilted phrases, and
for the brief time daily that they were alone together, husband
and wife were wretchedly unhappy, Jim watching his wife gloomily,
Julia feeling that his look could chill her happiest mood. She had
sometimes suspected that this state of affairs existed between
other husbands and wives, and marvelled that life went smoothly
on; there were dinners and dances, there were laughter and light
speech. Jim might merely answer her half-timid, half-confident
"Good-morning" with only a jerk of his head; he might eat his
breakfast in silence, and accord to Julia's brief outline of
dinner or evening engagements only a scowling monosyllable. Yet
the day proceeded, there was the baby to visit, a dressmaker's
appointment to keep, luncheon and the afternoon's plans to be
gotten through, and then there was the evening again, and Jim and
herself dressing in adjoining rooms in utter silence, silently
descending to welcome their guests, or silently whirling off in
the limousine.

Sometimes she fancied that when she resolutely assumed a cheerful
tone, and determined to fight this unwholesome atmosphere with
honest bravery, she merely succeeded in making Jim's mood uglier
than ever. Often she tried a shy tenderness, but with no success.

One day when Miss Toland was lunching with her Julia made some
allusion to the subject, in answer to the older woman's comment
that she did not look very well.

"I'm NOT very well, Aunt Sanna," said Julia, pushing her plate
away, and resting both slim elbows on the table. "I'm worried."

"Not about Anna?" Miss Toland asked quickly.

"No-o! Anna, God bless her, is simply six-months-old perfection!"
Julia said, with a brief smile. "No--about myself and Jim."

Miss Toland gave her a shrewd glance.

"Quarrelled, eh?" she said simply.

"Oh, no!" Julia felt her eyes watering. "No. I almost wish we had.
Because then I could go to him, and say 'I'm sorry!'" she
stammered.

"Sorry for what?" demanded Miss Toland.

"For whatever I'd done!" elucidated Julia, with her April smile.

"Yes, but suppose he'd done it, what then?" Miss Toland asked.

"Ah, well," Julia hesitated. "Jim doesn't do things!" she said
vaguely.

"Jim's in one of his awful moods, I suppose?" his adopted aunt
asked, after a pause.

"Oh, in a dreadful one!" Julia confessed.

"How long--days?"

"Weeks, Aunt Sanna!"

"Weeks? For the Lord's sake, that's awful!" Miss Toland frowned
and rubbed the bridge of her nose. "What gets into the boy?" she
said impatiently. "You don't know what it's about, I suppose?"

Julia hesitated. "I think it's that he gets to thinking of my old
life, when I was a little nobody, south of Market Street," she
hazarded with as much truth as she could.

"Oh, REALLY!" Miss Toland said, in a tone of cold satire. But her
look fell with infinite tenderness and pity upon the drooping
little figure opposite. "Yet there's nothing of the snob about
Jim," she mused unhappily.

"Oh, NO!" Julia breathed earnestly.

"There isn't, eh?" Miss Toland said. "I'm not so sure. I'm not at
all sure. He isn't working too hard, is he?"

"He isn't working hard at all," Julia said. "Jim doesn't have a
case, to worry over, twice a year. You see it's either City and
County cases, that he just goes ahead and DOES, or else it's rich,
rich people who have one of the older doctors, and just call Jim
in to assist or consult. He was a little nervous over a
demonstration before the students the other day, but at the very
last second," Julia's quick smile flitted over her face, "at the
very last second the assisting nurse dropped the cold bone--as
they call it--that Jim was going to transplant. Doctor Chapman
told him he'd bet Jim bribed the girl to do it!"

"H'm!" Miss Toland said absently. "But his father was just another
such moody fellow, queer as Dick's hatband!" she added, suddenly,
after a pause.

"Jim's father? I didn't know you knew him!"

"Knew him? Indeed I did! We all lived in Honolulu in those days.
Charming, charming fellow, George Studdiford, but queer. He was
very musical, you know; he'd look daggers at you if you happened
to sneeze in the middle of one of his Beethoven sonatas. Tim's
mother was very sweet, beautiful, too, but spoiled, Julia,
spoiled!"

"Too much money!" Julia said, shaking her head.

"Exactly--there you have it!" Miss Toland assented triumphantly.
"I've seen too much of it not to know it. There's a sort of dry
rot about it; even a fine fellow like Jim can't escape. But, my
dear"--her tone became reassuring--"don't let it worry you. He'll
get over it. Just bide your time!"

"Well, that's just what I AM doing," Julia said, with a rueful
laugh. "But it's like being in a bad dream. There is sorrow that
you have to bear, don't you know, Aunt Sanna, like crippled
children, or somebody's death, or being poor; and then there are
these other unnatural trials, that you just REBEL against! I say
to myself that I'll just be patient and sweet, and go on filling
my time with Anna and calls and dinner parties, until Jim comes to
his senses and tells me what an angel I am, but it's awfully hard
to do it! Sometimes the house seems like a vault to me, in the
mornings, even the sunshine"--Julia's eyes watered, but she went
steadily on--"even the sunshine doesn't seem right, and I feel as
if I were eating ashes and cotton! I go about looking at other
houses, and thinking, 'I wonder what men and women are being
wretchedly unhappy behind YOUR plate-glass windows!' I watch other
men and their wives together," pursued Julia, smiling through
tears, "and when women say those casual things they are always
saying, about not loving your husband after the first few months,
and being disillusioned, and meaning less and less to each other,
I feel as if it would break my heart!"

"Well," Miss Toland said, somewhat distressed, "of course, I'd
rather walk into a bull fight than advise--"

"I know you would," Julia hastened to assure her. "That's why I've
been talking," she added, "and it's been a real relief! Don't
think I'm complaining, Aunt Sanna--"

"No, my dear," Miss Toland said. "I'll never think anything that
isn't good of you, Julie," she went on. "If Jim Studdiford is so
selfish as to--to make his wife unhappy for those very facts that
made him first love her and choose her, well, I think the less of
Jim, that's all! Now give me a kiss, and we'll go and pick out
something for Barbara's boy!"

"Well, it may be a pretty safe general rule not to discuss your
husband with your women friends," Julia said gayly. "But I feel as
if this talk had taken a load off my heart! In books, of course,"
she went on, "the little governess can marry the young earl, and
step right into noble, not to say royal, circles, with perfect
calm. But in real life, she has an occasional misgiving. I never
can quite forget that Jim was a ten-year-old princeling, with a
pony and a tutor and little velvet suits, and brushes with his
little initials on them, when I was born in an O'Farrell Street
flat!"

"Well, if you remember it," said Miss Toland, in affectionate
disapproval, "you're the only person who does!"

Either the confidential chat with Miss Toland had favourably
affected Julia's point of view, or the state of affairs between
Jim and herself actually brightened from that day. Julia noticed
in his manner that night a certain awkward hint of reconciliation,
and with it a flood of tenderness and generosity rose in her own
heart, and she knew that, deeply as he had hurt her, she was ready
to forgive him and to be friends again.

So a not unhappy week passed, and Julia, with more zest than she
had shown in some months, began to plan a real family reunion for
Thanksgiving, now only some ten days off. She wrote to the Doctor
and Mrs. Toland, to the Carletons and Aunt Sanna, and to Richie,
who had established himself in a little cottage on Mount
Tamalpais, and who was somewhat philanthropically practising his
profession there. She very carefully ordered special favours for
the occasion, and selected two eligible and homeless young men
from her list of acquaintances to fill out the table and to amuse
Constance and Jane. Jim had to go to Sacramento on the Saturday
before Thanksgiving for an important operation, but would be home
again on Tuesday or Wednesday to take the head of his own table on
the holiday.

Julia offered, when the Friday night before his departure came, to
help him with packing. They had dined very quietly with friends
that night, and found themselves at home again not very long after
ten o'clock. But Jim, sinking into a chair beside the library
fire, with an assortment of new magazines at his elbow, politely
declined.

"Oh, no, thank you! Plenty of time for that in the morning. I
don't go until nine."

"Let Chadwick do it, anyway, Jim. Shall I tell Ellie to send him
up at eight?"

"If you will. Thank you! Good-night!"

"Good-night!" And Julia trailed her satins and laces slowly
upstairs, unfastening her jewels as she went. A little sense of
discouragement was fighting for possession; she fought it
consciously as she had fought such waves of despondency a hundred
times before. She propped herself comfortably in pillows, turned
on a light, and began to read.

Ellie fussed about the room for a few minutes, and then was gone.
The big house was very still. Eleven o'clock struck from the
little mahogany clock on her mantel, midnight struck, and still
Jim's footstep did not come up the stairs, and there was no
welcome sound of occupancy in the room adjoining her own.

Suddenly terror smote Julia; she flung her book aside and sat up
erect in bed. Her heart was thundering with fear; the silence of
the house was like that that follows an explosion.

For a few dreadful seconds she sat motionless; then she thrust her
bare feet in the slippers of warm white fox that Ellie had put
out, and caught up a Japanese robe of black crepe, in which her
figure was quite lost. Fastening the wide obi with trembling
fingers, she slipped out into the hall, dimly lighted and very
still. Then she ran quickly downstairs.

What sight of horror she expected to find in the library she did
not know, but the shock of revulsion, when the opened door showed
her nothing more terrible than Jim, musing in the firelight, was
almost as bad as a fright could have been.

"Oh, Jim!" she panted, coming in, one hand pressed against her
heart, "I thought something--I got frightened!"

Jim looked up with his old, tender, whimsical smile, the smile for
which she had hungered so long, and held out a reassuring hand.

"Why, no, you poor kid!" he said. "I've been sitting right here!"

"I thought--and it was so still--and you didn't come up!" Julia
said, beginning to sob. And in a moment she was in his arms,
clinging to him in an ecstasy of love and relief. For a long
blissful time they remained so, the soft curve of Julia's cheek
against Jim's face, her heart beating quick above his own, her
warm little figure, in its loose, soft robe, gathered closely to
him.

"Feeling better now, old lady?"

"Oh, fine!" But Julia's face quivered with tears again at the
tone.

"Well, then, what's this for?" He showed her a drop on the back of
his hand.

"Be--because I love you so, Jim!"

"Well, you needn't cry over it!" said Jim gently. "I'm the one
that ought to do the crying, Judy," he added, with a significant
glance at her lovely flushed face and tear-bright blue eyes.

Julia leaned against him with a long, happy sigh.

"Oh, I'm so glad I came down!" she breathed contentedly.

"'Glad!'" Jim echoed soberly. "God! You don't know what it meant
to me to look up and see my little Geisha coming in. I was going
crazy, I think!"

"Ah, Jimmy, why do you?" she coaxed, one slender arm about his
neck.

"I don't know," he said thoughtfully. "Made that way, I guess!"

For a while they were silent again, then Julia said softly:

"After all, nothing matters as long as we love each other!"

"No, no! You're right, Julie," he agreed seriously. "That's the
only thing that counts. And you do love me, don't you?"

"Love you!" Julia said, with a shaky laugh.

"I get crazy notions. I nearly go mad, sometimes," Jim confessed.
"I get to brooding--I know how rotten it is!" He fell silent,
staring into the fire. "Happy?" he asked presently, glancing down
at her as she rested quietly in his arms.

"Oh, HAPPY!" Julia said, a break in her voice. "I wish I could die
here, Jim. I wish I could go to sleep here and never wake up!"

"Like me as much as that baby, eh?" he asked, in a peculiar tone.

Julia sat up to face him, her cheeks bright under loosening films
of hair, her eyes starry in the firelight.

"Jimmy, you couldn't be jealous of your own baby?"

"Oh, couldn't I? I can be jealous of anything and everything,
sometimes." He fixed troubled eyes on the fire. "I've been
unhappy, Julie," he confessed.

"Unhappy? I've just been SICK about it," Julia said. "I can't
believe that we're talking about it, and it's all over!" She
sighed luxuriously. "There's no use of MY doing anything when
you're this way, Jim--I can't even remember that you love me," she
went on after a silence. "Everything seems changed and queer.
Sometimes I think you hate me, sometimes you give me such cold
looks--oh, you DO, Jimmy!--they just make me feel sick and queer
all over, if you know what I mean! And oh," she sank back again
with her head on his shoulder, "oh, if ONLY then I could dare just
come down to you here like this, and make you take me in your
arms, and talk to me this way!"

"Don't!" Jim said briefly, kissing the top of her hair.

"It just seems to SMOULDER in my heart!" Julia said. "I can't bear
it!';

"Don't!" he said again.

"Ah, but what makes you do it, Jim?" she asked, sitting erect to
rest both wrists on his shoulders, and bring her blue eyes very
near his own. Jim's glance did not meet hers, he looked sombrely
past her at the fire. Suddenly she felt his arms tighten about her
with a force that almost hurt her.

"Oh, it's this!" he said harshly, "I love you--you're mine! You're
the thing I live for, the thing I'm proudest of! I can't bear to
think there was a time when I didn't know you, my little innocent
girl! I can't bear--my God!--to think that you cared for some one
else--!"

And with swift force he got to his feet, and put her in his chair.
Julia sat motionless while he took a restless brief turn about the
room. He snatched a little jade god from the table, examined it
closely, and put it down again, to come and stand with his back to
the fire, one arm flung across the mantel, and his gloomy eyes
fixed on her. Julia met the rushing, engulfing wave of her own
emotion bravely.

"Jim," she said bravely, "does it mean nothing to you that there
were other women in YOUR life before you knew me?"

"Dearest," he answered seriously and quickly, "God knows that I
would cut my hand off to be able to blot that all out of my
boyhood. Those things mean nothing to a man, Ju, and they meant
less to me than to most men. Women can't understand that, but if
you knew how men regard it, you would realize that very few can
bring their wives as clean a record as mine!"

He had said this much before, never anything more. Julia, looking
at him now with all the tragic sorrow of her life in her
magnificent eyes, felt the utter impossibility of convincing him
that this accusation on her part, and bravely boyish and honest
confession on his, had any logical or possible connection with the
momentous conversation that they were having to-night. Her heart
recoiled in sick terror from any word that would hurt or estrange
him now, but she might have found that word, and might have said
it, could she have hoped that it would convey her meaning to him.
But Jim's standard of morals, for himself, was, like that of most
men, still the college standard. It was too bad to have clouded
the bright mirror, but it was inevitable, given youth and red
blood. And it was admirable to regret it all now. Any fresh
attempt on Julia's part to bring to his realization the parallel
in their situations, would have elicited from him only fresh,
youthful acknowledgments, until that second when anger and
astonishment at her bold effort to reduce the two distinct codes
to one would end this talk--like so many others!--with new
coldnesses and silences. Julia abandoned this line of argument
once and for all.

"I never cared for any one but you in my life, Jim," she said,
with dry lips.

"I know," he muttered, brushing his hair back with an impatient
hand. A second later he came to kneel penitently before her. "I'm
sorry, sweetheart," he said pleadingly. "You're a little angel of
forgiveness to me--I don't deserve it! I know how I make you
suffer!"

"Jim," she said, feeling old, and tired, and cold to her heart's
core, "do you think you do?"

"I know how _I_ suffer!" he answered bitterly.

"Jim, suppose it was something you had done long ago that _I_
couldn't forgive?"

"It isn't a question of forgiveness," he answered quickly.
"Forgiveness--when you are the sweetest and best wife a man ever
had! No, darling," he caught both her hands in his own, "you must
never think that, it's never that! It's only my mad, crazy
jealousy. I tell you I'm ashamed of it, and I AM! Just be patient
with me, Julia!"

Julia stared at him a few moments silently, her hands locked about
his neck.

"Ah, but you WORRY me so when you're like this, Jim," she said
presently, in the gentle, troubled tone a mother might use. "There
seems to be nothing I can do. I can only worry and wait!"

"I know, I know," he said hastily. "Don't remind me of it! My
father was like that, you know. My father shot at a man once
because he was rude to my mother when he was drunk--shot him right
through the shoulder! It raised the very deuce of a scandal down
there in Honolulu! He took Mother to Europe to get away from the
fuss, and paid the man the Lord knows what to quiet the thing!"

"Yes, but life isn't like that, Jim," Julia protested. "Life isn't
so simple! Shooting at somebody, and buying his silence, and
rushing off to Europe! Why can't you just say to yourself
reasonably--"

"'Reasonably,' dearest!" he echoed cheerfully, with a kiss. "When
was a jealous man ever reasonable!"

"But think how wonderfully happy we are, Jim," she persisted
wistfully. "Suppose there IS one part trouble, one part of your
life that you don't like, why can't you be happy because ninety-
nine parts of it are perfect?"

"I don't know; talking with you here, I can't understand it," he
said. "But I get thinking--I get thinking, and my heart begins to
hammer, and I lie awake nights, and I'd like to get up and
strangle someone--"

His vehemence died into abashed silence before her grave eyes.

"I ought to be the one to stamp and rave over this," Julia said.
"I ought to remind you that you knew my history when you married
me; and you know life, too--you were ten years older than I, and
how much more experienced! All I knew was learned at the
settlement house, or from books. And the reason I DON'T rave and
stamp, Jim," she went on, "is because I am different from you. I
realize that that doesn't help matters. We must make the best of
it now, we must help each other! You see I have no pride about it.
I know I am better than many--than most--of these society women
all about us, but I don't force you to admit that. They break
every other commandment of God, yes, and that one, too, and they
commit every one of the deadly sins! It seems to me sometimes as
if 'gluttony, envy, and sloth' were the very foundation on which
the lives of some of these people rest, and as for pride and anger
and lust, why, we take them for granted! Yet, whoever thinks
seriously of saying so?"

"You make me ashamed, Julie," Jim said, after a pause, during
which his eyes had not moved from her face. "I can only say I'm
sorry. I'm very sorry! Sometimes I think you're a good deal bigger
man than I am; but I can't help it. However, I'm going to try.
From to-night on I'm going to try."

"We'll both try," Julia said, and they kissed each other.




CHAPTER V


Miss Toland, who had accepted Julia's invitation for Thanksgiving,
arrived unexpectedly on the afternoon before the holiday, to spend
the night with the Studdifords. It was a wild, wet day, settling
down to heavy rain as the early darkness closed in, and the
Pacific Avenue house presented a gloomy if magnificent aspect to
the guest as she came in. But Ellie beamingly directed her to the
nursery, and here she found enough brightness to flood the house.

Caroline, it appeared, had gone to her own family for the
afternoon, and Julia, looking like a child in her short white
dress and buckled slippers, was sitting in a low chair with little
Anna in her arms. The room was bright with firelight and the soft
light from the subdued nursery lamps, and warm russet curtains
shut out the dull and dying afternoon. Dolls and blocks were
scattered on the hearth rug, and Julia sat her daughter down among
them, and jumped up with a radiant face to greet the newcomer.

"Aunt Sanna--you darling! And you're going to spend the night?"
Julia cried out joyfully, with her first kisses. "What a dear
thing for you to do! But you're wet?"

"No, I dropped everything in my room," Miss Toland said. "Things
were very quiet at The Alexander--that new woman isn't going to do
at all, by the way, too fussy--so I suddenly thought of coming
into town!"

"Oh, I'm SO glad you did!" Julia exulted. Miss Toland rested firm
hands on her shoulders, and looked at her keenly.

"How goes it?"

"Oh, splendidly!" The younger woman's bright eyes shone.

"No more blues, eh?"

"Oh, NO!"

"Ah, well, that's a good thing!" Miss Toland sat down by the fire,
and stretched sturdy shoes to the blaze. "Hello, Beautiful!" she
said to the baby.

Julia dropped to the rug, and smothered the soft whiteness and
fragrance of little Anna in a wild hug.

"She has her good days and her bad days," said Julia, biting
ecstatic little kisses from the top of the downy little head, "and
to-day she has simply been an ANGEL! Wait--see if she'll do it!
See, Bunny," Julia caught up a white woolly doll. "Oh, see poor
dolly--Mother's going to put her in the fire!"

"Da!" said Anna agitatedly, and Julia tumbled her in another mad
embrace.

"Isn't that DARLING, not six months old yet?" demanded the mother.
"Here, take her, Aunt Sanna, and see if you ever got hold of
anything nicer than that! Come, baby, give Aunt Sanna a little
butterfly kiss!" And Julia swept the soft little face and
unresponsive mouth across the older woman's face before she
deposited the baby in her lap.

"She's like you, Julie," Miss Toland said, extending a ringed
finger for her namesake's amusement.

"Yes, I think she is; every one says so. You see her hair's coming
to be the same ashy yaller as mine. And see the fat sweet little
knees, and don't miss our new slippers with wosettes on 'em!"

"She's really exquisite," Miss Toland said, kissing the tawny
little crown as Julia had done, and watching the deep-lashed blue
eyes that were so much absorbed by the rings. "Watching her, Ju,
we'll see just what sort of a little girl you were."

"Oh, heavens, Aunt Sanna," Julia protested, with a rather sad
little smile, "I was an awful little person with stringy hair, and
colds in my nose, and no hankies! I never had baths, and never had
regular meal hours, or regular diet, for that matter! Anna'll be
very different from what I was."

"Your mother was to blame, Ju," Miss Toland said, gravely shaking
her head.

"Oh, I don't know, perhaps HER mother was," Julia suggested. "Yet
my Grandmother Cox is a sweet little old woman," she went on,
smiling, "always afraid we're hungry, and anxious to feed us,
tremendously loyal to us all. I went out there to-day, to take
Mama some special little things for Thanksgiving, and see if their
turkey had gotten there, and so on, and my heart quite ached for
Grandma--Mama's very exacting now, and the girls--my aunt, Mrs.
Torney's girls--seemed so apathetic and dull. The house was very
dirty, as it always is, and the halls icy, and the kitchen hot--I
just wanted to pitch in and CLEAN! Mama was cross at me for not
bringing Anna, in this rain, and staying to dinner to-morrow; but
Grandmother was so pleased to have the things, and she got to
telling me of old times, poor thing, and how she had to work and
scheme to get up a Thanksgiving dinner, and how my grandfather
would worry her by promising that he'd only have one drink, and
then disappearing for hours--"

"Does it ever occur to you that you are an unusual woman, Julia?"
Miss Toland asked, holding her watch to the baby's ear. Julia
flushed and laughed.

"Well, no, I don't believe it ever did!"

"Not so much in climbing up in the world as you have," pursued the
older woman, "but in not despising the people you left behind you!
That's very fine, Julie. I can't tell you how fine it seems to
me!"

"There's nothing fine about it," Julia said simply. "It's just
that I like that sort of people as well as I do--Jim's sort. I
used to think that to work my way into a world where everything
was fine and fragrant and costly would mean to be happy, but of
course it doesn't, and I've come more and more to feel that I like
the class where joys are real, and sorrows are real, and the
goodness means more, and there's more excuse for the badness!"

"Did you ever think of writing, Julia?" Miss Toland asked.
"Stories, I mean?"

"Everybody does nowadays, I suppose," Julia laughed. "Sometimes I
think what good material The Alexander stuff would be, Aunt Sanna.
But the truth is, Jim doesn't like the idea."

"Doesn't? Bless us all, why not?"

"Oh!" Julia dimpled demurely. "The great Mrs. Studdiford writing,
like a mere ordinary person?" she asked.

"Oh, that's it? Where is Jim, by the way?"

"Sacramento. But the operation was on Sunday, so he should have
been here yesterday, at latest," Julia said. "However, he'll rush
in to-night or to-morrow; he knows you're all going to be here.
Give her to me, Aunt Sanna, she's getting hungry, bless her little
old heart! Ah, here's Ellie with something for Mother's girl!"

"And tea for you in the library," Ellie said in an aside,
receiving the baby into her arms with a rapturous look.

"Tea, doesn't tea sound good!" Julia caught Miss Toland by the
hand. "Come and have some tea, Aunt Sanna!" said she. "I'm
starving!"

They were loitering over their teacups half an hour later when
Lizzie came into the library with a special delivery letter.

"For me?" Julia smiled, reaching for it. "It's Jimmy!" she added
ruefully, for Miss Toland's benefit, as she took it. "This means
he can't get here!"

"Drat the lad!" his aunt said mildly. "What has he got to say?"

Julia pulled out a hairpin to open the letter, her face a little
puzzled. She unfolded three pages of large paper closely written.

"Why, I don't understand this," said she. "Jimmy writes such short
letters!"

And immediately fear, like cold iron, entered her heart, and she
felt a chill of distaste for the letter; she did not want to read
it, she wished she might fling it on the ere, and rid her hands of
the horrible thing.

"It IS Jim, isn't it?" Miss Toland said, with a sharp look. "Is he
coming?"

"I don't know," Julia said, hardly above a whisper.

"Anything wrong?" Miss Toland asked, instantly alert.

"No, I don't suppose so!" Julia said, trying to laugh. "But--but I
hate him to just send a letter when I expected HIM!" she added
childishly.

She picked it up, and began slowly to read it. Miss Toland,
watching her, saw the muscles of her face harden, and her eyes
turn to steel. The blood rushed to her face, and then receded
quickly. She read to the last word, and then looked up to meet the
other woman's eyes.

"What IS it?" Miss Toland demanded, aghast at Julia's look.

"It's Jim," said Julia. Her face was blazing again, and she seemed
to be choking. "He's going to Europe," she went on, in a
bewildered tone, "he's not coming back."

"WHAT!" said Miss Toland sharply. "D'you mean to tell me he's
simply walked off--"

Julia's colour was ghastly; her eyes looked sick and heavy.

"No, no, he can't mean that!" she said quickly. She crushed the
pages of the letter together convulsively. "I can't---" she began,
and stopped. Suddenly she rose to her feet, muttered something
about coming back, and was gone.

She ran up to her room, and alone there, it seemed for a few
moments as if she must suffocate. She put the letter on her desk,
where its folded sheets instantly looked hideously familiar. She
went into the bathroom, and found herself holding her fingers
under the hot-water tap, vaguely waiting for hot water. Like a
hunted creature she went through the luxurious rooms, the mortal
wound in her heart widening every instant; finally she came back
to her desk, and sat down, and read the letter again.

"Dear Julia," wrote Jim, "I have been thinking and thinking about
this affair, and I cannot stand it. I am going away. Atkins is
going to Berlin for a three months' course under Hofner and Braun,
and I am going with him. I only made up my mind to-night, but I
have thought of something like this a long, long time. I cannot
bear it any longer. I think and think about things--that another
man loved you and you loved him--and I nearly go mad. Even when
people meet me and ask how you are, I am reminded of it; for weeks
now I haven't thought of anything else; it just seems to rise up
wherever I go.

"I think it will be better when I don't see you.

"I have been sitting here with my head in my hands, wondering if
there is any way in which I can spare you the pain of reading this
letter, but it's no use, it's impossible to go back and bluff
about it.

"Collins spoke to me about the change in me; he said he thought it
was that touch of the sun in September. I wish to God it was!

"I will take the course with Atkins, and then let you know. He
wants to go to Benares for some reason or another, and perhaps I
will go with him, or perhaps come home to you. But I don't think I
will come back under a year.

"You hear of men all your life who do this, but I feel as if it
was killing me, and you, too. I wish there was some other way.

"I have written Harry at the Crocker; my account there is to be
transferred to your name. I don't know exactly what it is, but the
money from the San Mateo lots went in there, and so there is
plenty. For God's sake spend it, don't hesitate about getting
anything you want. Why shouldn't you keep the house, until April
anyway; some one would stay with you, and then you could go to San
Rafael.

"I'm not going to try to tell you how I feel about all this,
because you know. It all seems to me a bad dream. Every little
while I try to make myself think that after a while it will all
come right, but it seemed to me all dead and buried after that
time on the steamer, and of course it wasn't!

"Tell people what you please, I leave all that to you.

"Chadwick will sell the car, and send you the bill of sale and the
money. He knows what I want sent; he'll do all that.

"I've written and rewritten this ten times; my head is splitting.
It seems strange to think it is you and me.

"God bless you always, and our little girl.

"JIM."

Julia finished it with a little grinding sound, like a groan,
heard herself make a dramatic exclamation, an "Ah!" of agonized
unbelief. She sat down, got up again to take a few irresolute
steps toward her desk, and finally went to her bedside telephone,
and took down the receiver.

There was a delay; Julia rapped an impatient slipper on the floor,
and rattled the hook.

"Western Union, please," she said, a moment later; "I want to send
a telegram."

An interval of silence followed. Julia sat staring blankly at the
wall. Then she rattled the hook again.

"No matter about that number, Central; I've changed my mind," she
said. She walked irresolutely into the middle of the room, stood
there a moment frowning, and then turned, to go back and fling
herself on her bed, staring up into the dark, the letter crackling
as it dropped beside her.

After a while she began to say, "Oh, oh, oh!" quietly and quickly
under her breath. The cry grew too much for her, she twisted on
her face to stifle it, and after a few moments it stopped. Then
she turned on her back again, and said something sharply to
herself in a whisper once or twice, and after that the moaning
"Oh, oh, oh!" began again.

So Miss Toland found her, when she came into the room without
knocking, a little later.

"Julia," Miss Toland said sharply, sitting down on the edge of the
bed and possessing herself of one of Julia's limp, cold hands,
"Ellie told me you--she came to the door and heard you! My child,
this won't do! You mustn't make mountains out of molehills. If Jim
Studdiford has had the senseless cruelty to go off to Europe in
this fashion, why, he ought to be horsewhipped, that's all! But I
don't believe he'll get any farther than New York, myself; I don't
believe he'll get that far!" She paused, but Julia was silent.
After a moment the older woman spoke again. "What does he say in
the letter?" she asked. "One would really like to know just how
this delightful piece of work is explained."

"Aunt Sanna!" Julia said, in a difficult half whisper. She took
Miss Toland's hand and pressed it against her heart. Her lips were
shut tight, and against the white pillow there was a little
negative movement of her head.

"Well, of course you don't want to talk about it," Miss Toland
said soothingly. "But was there a quarrel?"

"Oh, no--no!" Julia said quickly, briefly, with another convulsive
pressure of Miss Toland's hand, and another jerk of her head. "It
was something--that distressed Jim--something I couldn't change,"
she added with difficulty.

"H'm!" said the other, and the evidence for both sides was in, as
far as Miss Toland was concerned, and the case closed. She sat
beside Julia in the dark for a long time, patting her hand without
speaking. After a while Ellie brought a glass of hot milk, and
Julia docilely drank it, and submitted to being put to bed,
raising a face as sweet as a child's for Miss Toland's good-night
kiss, and promising to sleep well.

The pleasant winter sunlight was streaming into the older woman's
room when Julia came in the next morning, although all San
Francisco echoed to the sombre constant call of the foghorn, and
the air was cool enough to make Miss Toland's fire delightful.
Julia had Anna with her, a delightful little armful in her tumbled
nightwear, and she smiled at the picture of Miss Toland,
comfortably enjoying her breakfast in bed. But it was evident that
she had not slept: deep shadows lay under her blue eyes, and she
was very pale. She put the baby down on the bed with a silver
buttonhook and a bracelet, and sat down.

"Sleep any?" Miss Toland asked.

"Yes, I think I did!" Julia said, with an effort at brightness.
She seemed nervous and restless, but showed no tendency to break
down. "I've just been talking to Caroline," she went on. "I told
her that Doctor Studdiford had been called away, and implied that
there would be changes. Then I spoke to Foo Ting at breakfast--
Mrs. Pope is crazy to get him--so that will be all right--"

"Julia--of course I've not read Jim's letter," Miss Toland said
earnestly, "but aren't you taking this too much to heart--aren't
you acting rather quickly?"

Julia looked down at her laced fingers for a few moments without
speaking.

"Jim isn't coming back," she said soberly.

"But what makes you SAY so, dear? How do you know?"

"Well, I just know it," Julia said, raising heavy-lidded eyes.
They looked at each other.

"But you aren't telling me seriously, my child, that you two--the
most devoted couple I ever SAW--why, Julia, show a little courage,
child! Jim must be brought to his senses, that's all. We must
think what's wisest to do, and do it. But, my dear, there'd be no
marriages left in the world if people flew off the handle--"

"I HAVE been thinking, all night," Julia said patiently, "and this
is what I thought. I want"--she glanced restlessly about the room-
-"I want to get away from here! That'll take some little while."

"Go away by all means, dear, if you want to, but don't dismantle
your house--don't make it impossible for the whole thing to blow
over---"

"He won't come back," Julia repeated quietly.

"You don't think so?" Miss Toland said uncomfortably. "H'm!"

"No one must know, not even Doctor and Mother," pursued Julia. "No
newspapers, NOBODY!"

"Well, in any case, that's wise!" the older woman assented. "And
where will you go--to Sally?"

"No!" Julia said with a quick shudder. "Not anywhere near here!
No, I should rather like to give the impression that I will be
with Jim, or near Jim," she added slowly.

"Following him abroad with the baby, that's quite natural!" Miss
Toland approved. "But why not stay a week or two in Sausalito,
just to keep them from guessing?"

"Oh, I couldn't!" Julia said, in a quick breath.

"And where'll you go--New York?"

"Oh, no!" Julia leaned back and shut her eyes. The muscles of her
throat worked. "We were so happy in New York," she said, with a
sudden quivering of her lips. But a moment's struggle brought back
her composure. "I thought--some little French village, or
England," she hazarded.

"England," Miss Toland said promptly. "This is no time of the year
to take a child to France; besides, you get better milk in
England, and if Anna was sick, there's London, full of doctors who
speak your own language."

"So long as it's quiet," Julia said, "and we see nobody--that's
all I care about. Then if Jim should--But I couldn't wait here,
with everybody asking, and inviting me places, and spying on me!"

"We'll take some sort of little place in Oxfordshire," Miss Toland
said, "and then we can run up to London--"

"'We?'" Julia echoed. She gazed bewilderedly at the other woman
for a moment, then put her hands over her face and burst into
tears.

A month like a nightmare followed. Julia had never grown to care
for the Pacific Avenue house; now it came to have an absolute
horror for her. She seemed to see it through a veil of darkness;
she seemed to move under the burden of an intolerable weight.
Sometimes she found herself panting as if for air, as she went
from silent room to silent room, and sometimes a memory unbearably
poignant and dear smote her as with physical violence, and her
face worked for a few moments, and she fought with tears.

There were other times, when life seemed less sad than dull. Julia
grew sick of loneliness, sick of silence; she stared at her face
in the mirror, when she was slowly dressing in the morning; stared
at herself again at night--as if marvelling at this woman who was
a wife, and a mother, and deserted in her young bloom. Deserted--
her husband had gone away from her, and she knew no way to bring
him back. A weary flatness of spirit descended upon her; it seemed
a part of the howling winter storms, the dark and heavy weather.

For the servants other positions were quickly found, the furniture
was stored, the motor car sold. On the last day on which the last
was at her disposal, Julia, with Ellie and the baby, drove about
downtown, and disposed of several odds and ends of business. She
left the keys of the Pacific Avenue house at the agent's office,
not without an agonized memory of the day she had first called for
them, more than two years ago. She went to the bank, and was
instantly invited into the manager's office and given a luxurious
chair.

"Well, Mrs. Studdiford," said Mr. Perry pleasantly, "what brings
you out in this dreadful weather?"

"Good-byes," Julia said, flinging back her veil, and laying her
muff aside. "Miss Toland and I will probably leave for New York on
the seventh, and sail as soon as we can after we get there. I want
to take a letter of credit, and I want to know just how I stand
here."

Mr. Perry touched a button, the letter of credit was duly made
out, a clerk came in with a little slip, which he handed to Mr.
Perry.

"Ah, yes, yes, indeed! And where is Doctor Studdiford now? In
Berlin? Lovely city. You'll like Berlin," said Mr. Perry. He
glanced at the slip. "Thirty-seven thousand, two hundred and
twenty dollars, Mrs. Studdiford," said he. "Transferred to your
name a month ago.

"I had no idea it was so much!" Julia said, her heart turning to
lead. Why had he given her so much?

Mr. Perry, bowing her out, laughed that that was a fault on the
right side, and Julia left the bank, with its brightly lighted
warm atmosphere tinged with the odour of ink and polished wood and
rubber flooring, and its windows streaming with rain. She got into
the motor car again, and took little Anna on her lap.

"Now I think we'll drop you at the hotel, Ellie," said she, "and
I'll take the baby out to say good-bye to my mother."

"Oh, Mrs. Studdiford, it's raining something terrible!" protested
the maid.

"Yes, I know," Julia agreed, looking a little vaguely out of the
blurred window. "But you see to-morrow may be just as bad, and
we've got her all dressed and out now. So you go home and pack,
and I'll just fly out there and fly back. Day after to-morrow I've
promised to take her to Sausalito, and the day after that we
start!"

The city streets looked dark and gloomy under the steady onslaught
of the rain, as the car rolled along. Julia stared sombrely
through the drenched glass, now and then kissing the perfumed top
of the little silk cap that covered the drowsy head on her breast.
It was a long trip to Shotwell Street; for all her family's
peculiarities, it was rather a sad trip to-day. She let her
thoughts drift on to the coming changes in her life. She thought
of New York, of the great unknown ocean, of London--London to
Julia meant fog, hansom cabs, and crossings that must be swept. It
was not, she felt, with a certain baffled resentment, what she
wanted to do. London was full of Miss Toland's friends, and Julia
was too sick in spirit to wish to meet them now. To be alone--to
be alone--to be alone--some gasping inner spirit prayed
continually. They would go to Oxfordshire, of course. But Miss
Toland would be miserable in the country, she was always miserable
in the country.

They were passing Eighteenth Street, passing St. Charles's shabby
little church. Julia stopped the motor. She got out and carried
the baby up the stairs, and went up the echoing aisle to a front
pew, where Anna could sit and stare about her. Julia, panting,
dropped on her knees. The big edifice was empty, and smelled of
damp plaster, rain rattled the high windows. The afternoon was so
dark that the sanctuary light sent a little pool of quivering red
to the floor below.

After a while a very plain young woman came out of the vestry, and
walking up the steps to the main altar, carried away one of the
great candlesticks. She was presently joined by a little nun; the
two whispered unsmilingly together, came and went fifty times with
flowers, with candles, with fresh altar linen.

Julia could not pray. Her thoughts would not settle themselves;
they drifted back and forth like rippling breezes over grass. She
felt that if she might kneel here an hour she could begin to pray.
Now a thousand little things distracted her: the odour of the
church, the crisping feet of some one entering the church far
behind her, the odour of the damp glove upon which she rested her
cheek.

Life troubled her; she was afraid. She had thought it lay plain
and straight before her; now all her guide posts were gone, and
all her pathways led into deeper and deeper uncertainty. The utter
confusion into which she had been thrown made even her own
identity indefinite to her; she suffered less for this
bewilderment. If by the mere raising of her hand she might have
brought Jim back to her, she would not have raised that hand; not
now, not until some rule that would adjust their relationship was
found. Her marriage seemed a dream, their love as strange and
remote as their separation.

Only Anna seemed real, and as much a sorrow as a joy just now. To
what heritage would the beautiful, mysterious little personality
unfold? What of the swiftly coming time when she would ask
questions?

Julia turned to the little white-capped, white-coated figure. Anna
had chewed a bonnet string to damp limpness; now she was saying
"Da!" in an alluring and provocative tone to a lady praying
nearby. The lady regarded her with an unmoved eye, however, and
Julia gathered her small daughter in her arms and went down to the
motor car.

At her mother's door she dismissed Chadwick for an hour or two of
warmth and shelter, and, sighing, went into the unaired dark
hallway that smelled to-day of wet woollens and of a smoky
kerosene wick, and retained as well its old faint odour of
carbolic acid.




CHAPTER VI


Julia found the family as usual in the kitchen, and the kitchen as
usual dirty and close. Her old grandmother, a little bent figure
in a loose calico wrapper, was rocking in a chair by the stove.
Julia's mother was helpless in a great wheeled chair, with
blankets and pillows carelessly disposed about her, and her eager
eyes bright in a face chiselled by pain. Sitting at the table was
a heavy, sad-faced woman, with several front teeth missing, in
whom Julia recognized her aunt, Mrs. Torney. A girl of thirteen,
with her somewhat colourless hair in untidy braids, and a flannel
bandage high about her throat, came downstairs at the sound of
Julia's entrance. This was Regina Torney.

"Well, it's Julia!" Mrs. Cox said. "And the darlin' sweetie--you
oughtn't to bring her out such weather, Julie! How's them little
hands?"

She took the baby, and Julia kissed her mother and aunt, expecting
to draw from the former the usual long complaints when she said:

"How are you, dear? How does the chair go?"

But Mrs. Page surprised her by some new quality in her look and
tone, something poignantly touching and admirable. She was a thin
little shadow of her former self now, the skin drawn tight and
shining over her cheek bones, her almost useless hands resting on
a pillow in her lap. She wore a soiled dark wrapper, her dark
hair, still without a touch of gray, was in disorder, and her
blankets and pillows were not clean. She smiled at her daughter.

"I declare, Ju, you do seem to bring the good fresh air in with
you whenever you come! Don't her cheeks look pretty, Regina? Why,
I'm just about the same, Ju. To-day's a real bad day, on account
of the rain, but I had a good night."

"She's had an awful week, Julia. She don't seem to get no better,"
Mrs. Torney said heavily. "I was just saying that it almost seems
like she isn't going to get well; it just seems like it had got
hold of her!"

Julia sat down next to her mother, and laid her own warm young
hand over the hand on the pillow.

"What does the doctor say?" she asked, looking from one
discouraging face to another.

"Oh, I don't know!" Mrs. Page said, sighing, and old Mrs. Cox
cackled out a shrill "Doctors don't know nothing, anyway!"

"Emeline sent for me," Mrs. Torney said in a sad, droning voice.
"Mamma just couldn't manage it, Julia; she's getting on; she can't
do everything. So me and Regina gave up the Oakland house, and
we've been here three weeks. We didn't want to do it, Julia, but
you couldn't blame us if you'd read your Mamma's letter. Regina's
going to work as soon as she can, and help out!"

Julia understood a certain deprecatory and apologetic note in her
aunt's voice to refer to the fact that the Shotwell Street house
was largely supported by Jim's generous monthly cheque, and that
in establishing herself and her youngest daughter there she more
or less avowedly added one more burden to Julia's shoulders.

"I'm glad you did, Auntie," she answered cheerfully. "How's
Muriel? And where's Geraldine?"

"Geraldine's at school," Mrs. Torney said mournfully. "But
Regina's not going to start in here. She done awfully well in
school, too, Julia, but, as I say, she feels she ought to get to
work now. She's got an awful sore throat, too. Muriel's started
the nursing course, but I don't believe she can go on with it,
it's something fierce. All my children have weak stomachs; she
says the smell in the hospital makes her awfully sick. I don't
feel real well myself; every time I stand up--my God! I feel as if
my back was going to split in two, and yet with poor Em this way I
felt as if I had ter come. Not that I can do anything for Emeline,
but I was losing money on my boarders. I wish't you'd come out
Sunday, Julia, I cooked a real good dinner, didn't I, Ma?"

Mrs. Cox did not hear, and Julia turned to her mother.

"Made up your mind really to go, Ju?" Mrs. Page asked.

"Oh, really! We leave on the seventh."

"I've always wanted to go somewheres on a ship," Emeline said.
"Didn't care so much what it was when I got there, but wanted to
go!"

"So have I," contributed Mrs. Torney. "I was real like you at your
age, Julia, and I used to think I'd do this and that when the
children was big. Well, some of us are lucky and some of us
aren't--ain't that it, Ma? I was talking to a priest about it
once," she pursued, "and he said, 'Well, Mrs. Torney, if there was
no sorrow and suffering in the world, there wouldn't be no
saints!' 'Oh, Father,' I says, 'there isn't much of the saint in
me! But,' I says, 'I've been a faithful wife and mother, if I say
it; seven children I've raised and two I've buried; I've worked my
hands to the bone,' I says, 'and the Lord has sent me nothing but
trouble!'"

"Ma, ain't you going to put your clothes on and go to the store?"
Regina said.

"I was going to," Mrs. Torney said, sighing, "but I think maybe
now I'll wait, and let Geraldine go--she'll have her things on."

"I suppose you haven't got any milk?" Mrs. Page said. "I declare I
get to feeling awfully gone about this time!"

"We haven't a drop, Em," Mrs. Torney said, after investigating a
small back porch, from which Julia got a strong whiff of wet ashes
and decaying cabbage leaves.

"How much milk do you get regularly?" Julia asked, looking
worried.

"Oh, my dear," Mrs. Torney said, from the sink, where she was
attacking a greasy frying pan with cold water and a gray rag worn
into holes, "you forget we ain't rich people here. We don't have
him leave milk, but if we want it we put a bottle out on the back
steps."

"You ought to have plenty of milk, Mama, taking those strong,
depressing medicines!" Julia said.

"Well, I ain't got much appetite, Julie," her mother answered,
with that new and touching smile. "Now, last night the girls had
cabbage and corn beef cooking--I used to be real fond of that
dinner, but it almost made me sick, just smelling it! So Geraldine
fried me an egg, yet that didn't taste good, either! Gettin' old
and fussy, I guess!"

Julia felt the tears press suddenly behind her eyes as she
answered the patient smile. "Mama, I think you are terribly
patient!" said she.

"I guess you can get used to anything!" Emeline said.

Regina coughed, and huddled herself in her chair.

"But I thought since we had the air-tight stove put in the other
room you were going to use it more?" said Julia, as Mrs. Torney
shook down the cooking stove with a violence that filled the air
with the acrid taste of ashes.

"Well, we do sometimes. I meant to clean it to-day and get it
started again," her aunt said. "I'm sure I don't know what we're
going to do for dinner, Ma," she added. "Here it is getting round
to five, and Geraldine hasn't come in. I don't know what on earth
she does with herself--weather like this!"

Mrs. Cox made no response; she was nodding in the twilight over
the little relaxed figure of the baby; a fat little white-clad leg
rolled on her knee as she rocked. A moment later Geraldine, a
heavy, highly coloured girl, much what her sister Marguerite had
been ten years before, burst in, cold, wet, and tired, with a
strapful of wet books which she flung on the table.

"My Lord, what do you keep this place so dark for, Ma!" said
Geraldine. "It's something awful! Hello, Julia!" She kissed her
cousin, picked Julia's big muff from a chair, and pressed the soft
sables for a moment to her face. "Well, the little old darling,
she's asleep, isn't she?" she murmured over the baby. "Say,
Mamma," she went on more briskly, "I've got company coming to-
night--"

"YOU!" said Julia, smiling, and laying an affectionate hand on her
young cousin's shoulder, as she stood beside her. "Why, how old
are you, child?"

"I'm sixteen--nearly," Geraldine said stoutly. "Didn't you have
beaus when you were sixteen?"

"I suppose I did!" Julia admitted, smiling. "But you seem awfully
young!"

"I thought--maybe you'd go to the store for me," said Mrs. Torney.
Geraldine glared at her.

"Oh, my God! haven't the things come?" she demanded, in shrill
disgust. "I can't, Mamma, I'm sopping wet, and I've got to clean
the parlour. It's all over ashes, and mud, and the Lord knows
what!"

"Well, I couldn't get out to-day, that's all there is to that,"
Mrs. Torney defended herself sharply. "My back's been like it was
on fire. I've jest been resting all day. And when you go upstairs
you won't find a thing straightened, so don't get mad about that--
I haven't been able to do one thing! Regina's been real sick, too;
she may have made the beds--she was upstairs a while--"

"She didn't!" supplied Regina herself, speaking over her shoulder
as she lighted the gas. They all blinked in the harsh sudden
light.

"Oh, Lord!" Geraldine was beginning, when Julia interrupted
soothingly:

"See here, I have the car here; Chadwick was to come back at five.
Let me send him for the things! What do we want?"

"Well, we don't want to keep you, lovey," her mother began. But
Julia was already writing a list.

"Indeed I'm going to stay and have some with you, Mrs. Page," she
said cheerfully. "Chops for the family--aren't those quickest? And
a quart of oysters for Mama, and cake and cheese and jam and eggs-
-tell me anything you think of, Aunt May, because he might as well
do it thoroughly!

"Mama and Regina are going to have oyster soup and toast because
they are the invalids!" she announced cheerfully, coming back from
the door a little later, "You like oysters, don't you, Mama?"

"Oh, Julia, I like 'em SO much!" Mrs. Page said, with grateful
fervour.

"You can have other things, too, you know, Madam," Julia assured
her playfully. "And why don't you let me push you, so--" She
wheeled the chair across the kitchen as she spoke. "Over here, you
see, you're out of the crowd," she said. She presently put a
coaxing arm about Regina. "Do go up and brush your hair and
change, dear, you'll feel so much better," she urged.

"I feel rotten," Regina said, dragging herself stairward
nevertheless.

Poor Mrs. Page cried when the moment for parting came. It was
still early in the evening when Julia bundled up the sleeping
Anna, and sent her to the motor car by Chester, a gentle gray-
haired man, who had been extremely appreciative of a good dinner,
and who had been sitting with his wet socks in the oven, and his
stupid kindly eyes contentedly fixed upon Julia and her mother.

"I may not see you again, Julie," Mrs. Page said with trembling
lips. "Mama ain't strong like she once was, dear. And I declare I
don't know what I SHALL do, when day after day goes by and you
don't come in--always so sweet!" The tears began to flow, and she
twisted her head, and slowly and painfully raised her handkerchief
in a crippled hand to dry her eyes. Julia knelt down to kiss her,
her young face very sober.

"Listen, Mama--don't cry! Please don't cry!" said she. "Listen!
I'll PROMISE you to see you again before I go!"

Her mother brightened visibly at this, and Julia kissed her again,
and ran out in the dripping rain to her car. She took the baby
into her arms, and settled back in the darkness for the long trip
to her hotel. And for the first time in many months her thoughts
were not of her own troubles.

She thought of the Shotwell Street house, and wondered what had
attracted her grandfather and grandmother to it, forty years ago.
She tried to see her mother there, a slender, dark-haired child;
tried to imagine her aunt as young and fresh and hopeful. Had the
rooms been dark and dirty even then? Julia feared so; in none of
her mother's reminiscences was there ever any tenderness or
affection for early memories of Shotwell Street. Four young people
had gone out from that house, nearly thirty years ago, how badly
equipped to meet life!

Julia's own earliest recollections centred in it. She remembered
herself as an elaborately dressed little child, shaking out her
little flounces for her grandmother's admiration, and having large
hats tied over her flushed sticky face and tumbled curls. She
remembered that, instead of the row of cheap two-story flats that
now faced it, there had been a vacant lot across the street then,
where horses sometimes galloped. She remembered the Chester of
those days, a pimply, constantly smoking youth, who gave her
little pictures of actresses from his cigarette boxes, and other
little pictures that, being held to a strong light, developed
additional figures and lettering. He called her "Miss O'Farrell of
Page Street" sometimes, and liked to poke her plump little person
until she giggled herself almost into hysterics.

Still dreaming of the old times, she reached her hotel, and while
Ellie settled the baby into her waiting crib, Julia sat down
before a fire, her slippered feet to the comfortable coals, her
loose mandarin robe deliciously warm and restful after the tiring
day.

"You want the lights, Mrs. Studdiford?" asked Ellie, tiptoeing in
from the next room.

"Oh, no, thank you!" Julia said. "I'll just sit here for a while,
and then go to bed."

Ellie went softly out; the clock struck nine--ten--eleven. Against
the closely curtained windows the rain still fell with a softened
hiss, the coals broke, flamed up, died down to a rosy glow. Still
Julia sat, sunk in her deep chair, musing.

She saw the Shotwell Street house changed, and made, for the first
time in its years of tenancy, into a home. There must be paint
outside, clean paint, there must be a garden, with a brick path
and rose bushes, where a little girl might take her first
stumbling steps, and where spring would make a brave showing in
green and white for the eyes of tired homegoers.

Indoors there should be a cool little orderly dining-room, with
blue china on its shelves, and a blue rug under the round table,
and there should be a drawing-room papered in clean tans and
curtained in cream colour, with an upright piano and comfortable
chairs. The ugly old storeroom off the kitchen must be her
mother's; it must have new windows cut, and nothing but what was
new and pretty must go in there. And the kitchen should have blue-
and-white linoleum, with curtains and shining tinware; there must
be the gleam of scrubbed white woodwork, the shine of polished
metal. It was a big kitchen, the invalid might still like to have
her chair there.

The basement's big, unused front room must be finished in durable
burlaps and grass matting for Uncle Chester; there must be a bath
upstairs; two rooms for Aunt May and the girls, one for Grandma,
one for Julia and little Anna.

So much for externals. But what of changing the tenants to suit
the house? Would time and patience ever transform Mrs. Torney into
a busy, useful woman? Would Geraldine and Regina develop into
hopeless incompetents like Marguerite, or pay Julia for all her
trouble by becoming happy and helpful and contented?

Time must show. Only the days and the years would answer the
question that Julia asked of the fire. There must be patience,
there must be endless effort, there would be times of bitterest
discouragement and depression. And in the end?

In the end there would only be, at best, one family, out of
millions of other families, saved from unnecessary suffering.
There would be only one household lifted from the weight of
incompetence and wretchedness that burdened the world. There would
be no miracle, no appreciation, no gratitude.

"But--who knows?" mused Julia. "It may save Geraldine and Regina
from lives like Rita's, and bitterness like Muriel's and Evelyn's.
It may save them from clouding their lives as I did mine. Rita's
children, too, who knows what a clean and sweet ideal--held before
them, may do for them? And poor Chess, who has been wronged all
his life, and my poor little grandmother, and Mama--"

It was the thought of her mother that turned the scale. Julia
thought of the dirty blankets and the soggy pillow that furnished
the invalid's chair, of the treat that a simple bowl of oyster
soup seemed to the failing appetite.

"And I can do it!" she said to herself. "It will be hard for
months and months, and it will be hard now to make Aunt Sanna see
that I am right; but I can do it!" She looked about the luxurious
room, and smiled a little sadly. "No more of this!" she thought.
And then longing for her husband came with a sick rush. "Oh,
Jimmy!" she whispered, with filling eyes. "If it was only you and
me, my darling! If we were going ANYWHERE together, to the poorest
neighbourhood and the meanest cabin in the world--how blessed I
would be! How we could work and laugh and plan together, for Anna
and the others!" But presently the tears dried on her cheeks.
"Never mind, it will keep me from thinking too hard," she thought.
"I shall be needed, I shall be busy, and nothing else matters
much!"

She got up, and went to one of the great windows that looked down
across the city. The rain was over, dark masses of cloud were
breaking and stirring overhead; through their rifts she caught the
silver glimmer of the troubled moon. Across the shadowy band that
was the bay a ferryboat, pricked with hundreds of tiny lights, was
moving toward the glittering chain of Oakland. There was a light
on Alcatraz, and other nearer lights scattered through the dark
masts and dim hulks of the vessels in the harbour below her.

"It will be bright to-morrow!" Julia thought, resting her forehead
against the glass. She was weary and spent; a measureless
exhaustion seemed to enfold her. Yet under it all there glowed
some new spark of warm reassurance and certainty. "Thank God, I
see my way clear at last!" she said softly.




CHAPTER VII


The kitchen in the old Cox house formed a sort of one-story annex
behind the building, and had windows on three sides, so that on a
certain exquisite morning in March, four years later, sunlight
flooded the two eastern windows and fell in clear squares of
brightness on the checkered blue-and-white linoleum on the floor.
There were thin muslin sash curtains at these windows, and white
shades had been drawn down to meet them. Some trailing English ivy
made a delicate tracery in dark green beside one window, and two
or three potted begonias on the sill lifted transparent trembling
blooms to the sun. The rest of the large room was in keeping with
this cheerful bit of detail. There was a shining gas stove beside
the shining coal range, and a picturesque bit of colour in the
blue kettles and copper casseroles that stood in a row on the
shelves above the range. A pine cupboard had been painted white,
and held orderly rows of blue plates and cups; there were several
white-painted chairs, and two tables. One of these was pushed
against the west wall, and was of pine wood white from scrubbing;
the other stood on a blue rag rug by the eastern windows, and was
covered by a fringed tablecloth in white and blue. Near the outer
door, with a window above it, was a white-enamelled sink in a
bright frame of hanging small utensils.

The sunlight twinkled here and there on a polished surface, and
flung a trembling bright reflection on the ceiling from the brass
faucets of the sink. A clock on the wall struck seven.

As the last stroke sounded, Julia Studdiford quietly opened the
hall door and stepped into the kitchen. She softly closed the door
behind her, and went to another door, at which she paused for a
few seconds with her head bent as if listening. Evidently
satisfied that no one stirred in the bedroom beyond the door, she
set briskly if noiselessly about her preparations for breakfast.

These involved the tying on of a crisp checked apron, and various
negotiations with a large enamelled coffee pot, an egg, and the
dark grounds that sent a heartening odour of coffee through the
room. Bread was sliced and trimmed for toast with delightful
evenness and swiftness, a double boiler of oatmeal was lifted from
the fireless cooker, and the ice box made to furnish more eggs and
a jar of damp, firm butter.

It was while making a little journey to the back porch for milk
and cream that the housekeeper first wavered in her swift routine.
Below the back steps lay a little city garden, so lovely in the
strengthening March sunlight that she must set her bottles down on
the step, and run down for a whiff of the fragrance of climbing
roses, just beginning to bloom, of bridal-wreath and white lilac.
Cobwebs, caught from bush to wet bush, sparkled with jewels; a
band of brown sparrows flew away from a dripping faucet, and a
black cat, crouching on the crosspieces of the low fence, rose,
yawned, and vanished silently. The wall was almost entirely hidden
by vines, principally rose vines, which flung long arms in the
air. Presently a woman in the next yard parted these vines, to
look over and say pleasantly:

"Good-mornin', Mis' Studdiford! I's just looking over an' DEE-
spairin' of ever gettin' my backyard to look like yours! It does
smell like one big bo'quet mornin's like this!"

"Oh, well, there are so many of us to fuss with it," said the
young woman addressed, cheerfully. "My aunt and my cousins are
nearly as crazy about flowers as I am, and the other day--that
warm day, you know, when we had my mother out here--she was just
as absorbed as the rest of us!" She put a friendly head over the
wall. "But I don't see what you've got to complain of, Mrs.
Calhoun," said she, "especially as you're just beginning! I see
your geraniums all took hold!"

"Every one but the white Lady Washington," the woman said. "How is
your mother?" she added.

"Pretty comfortable, thank you!" said the other. "I imagine she
may have had a restless night, for both she and my aunt seem to be
asleep, so I'm getting breakfast for my cousins and uncle myself!
And I'm not supposed to be out here at all!" she added, with a
farewell laugh and nod, as she turned back to the steps. "But I
just couldn't resist the garden!"

She picked up the milk bottles and reentered the kitchen just as a
trimly dressed young woman came into it from the hall. The
newcomer was tall, and if not quite pretty was at least a fresh-
looking, pleasant-faced girl. She wore a tailor-made skirt and
white shirt waist, and a round hat covered with flowers, and laid
her jacket over the back of a chair.

"Julie, where's Ma?" said she, in surprise. "Have you been doing
everything?"

"Not everything!" Julia smiled. "But Aunt May must have overslept
herself; there hasn't been a sound from their room this morning.
Your suit looks lovely," she added admiringly.

"Oh, do you think so?" asked the younger woman eagerly. She
interrupted her task of putting plates and cups on the table, to
come close and turn toward Julia the back of her head for
inspection. "Like it?" asked she.

Julia seriously inspected the rhinestone comb that glittered
there.

"Why, I don't utterly dislike it," she said, in her pleasant
voice.

"But you don't think it's in good taste, Julie?"

"Well no, not exactly. Not for the office, anyway."

"All right, then--that settles it!" the young woman assured her.
"I'll run upstairs after breakfast and change. We had a glorious
time last night!" she went on, putting her head on one side to
give the table a critical glance. "I'll tell you about it. This
has boiled up, hasn't it--it can be settled?"

"Yes, settle it." said Julia, buttering toast, "and tell me!"

But at this moment the hall door opened again, and a little girl
of four and a half appeared in the doorway. She was so lovely a
vision, with her trailing wrapper and white nightgown bunched up
to be out of her way, curls tumbled about her face, and eyes big
with reproach, that both women laughed with pleasure at the sight
of her.

"Mother," said she, with that lingering on the last consonant that
marks the hurt pride of a child, "why diddunt you wake me?"

"Because you were sleeping so nicely, Pussy!" Julia laughed, on
her knees by this time, with both arms about the little figure.
"Give me a thousand kisses and say 'I love my mother!'"

"I love my mother!" said Anna, her eyes roving the room over her
mother's shoulder. "I guess you don't know how hard you're
squeezing me, Mother!" she added. "Can I come out here in my
wrapper, and have breakfast with Regina?"

"Yes, let her, Julia!" Regina urged. "Come on, darling! Bring your
bowl up here to my end. Do sit down and eat something yourself,
Julia."

"This is the way to enjoy breakfast; not twenty feet from the
stove!" Julia said, pouring the cream into her coffee. "Was
Geraldine stirring when you got up, Regina?"

"Not a stir!" Regina said cheerfully. "She and Morgan were talking
last night until two--I looked at the clock when she came
upstairs! What they have to talk about gets me!"

"Oh, my dear, engaged people could talk forever," Julia said
leniently. "They were househunting yesterday, there's always so
much to talk about!"

"It seems to me that the people who don't marry have the most
fun," Regina said. "Look at Muriel and Evvy, the money they make!
Evvy going East for the firm every year, and Muriel getting her
little twenty-five a week. And then look at Rita, with four
children to slave for--"

"Ah, well, Rita's husband doesn't work steadily, and she hates
housework--she admits it!" Julia protested swiftly. "Rita could do
a good deal, if she would."

"Rita gives me a great big pain," said her younger sister
absently.

"A boy named Willis had a sword, and he hit a little boy with it,
and Mrs. Calhoun said it was a wonder he wasn't killed!"
contributed Anna suddenly, her eyes luminous from some thrilling
recollection.

"Fancy!" Julia said. "Eat your oatmeal, Baby, and run upstairs and
get some clothes on!" she added briskly. "You'll catch cold!"

But there was no severity in the glance she turned upon her
daughter. Indeed, it would have been a stern heart that little
Anna Studdiford's first friendly glance did not melt. She had been
exquisite from her babyhood, she was so lovely now, as she emerged
from irresponsible infancy to thoughtful little girlhood, that
Julia sometimes wondered how she could preserve so much charm and
beauty unspoiled. Anna had her mother's ash-gold hair, but where
Julia's rose firm and winglike from her forehead, and was held in
place by its own smooth, thick braids, the little girl's fell in
rich, shining waves, sprayed in fine mist across her eyes,
glittered, a golden mop in the sunlight, and even in the shade
threw out an occasional gleam of gold. Anna's eyes were blue, with
curled thick lashes like her mother's, but in the firm little
mouth and the poise of her head, in the quick smile and quicker
frown, Julia saw her father a hundred times a day. Her skin had
the transparent porcelain beauty of babyhood, there was a
suggestion of violet shadow about her eyes, and on her cheeks
there glowed the warm colour of a ripe apricot. Even the gingham
aprons and sturdy little shoes which she customarily wore did not
disguise Anna's beauty. Julia trusted more to the child's wise
little head than to the faint hope that her own precautions could
ward off flattery and adulation. The two had been constant
companions for more than four years: Anna's little bed close to
her mother's at night, Anna's bright head never out of Julia's
sight by day. If Anna showed any interest in what her mother was
reading, Julia gave her a grave review of the story; if Julia went
to market, Anna trotted beside her, deeply concerned as to cuts of
meat and choices among vegetables; and when baking was afoot, Anna
had a tiny moulding board on a chair, and cut cookies or scalloped
tarts with the deep enjoyment of the born cook.

Once or twice the child had asked for her father, accepting
quietly enough the explanation that he was in Germany, and very
busy.

"Aren't we going to see him some time, Mother?"

"Not while Grandma needs Mother so much, dear!" Julia would answer
easily.

Easily, because the busy months with their pain and joy, their
problems and their successes, had seemed to seal away in a deep
crypt her memories of her husband. Julia had been afraid to think
of him at first; she could not make herself think of him now; his
image drifted vaguely away from her, as unreal as a dream. He was
as much a name as if she had never seen him, never loved him,
never suffered those exquisite agonies of grief and shame with
which the first year of their separation was full. Jim's child had
taken his place; the purity and sweetness of the child's love
filled Julia's heart; she wanted only Anna, and Anna was her
interpreter for all the relationships of life. Anna first made her
draw close to her own mother; Anna was at once her spur and her
reward during the first hard years at Shotwell Street.

Anna had gone upstairs, and Regina was finishing her breakfast
when Chester came downstairs, followed by the still sleepy yet
shining-eyed Geraldine. Geraldine was to be married in a few weeks
now, and had given up her position in an office, to devote all her
time to house-furnishing and sewing.

"I'm awfully sorry to be so late," smiled Geraldine, "but we
talked until I don't know when last night!" She poured herself a
cup of coffee; the meal went cheerfully on. Presently the bedroom
door opened, and a stout, handsome, middle-aged woman came into
the kitchen.

Julia was used, by now, to the transformation that had come to
house and garden, that had affected every member of her mother's
family in the past four years. But to the change in her aunt, Mrs.
Torney, she never became quite accustomed. It had been slow in
coming; it had come all at once. There had been weeks when Julia
felt that nothing would ever silence the whining voice, or make
useful the idle hands. There had been a wretched time when the
young woman had warned the older that matters could not continue
as they were. There had been agitated decisions on Mrs. Torney's
part to go away, with Regina, to starve and struggle again; there
had been a scene when Regina coolly refused to leave the new
comforts of Julia's rule.

And then, suddenly, there was a new woman in the family, in Aunt
May's place. Julia always dated the change from a certain
Thanksgiving Day, when Mrs. Torney, who was an excellent cook, had
prepared a really fine dinner. Julia and the girls put the dining-
room in order, a wood fire roared in the air-tight stove, another
in the sitting-room grate. Julia dressed prettily; she put a late
rose in her mother's hair, draped the invalid's prettiest shawl
about the thin shoulders, arrayed the toddling baby in her
daintiest finery. She coaxed her aunt to go upstairs to make
herself fresh and neat just before dinner, and during the whole
evening Mrs. Torney's sons and daughters, Julia and Evelyn,
Chester and Mrs. Page and little old Mrs. Cox united to praise the
dinner and the cook.

It was as if poor Aunt May had come into her own, had been given
at last the role to which she had always been suited. Handsome in
her fresh shirt waist and black skirt, with her gray hair coiled
above a shining face, she beamed over turkey dressing and
cranberry sauce; she laughed until she cried, when Elmer, who had
come from Oakland for the feast, solemnly prefaced a request for
more mince pie with a reckless: "Come on, Lloyd, let's die
together; it's worth it!"

From that day hers was the happy part of the bustling housewife.
No New England matron ever took more pride in cup cakes or apple
pies, no kitchen in the world gave forth more savoury odours of
roast meats and new-baked bread. Mrs. Torney's heavy tread on the
kitchen floor was usually the first thing Julia heard in the
morning, and late at night the infatuated housekeeper would slip
out to the warm, clean, fragrant place for a last peep at rising
dough or simmering soup. Aunt May read the magazines now only to
seek out new combinations of meats and vegetables. Julia would
smile, to glance across the dining-room to her aunt's chair
beneath the lamp, and see the big, kindly face pucker over some
startling discovery.

"Em!" Mrs. Torney would remove her glasses, she would address her
sister in shocked tones. "Here they've got a sour-cream salad
dressing. Did you ever hear of such a thing!"

"For heaven's sake!" Mrs. Page would look up from her absorbed
watching of Chester's solitaire, drop her emaciated little head
back against the waiting pillow.

"Try it some time, Aunt May, you could make anything taste good!"
Julia might suggest. But Mrs. Torney would shake a doubtful head
and, with a muttered "Sour cream!" resume her glasses and her
magazine.

Now she was tying a crisp apron over her blue cotton dress, and
ready with a smiling explanation for Julia.

"I declare, Ju, I don't know what's got into my alarm. I never
woke up at all until quarter to eight o'clock! Don't start those
dishes, lovey, there's no hurry!"

"I was afraid that Mama'd had a bad night," Julia said, smiling a
good-morning from the sink. "Sit. down, Aunt May, I'll bring you
your coffee!"

"No, Emeline had a real good night. She was reading a while, about
three, but she's sound asleep now."

"I lighted a fire in the dining-room," said Chester, "just to take
the chill off, if Em wants to go in there!"

"Then I'll bring my sewing down, after the beds are made,"
Geraldine said. "You go to market if you want to, Julie; I'll do
your room."

"Well," Julia agreed, "perhaps I can get back before Mama wakes.
I'll go up and see what Anna is doing."

Regina and Chester presently went off to their work, Mrs. Torney
and Geraldine fell upon the breakfast dishes, and Julia went
upstairs. She found the little Anna dreaming by a sunny window,
one stocking on, one leg still bare, and her little petticoat
hanging unbuttoned.

"Come, Infant, this won't do!" Julia's practised hands made quick
work of the small girl's dressing. A stiff blue gingham garment
went on over Anna's head, the tumbled curls were subjugated by a
blue ribbon. When it was left to Anna merely to lace her shoes,
Julia began to go about the room, humming as she busied herself
with bureau and bed. She presently paused at the mirror to pin on
a wide hat, and her eye fell upon the oval-framed picture of Jim
that she had carried away with her from the Pacific Avenue house.
It had been taken by some clever amateur; had always been a
favourite with her. She studied it dispassionately for a moment.

Jim had been taken in tennis clothes; his racket was still in his
hand, his thin shirt opened to show the splendid line of throat
and chin. His thick hair was rumpled, the sunlight struck across
his smiling face. Julia's memory could supply the twinkle in his
eye; she could hear him call to Alan Gregory: "For the Lord's
sake, cut this short, Greg! It's roasting out here!"

Beside this picture hung another, smaller, and also a snapshot.
This was of a man, too, a tall, thin, ungainly man, sitting on a
roadside rock, with a battered old hat in his hand. Behind him
rose a sharp spur of rough mountainside, and so sharply did the
ground fall away at his feet that far below him was a glimpse of
the level surface of the Pacific. Julia smiled at this picture,
and the picture smiled back.

"Come, Mouse!" said she, rousing herself from a reverie a moment
later. "Get on your hat! You and I have to go to market!"

The morning wore on; it was like a thousand other happy mornings.
Julia and Anna loitered in the cool odorous fish stalls at the
market, welcomed asparagus back to its place in the pleasant cycle
of the year's events, inspected glowing oranges and damp crisp
heads of lettuce; stopped at the hardware store for Aunt May's new
meat chopper, stopped at the stationer's for Anna's St. Nicholas,
stopped at the florist's to breathe deep breaths of the damp
fragrant air, and to get some buttercups for Grandma.

Julia's mother was in the kitchen when she and Anna got home, her
dark hair still damp from brushing, her thin wrists no whiter than
her snowy ruffles. Presently they all moved into the dining-room,
where Geraldine's sewing machine was temporarily established, and
where Anna's blocks had a corner to themselves. The invalid,
between intervals of knitting, watched them all with her luminous
and sympathetic smile.

"A letter for you, Julie, and four for me," said the bride-elect,
coming back from the door after the postman's ring.

"FOUR for you--Gerry! You lucky thing!"

"Well--two are from Morgan," admitted Geraldine, smiling, and
there was a laugh as Julia opened her own letter.

"It's from Dr. Richard Toland," she announced a moment later. "He
says Mill Valley is too beautiful for words just now. How'd you
like to go over and see Uncle Richie to-morrow, Anna?"

"I'd love it," said Anna unhesitatingly.

"We've not been for weeks," Julia said, "I'd love it, too, if my
Marmer doesn't mind?" She turned her bright smile to her mother.
"Regina says she has an engagement with the O'Briens for Sunday,"
said she, "and if Gerry goes off with Morgan, will that leave
things too quiet?"

"Indeed it won't!" said Mrs. Torney, looking up from the tissue-
paper pattern over which she had hung in profound bewilderment for
almost half an hour. "Rita may bring some of the children in, or
Lloyd and Elmer may come over. Go along with you!"

Richie, much stronger in these days, and without his crutch,
though still limping a little, met Julia and the dancing Anna on
the following afternoon, and the three crossed the ferry together.
It was a day bursting with summer's promise, the air was pure and
warm, and the sky cloudless. Getting out of the train at Mill
Valley, Julia drew an ecstatic breath.

"Oh, Richie, what heavenly freshness! Doesn't it just smooth your
forehead down like a cool hand!"

There was a poignant sweetness to the mountain air, washed clear
by the late rains, and warmed and invigorated by the sunshine of
the lengthening March day. The country roads were dark and muddy
and churned by wheel tracks, but fringed with emerald grass. Even
at four o'clock the little valley was plunged in early shadow, but
sunshine lay still upon the hills that framed it, and long lines
of light threw the grim heights of Tamalpais into bold relief. The
watching tiers of the redwoods looked refreshed, their spreading
dark fans were tipped with the jade-green sprays of the year's new
growth. The first pale smoke of wild lilac bloom lay over the
hills.

"It makes you think of delicious words," said Julia, as Richie's
rusty white mare plodded up and up the mountain road. "Ozone--and
aromatic--and exhilarating! In town it was a little oppressive to-
day--Anna and I were quite wilted!"

"You don't look wilted!" Richie smiled at his goddaughter, who was
in her mother's arms. "Look, Ju--there's columbine! Loads of it up
near my place!" "And the wild currant, with that delicious pungent
smell!" sighed Julia blissfully. "What's new with you, Richie?"
she asked presently.

"Oh, nothing much! Cable from Bab yesterday, but you must have had
one, too?"

"Yes, I did. A third boy!" Julia laughed. "Poor Bab--when she
wanted a girl so badly!"

"I suppose she did," grinned Richard.

"Oh, of course she did! Who wouldn't?" Julia hugged her own girl.
"And isn't it glorious about Keith?" she added, with sudden
enthusiasm.

"Is it? I suppose it is," Richie said. "But then those old guys in
Germany called him a genius long before New York did, and you
girls didn't make so much fuss!"

"Oh, but Richie, there's so much money in this American tour;
three concerts in New York alone, think of it!" Julia protested
eagerly. "And Sally's letter sounded so gay; they were having a
perfectly glorious time. I hope they come to San Francisco!"

"Well, she deserves it," Richie observed, flicking the rusty mare
with a whip she superbly ignored. "Sally's had a pretty rotten
time of it for seven or eight years--paying his lesson bills when
she didn't have enough to eat or shoes to wear--and losing the
baby---"

"I don't believe all that meant as much to Sally as you think,"
Julia said sagely. "Her entire heart was set upon Keith's success,
and that has come along pretty steadily. Her letter to me about
the baby wasn't the sort I should have written; indeed, I couldn't
have written at all! And then that was four years ago, Richie, and
four years is a long time!"

"It is!" Richie agreed. "Keith's about all the baby she'll ever
want; those fellows take an awful lot of spoiling. But I get more
pleasure from Mother's and Dad's pleasure than for Sally herself,"
he added. "Mother saves up newspaper accounts, and has this
translated from the German and that from the French--it's sort of
pathetic to see! Dad and Janey are in New York now; something was
said last night about their going over to see Bab."

"Ted and your mother are alone, then? How's Ted?"

"Oh, driving Mother crazy, as usual. She'd flirt with the
Portuguese milkman if she had a chance. She can't seem to
understand that because she wants to be free she ISN'T free! Talks
about 'if I marry again,' and so on. Of course Carleton's marrying
again has made her wild."

"But, good heavens, Richie, Ted ought to have some SENSE!"

"Well, she hasn't. She stretched a point to marry him, d'you see?
Carleton had been baptized as a child, and his first wife hadn't,
and they were married by a Justice of the Peace, or something of
that sort. So Ted claimed that in the eyes of the Church he hadn't
been married at all, and she married him. Then----"

"But if she loved him, Richie--and Ted was so young!"

"All true, of course, only if you're going to push things to the
point of taking advantage of a quibble like that, your chance of
happiness is more or less slim! So three years ago Carleton proved
that he hadn't cared a whoop about the legal or religious aspects
of the case, and left Ted. And now Ted can't see herself, at
twenty-seven, tied to another woman's husband!"

"She has her boy," Julia said severely.

"Yep, but that doesn't seem to count."

"Well, it's funny, Richie, take us all in all, what a mess we've
made of marrying!" Julia mused. "Ned gives me the impression,
every time I see him, of being a sulky martyr in his own home;
Sally's managed to drag happiness out of a most hopeless
situation; Ted, of course, will never be happy again, like Jim and
me; and Connie, although she made an exemplary marriage, either
has to leave her husband or bring her baby up in Manila, which she
says positively isn't safe! Bab is the only shining success among
us all!"

"Oh, I don't know," Richie said, stopping the horse, and flinging
the reins to the Portuguese who came out of a small barn to meet
them. "Here we are, Ju--take your time! I've always considered you
rather successful," he resumed.

"Oh, me!" Julia laughed as she jumped down like a girl. She
followed Anna across a little hollow filled with buttercups and
long grasses, and they mounted the little rise to Richie's tiny
cabin. The little house had Mount Tamalpais for a background, and
its wide unroofed porch faced across the valley, and commanded a
view of the wooded ridges, and the marshes, and the distant bay,
and of San Francisco twelve miles away. Scrub oaks and bay trees
grew in a tangle all about it, even a few young redwoods and an
occasional bronze and white madrona tree. Wild roses and field
flowers crowded against its very walls, and under the trees there
were iris and brown lilies, and a dense undergrowth of manzanita
and hazelnut bushes, wild currant and wild lilac trees.

The big room that Julia entered first was dim with pleasant
twilight, and full of the sweet odours of a dying wood fire. It
had nothing of distinction in it: a few shabby chairs, an old
square piano, an unpainted floor crossed here and there by rugs,
books in cases and out of them, candlesticks along the brick
mantel, a green-shaded student's lamp on a long table, and several
wide windows, dim and opaque now in the fast-gathering darkness,
but usually framing each a picture of matchless mountain scenery.

A door at one side of the fireplace led into a tiny kitchen whose
windows looked out into oak branches; and another door, on the
other side, gave access to a little cement-floored bathroom with a
shower, and two small bedrooms, each with two beds built in tiers
like bunks. This was Richie's whole domain, and whether it was
really saturated with the care-free atmosphere of childhood, and
fragrant with the good breath of the countryside all about it, or
whether Julia only imagined it to be so, she found it perfect, and
was never so happy in these days as when she and Anna were there.
She was always busy, and satisfied in her work, but there were
needs of heart and mind that her own people could not meet, and
when these rose strong within her she found no company as bracing
and as welcome as Richard's.

"No Aunt Sanna?" said she cheerfully, when she had taken off her
hat and the small girl's, and was in her favourite chair by the
fire.

"No, darn it!" said Richie, struggling with a refractory lamp
wick.

"Oh, don't be so blue, Rich! She'll be here on the seven."

"No, she won't--she said the four--I expected to find her here,"
Richie said, settling the glass chimney into place, as the light
crept round the wick. A little odour of hot kerosene floated on
the air, and was lost in other odours from the kitchen, where a
Chinese boy was padding about in the poor light of one lamp. He
began to come and go, setting the table, the ecstatic Anna at his
heels. Whenever the outer door was opened, a cool rush of sweet
country air came in. Richie began to stamp back and forth with
great logs for the fireplace.

"Wonderful what millions of miles away from every one we seem,
Rich!" Julia said contentedly. "Was there ever anything like the
quiet of this mountain?"

"I'm terribly sorry about Aunt Sanna," Richie said. "I feel like
an ass--getting you way up here!"

"Why, my dear boy, it's not YOUR fault!" Julia said, round eyed.

"She said she would positively be here," Richie pursued. "I
suppose there's no earthly reason---" he added uncomfortably.

"Why you and I shouldn't stay here alone? I should hope not!"
Julia reassured him roundly. "And she may come on the seven,
anyway!"

"These are the times I wish I had a telephone," said Richie.

"Aw leddy," contributed the Chinese boy. They took their places at
the table, and dinner was eaten by the light of the lamp. But
after dinner, when Julia had tucked Anna into bed, she came back
and put out the lamp. She lighted two candles on the mantelpiece
that sent a brave flicker over the dull walls and up to the
ceiling.

"There!" said she, with an energetic stirring of the fire, as she
took her chair again, "that's the way I like this room to look!"

Richard disposed of his awkward length in an opposite chair, his
big bony hands interlocked. In the fire and candlelight Julia
looked very young, her loosened hair glimmering against the back
of her chair, her thin white skirts spreading in a soft circle
above her slipper buckles. The man noticed the serene rise and
fall of her breast under her thin blouse, the content in her half-
shut blue eyes. He let his thoughts play for a moment with the
perilous dream that she belonged here at his hearth, that her
sweetness, her demure happiness, her earnest interest in
everything that concerned him, were all his by right.

"I don't quite know what to do about this!" he said gruffly.

"What--our being here?" Julia looked surprised. "Why, Richie, what
can we do? Do you think it matters, one night? After all, we're
brother and sister-in-law!"

"Almost," said Richie, with a laugh.

"Why, Rich, I would never give it one moment's thought; not if I
stayed here a month!" Julia assured him. "And neither would any
one else. Don't be so silly!"

"It's not me; but it isn't fair to you!" Richard said.

Julia had grown a little red. Now she stared into the fire.

"This sort of fuss isn't like you, Rich," she said presently, with
an uncomfortable laugh. "You--you don't usually talk about such
things!"

"No, I know I don't," Richard admitted, untouched by her reproach.
"I could go up to Porter's and try to get Aunt Sanna by
telephone!" he muttered.

Julia was displeased, and made no answer, and presently he got up
and went out. She sat there listening to the rattle of dishes in
the kitchen, until a splash announced the dishpan emptied under
the oak trees, and the Chinese through with his work for the
night. After a while she went to the doorway, and stared out at
the starry sky and the dark on darkness that marked masses of
trees and long spurs of the mountain. The air was sweet and
chilly, frogs were peeping, from somewhere near came the steady
rush of a swollen creek.

While Julia stood on the porch a livery hack from the village
creaked up, and stopped ten feet away. The horses were blowing on
the steep grade, and a strong odour from the animals and their
sweated harness smote the pure night air. The carriage lanterns
sent a wavering brightness across the muddy road, the grass looked
artificial in the yellow light. Miss Toland, vociferating apology
and explanation, emerged from the carriage.

When Richard came back from his fruitless errand he found both
women enjoying the fire, Miss Toland's skirt folded over her
knees, her veil pushed up on her forehead. In his enormous relief,
Richie felt that he could have danced and sung. He busied himself
brewing a hot drink for the older woman.

"Richie," said Julia, with a pleasant childish note of triumphant
reproach in her voice, "was worried to DEATH because I was here
alone with Anna! Don't you think he's crazy, Aunt Sanna?"

"Why, you two have been here alone?" Miss Toland asked, stirring
her chocolate.

"No, we haven't!" Julia answered cheerfully. "I never thought of
it before; but this dear old maid either has you here, or Janey,
or Doctor Brice's Mary from the village--isn't he queer?"

"It isn't as if you weren't practically brother and sister,
Richie," Miss Toland said moderately. "Not too much butter, dear!"
she interpolated, in reference to the toast her nephew was making,
adding a moment later, "Still, I don't know--a pretty woman in
your position can't be too careful, Julia!"

"Oh, Lord, you're an appreciative pair!" Richard said disgustedly,
going out to the kitchen for more bread.

Presently Miss Toland complained of fatigue, and left them to the
fire. And sitting there, almost silent, Julia thought that she had
never found her host so charming before. His rambling discourse
amused her, touched her; she loved his occasional shy introduction
of a line of poetry, his eager snatching of a book now and then to
illuminate some point with half a page of prose.

"Pleasant, isn't this, Rich?" she asked lazily, in a quiet
interval.

"Oh, PLEASANT!" He cleared his throat. "Yes--it's very pleasant!"

"And why couldn't you and I have done this just as well without
Aunt Sanna?" Julia asked triumphantly.

Richard gave her a look full of all-dignified endurance, a look
that wondered a little that she could like to give him pain.

"No reason at all," said he. And a sudden suspicion flamed in
Julia's heart with all the surety of an inspiration.

The revelation came in absolute completeness; she had never even
suspected Richie's little tragedy before. For a few moments Julia
sat stunned, then she said seriously:

"I always feel myself so much Jim's wife, Rich; I suppose it's a
sort of protection to me. It never occurs to me that any one could
think me less bound than I think myself."

"Sure you do!" Richard said, struggling with the back log. "But
other people might not! And it would be rotten to have him come
back and hear anything."

"I suppose he'll come back," Julia said, dreamily, almost in a
whisper. "I don't think of it much, now! I used to think of it a
good deal at first; I used to cry all night long sometimes, and
write him long letters that I never sent. It seemed as if the
longing for him was burning me up, like a fire!"

"Damn him!" Richard muttered.

"Oh, no, Richie, don't say that!" Julia protested. Richard, still
on one knee, with the poker in his hand, turned to her almost
roughly.

"For God's sake, Julie, don't defend him! I'll hold my tongue
about him, I suppose, as I always have done, but don't pretend he
has any excuse for treating you this way! You--the best and
sweetest and bravest woman that ever lived, bringing happiness and
decency wherever you go--"

"Richie, Richie, stop!" Julia protested, between laughter and
tears. "Don't talk so! I WILL defend Jim," she added gravely, "and
he DID have an excuse. It seems unfair to me that he should have
all the blame." She held her hand out, fingers spread to the
reviving flame, rosy and transparent in the glow.

"Rich, no one knows this but Jim and me; not Aunt Sanna, not my
own mother," she presently resumed. "But it makes what he did a
little clearer, and I'm going to tell you."

"Don't tell me anything," said Richard gruffly, eyes on the fire.

"Yes, I want to," Julia answered. But she was silent for a while,
a look of infinite sadness on her musing face. "I made a serious
mistake when I was a girl, Rich," she went on, after an interval.
"I had no reason for it--not great love, or great need. I had no
excuse. Or, yes, I did have this excuse: I had been spoiled; I had
been told that I was unusual, independent, responsible to nobody.
I knew that this thing existed all about me, and if I thought of
it at all, I suppose I thought that there could be nothing so very
dreadful about what men did as a matter of course! Perhaps that's
the best explanation; my mind was like a young boy's. I didn't
particularly seek out this thing, or want this thing; but I was
curious, and it came my way--

"Don't misunderstand me, Richie. I wasn't 'betrayed.' I'd had, I
suppose, as little good instruction, as little example, and
watching and guarding as any girl in the world. But I knew better!
Just as every boy knows better, and is taken, sooner or later,
unawares. Of course, if I'd been a boy--all this would be only a
memory now, hardly shameful or regrettable even, dim and far away!
Especially as it lasted only a few weeks, before I was sixteen!

"And, of course, people would say that I haven't paid the full
penalty, being a girl instead of a boy! Look at poor Tess, and
Trilby, and Hetty in 'Adam Bede!' I never let any one know it;
even your aunt never would have overlooked THAT, whatever she
might say now. No; even Jim protected me--and yet," Julia put her
head back, shut her eyes, "and yet I've paid a thousand times!"
said she.

There was a long silence, and then Richard said:

"I've thought sometimes this might be it, Ju. Being alone so much,
and reading and thinking--I've worked it out in my own mind. Aunt
Sanna saw Jim in Berlin two years ago, you know, and gave him a
horrible raking over the coals, and just from what she quoted, it
seemed as if there was some secret about it, and that it lay with
you. Then, of course," Richie eased his lame leg by stretching it
at full length before him, sinking down in his chair, finger tips
meeting, "of course I knew Jim," he resumed. "Jim's pride is his
weak point. He's like a boy in that: he wants everything or
nothing. He's like all my mother's children," said Richie,
comfortably analytical, "undisciplined. Chill penury never
repressed our noble rages; we never knew the sweet uses of
adversity. I did, of course, but here I am, a childless getting on
in years, not apt to leave a deep impression on the coming
generation. It's a funny world, Julie! It's a strange sort of
civilization to pose under the name of Christ. Christ had no
double standard of morals; Christ forgave. Law is all very well,
society has its uses, I have no doubt, but there are higher
standards than either!" "Well, that has come to me forcibly during
the past few years," Julia said thoughtfully. "I wasn't a praying
small girl; how could I be? But after I went to The Alexander,
being physically clean and respectable made me long to be clean
all over, I suppose, and I began to go to church, and after a
while I went to confession, Rich, and I felt made over, as if all
the stain of it had slipped away! And then Jim came, and I told
him all about it---"

"Before you were married?"

"Oh, Richie, of course!"

"Well, then, what--if he knew---"

"Oh, Richie, that's the terrible part. For I thought it was all
dead and gone, and it WAS all dead and gone as far as I was
concerned! But we couldn't forget it--it suddenly seemed a live
issue all over again; it just rose and stood between us, and I
felt so helpless, and poor Jim, I think he was helpless, too!"

Richard made no comment, and there was a silence.

"You know Jim wasn't a--wasn't exactly a saint, Ju," Richard said
awkwardly after a while.

"I know," she answered with a quick nod.

"I believe he was an exceptionally decent fellow, as fellows go,"
pursued Richie. "But, of course, it is the accepted thing. On
Jim's first vacation, after he entered college, he told me he
didn't care much for that sort of thing--we had a long talk about
it. But a year or two later there was a young woman--he used to
call her 'the little girl'--I don't know exactly---Anyway, Dad
went East, there was some sort of a fuss, and I know Jim treated
her awfully well--there never was any question of that--she never
felt anything but gratitude to him, whatever grievances she had
about any one else---"

His voice dropped.

"But it's not the same thing," Julia said with a sigh.

"No, I suppose not," Richard agreed.

"Life has been too violent and too swift with me," Julia resumed,
after a while. "If I had the past fifteen years to live over
again, I would live them very differently. I made an idol of Jim;
he could do no wrong. He wanted more bracing treatment than that;
he should have been boldly faced down. If I had been wiser, I
would have treated all my marriage differently. If I had been very
wise, I should not have married at all, should have kept my own
secret. Perhaps, marrying, I should not have told him the truth; I
don't know. Anyway, I have mixed things up hopelessly, given other
people and myself an enormous amount of pain, and wrecked my life
and Jim's. And now, when I am thirty, I feel as if I could begin
to see light, begin to live--as if now, when nothing on earth
seems really important, I knew how to meet life!"

"Well, that's been my attitude for some years," Richie said,
shifting his lame leg again. "Of course I started in handicapped,
which is a great advantage---"

"Advantage? Oh, Richie!" Julia protested.

"Yes, it is, from one point of view," he insisted whimsically.
"'Who loses his life,' you know. Most boys and girls start off
into life like kites in a high wind without tails. There's a
glorious dipping and plunging and sailing for a little while, and
then down they come in a tangle of string and paper and broken
wood. I had a tail to start with, some humiliating deficiency to
keep me balanced. No football and tennis for me, no flirting and
dancing and private theatricals. When Bab and Ned were in one
whirl of good times, I was working out chess problems to make
myself forget my hip, and reading Carlyle and Thoreau and Emerson.
Nobody is born content, Ju, and nobody has it thrust upon him;
just a few achieve it. I worked over the secret of happiness as if
it was the multiplication table. Happiness is the best thing in
the world. It's only a habit, and I've got it."

"IS happiness the best thing in the world, Rich?" Julia asked
wistfully.

"I think it is; real happiness, which doesn't necessarily mean a
box at the Metropolitan and a touring car," Richie said, smiling.
"It seems to me, to have a little house up here on the mountain,
and to have people here like me, and let me take care of them---"

"For nothing?" interposed Julia.

"Don't you believe it! I didn't write a cheque last month! Anyway,
it suits me. I have books, and letters, and a fire, and now and
then a friend or two--and now and then Julia and Anna to amuse
me!"

"I'm happy, too," Julia said thoughtfully. "I realized it some
time ago--oh, a year ago! I feel just as you might feel, Rich, if
you had left some critical operation unfinished, or done in a
wrong way, and then gone back to do it over. I feel as if, in
going back to first principles, and doing what I could for my own
people, I had 'trued' a part of my life, if you can understand
that! I had gone climbing and blundering on, and reached a point
where I couldn't help myself, but they were just where they
started, and I COULD help them!"

"It was probably the best thing you could have done for yourself,
at the same time," Richard interpolated, with a swift glance.

"Oh, absolutely!" Julia laughed a little sadly. "I was like an
animal that goes out and eats a weed: I had a wild instinct that
if I rushed into my grandmother's house, and bullied everybody
there, and simply shrieked and stamped on the dirt and laziness
and complaining, on the whole wretched system that I grew up
under, in short, that it would be a heavenly relief! My dear
Richie," and Julia laughed again, and more naturally, "I wonder
they didn't tar and feather me, and throw me out of the house! I
scoured and burned and scolded and bossed them all like a
madwoman. I told them that we had enough money to keep the house
decently, and always had had, but, my dear! I never dreamed the
whole crowd would fall in line so soon!"

"But, my Lord, Julie, what else could they do? You were paying all
the expenses, I suppose?"

"No, indeed I wasn't! Chester has a pretty fair salary now, and my
aunt's boys are awfully good about helping out. And then Muriel
has a position, and Evelyn is in a fair way to be a rich woman.
Besides, the mere question of where money is coming from never
worried my people! They managed as well with almost nothing at
all, as with a really adequate amount--which is to say that they
don't know in the least what the word manage means! Jim left me an
immense sum, Rich, but I've never touched anything but the
interest. When we shingled or carpeted or gardened out there, we
paid for it by degrees, and it cost, I must admit, only about one
third of what it would have been on the other side of town. I look
back now at those first months, more than four years ago," went on
Julia, smiling as she leaned forward in her low chair, her hands
locked about her knees, her thoughtful eyes on the flickering
logs, "and I wonder we didn't all rise up in the night and kill
each other. I was like a person with a death wound, struggling
madly through the little time left me, absolutely indifferent to
what any one thought. I simply wanted to die fighting, to register
one furious protest against all the things I'd hated, and
suffered, too! I remember reporters coming, at first, wild with
curiosity to know what took Doctor Studdiford abroad, and why Mrs.
Studdiford was living in a labourer's house in the Mission. What
impression they got I haven't the faintest idea. Once or twice
women called, just curious of course, Mrs. Hunter and Miss
Saunders--but that soon stopped. I was better hidden on Shotwell
Street than I would have been in the heart of India! Miss Saunders
came in, and met Mama and Grandma; we were having the kitchen
calcimined, the place was pretty well upset, I remember. Dear me,
how little what they thought or did or said seemed to count, when
my whole life was one blazing, agonizing cry for Jim!"

"That got better?" Richard asked huskily, after a pause.

"Rich, I think the past two, well, three years, have been the
happiest in my life," Julia said soberly. "My feet have been on
solid ground. I not only seem to understand my life better as it
is, but all the past seems clearer, too. I thought Jim was like
myself, Richie, but he wasn't; his whole viewpoint was different;
perhaps that's why we loved each other so!"

"And suppose he comes back?" Richard asked.

Julia frowned thoughtfully.

"Oh, Richie, how do I know! It's all so mixed up. Everybody, even
Aunt Sanna, thinks that he will! Everybody thinks I am a patient,
much-enduring wife, waiting for the end of an inexplicable
situation. Aunt Sanna thinks it's temporary aberration. Your
father thinks there's another woman in it. Your mother confided to
Aunt Sanna that it is her opinion that Bab refused Jim, and Jim
married from pique."

"That sounds like Mother!" Richie said with a dry laugh.

"Doesn't it?" Julia smiled. "But the truth is," she added, "Jim
has no preconcerted plan. He's made a very close man friend or two
in Germany, belongs to a doctors' club. I know him so well! He
lets the days, and the weeks, and the years go by, forgetting me
and everything that concerns me as much as he can, and getting
into a slow, dull rage whenever he remembers that fate hit him, of
all men in the world, such a blow!"

"And the baby?" said Richie. "Don't you suppose she counts? Oh,
Lord, to have a kid of one's own," he added slowly, with the half-
smiling sigh Julia knew so well.

"I imagine she would count if he had seen her lately," Julia
suggested. "But she was such a tiny scrap! And Jim, as men go,
isn't a lover of children."

"You wouldn't divorce him, Julie?" Richard asked, after a silence.

"Oh, never!" she answered quickly. "No, I won't do that." She
smiled. "Yet, Rich," she added presently, "it's a strange thing to
me that really my one dread is that he will come back. I THINK he
means nothing to me, yet, if I saw him--I don't know! Sometimes I
worry for fear that he might want Anna, and of course I wouldn't
give her up if it meant a dozen divorces."

Richard sat staring into the fire for a few moments; then he
roused himself to ask smilingly:

"How'd we get started on this little heart to heart, anyway?"

"Well, I don't know," Julia said, smiling, too. "I couldn't talk
of it for a long while. I can't now, to any one but you. But it
all means less to me than it did. Jim never could hurt me now as
he did then." She straightened up in her chair. "It's been a
wonderful talk!" she said, with shining eyes. "And you're a friend
in a million, Richie, dear! And now," very practically, "where are
you going to sleep, my dear? Aunt Sanna has your room."

"This couch out here is made up!" Richard said, with a backward
jerk of his head toward the room behind him.

"Ah, then you're all right!" Julia rose, and stopped behind his
chair for a moment, to lay a light kiss on his hair. "Good-night,
Little Brother!" she said affectionately.

Instantly one of the bony hands shot out, and Julia felt her wrist
caught as in a vise. Richard swiftly twisted about and got on his
own feet, and for a minute their eyes glittered not many inches
apart. Julia tried to laugh, but she was breathing fast.

"RICHARD!" she said in a sharp whisper. "What is it?"

"Julia!" he choked, breathing hard.

For a long moment they remained motionless, staring at each other.
Then Richard's grip on her wrists relaxed, and he sank into his
deep chair, dropped his elbows on his knees, and put his hands
over his face. Julia stood watching him for a second.

"Good-night, Richie!" she said then, almost inaudibly.

"Good-night!" he whispered through his shut fingers. Julia slipped
softly away, closing the door of her bedroom noiselessly behind
her.

Anna was asleep in the upper bed, lying flat on her back, with her
lovely hair falling loosely about her flushed little face. The
little cabin bedroom was as sweet as the surrounding woodland,
wide-open windows admitted the fragrant coolness of the spring
night. There was no moon, but the sky that arched high above the
little valley was thickly spattered with stars. Richie's cat, a
shadow among paler shadows, leaped swiftly over the new grass.
Julia got the milky odour of buttercups, the breath of the little
Persian lilac that flanked one end of the porch.

Her heart was beating thickly and excitedly, she did not want to
think why. Through her brain swept a confusion of thoughts,
thoughts disconnected and chaotic. She tried to remember just what
words on her part--on Richard's--had led to that strange mad
moment of revelation, but the memory of the moment itself
overleaped all those preceding it. Julia knelt, her elbows on the
window sill, and felt merely that she never wanted to move again.
She wanted just to kneel here, hugging to her heart the thrilling
emotion of the moment, realizing afresh that life was not dead in
her; youth and love were not dead in her; she could still tremble
and laugh and cry in the exquisite joy of being beloved.

And it was Richie, so weak in body, so powerful in spirit; so
humble in little things, so bold and sure in the things that are
great; not rich in money, but rich in wisdom and goodness; Richie,
who knew all her pitiful history now, and had long suspected it,
who loved her! Julia knew even now that it was an ill-fated love;
she knew that deep under this first strangely thrilling current of
pride and joy ran the cold waters of renunciation. But cool reason
had little to do with this mood; she was as mad as any girl whose
senses are suddenly, blindly, set free by a lover's first kiss.

After a while she began mechanically to undress, brushed her hair,
moved about softly in the uncertain candlelight. And as she did so
she became more and more unable to resist the temptation to say
"Good-night" to Richie again. Neither brain nor heart was deeply
involved in this desire, but some influence, stronger than either,
urged her irresistibly toward its fulfilment.

She would not do it, of course! Not that there was harm in it;
what possible harm could there be in her putting her head into the
sitting-room and simply saying "Good-night?" Still, she would not
do it.

A glance at herself in the dimly lighted mirror set her pulses to
leaping again. Surely candlelight had never fallen on a more
exquisite face, framed in so shining and soft an aureole of bright
hair. The long loose braid fell over her shoulder, a fine ruffle
of thin linen lay at the round firm base of her throat. She was
still young--still beautiful---

Anna stirred, sighed in her sleep. And instantly Julia had
extinguished the candle, and was bending tenderly over the child.

"It's only Mother, Sweet! Are you warm enough, dear? You FEEL
beautifully warm! Let Mother turn you over--so!"

"Is it morning, Mother?" murmured Anna.

"No, my heart! Mother's just going to bed." And ten minutes later
Julia was asleep, her face as serene as the child's own.

The morning brought her only a shamed memory of the night before
and its moods, and as Richie was quite his natural self, Julia
determined to dismiss the matter as a passing moment of
misinterpreted sentiment on both their parts. To-day was a Sunday,
so perfect that they had breakfast on the porch, and in the
afternoon took a long climb on the mountainside, across patches of
blossoming manzanita, and through meadows sweet with the liquid
note of rising larks. They came back in the twilight: Anna limp
and drowsy on Richard's shoulders, Miss Toland admitting to
fatigue, but all three ready to agree with Julia's estimate that
it had been a wonderful Sunday.

But night brought to two of them that new and strange self-
consciousness that each had been secretly dreading all day. Julia
fought it as she might have fought the oncoming of a physical ill,
yet inexorably it arrived. Supper was an ordeal, she found speech
difficult, she could hardly raise her eyes.

"Julie, you're as rosy as a little gipsy," said Miss Toland
approvingly. "Doesn't colour become her, Rich?"

"She looks fine," Richard muttered, almost inarticulately. Julia
looked up only long enough to give Miss Toland a pained and
fluttering smile. She was glad of an excuse to disappear with
Anna, when the little girl's bedtime arrived, and lingered so long
in the bedroom that Miss Toland came and rapped on the door.

"Julia! What ARE you doing?" called the older woman impatiently.
Julia came to the door.

"Why, I'm so tired, Aunt Sanna," she began smilingly.

"Tired, nonsense!" Miss Toland said roundly. "Come sit on the
porch with Richie and me. It's like summer out of doors, and
there'll be a moon!"

So Julia went to take her place on the porch steps, with a great
curved branch of the white rose arching over her head, and the
fragrant stretch of the grassy hilltop sloping away, at her feet,
to the valley far below. Miss Toland dozed, and the younger people
talked a little, and were silent for long spaces between the
little casual sentences that to-night seemed so full of meaning.

The next day Julia went home, to Miss Toland's disgust and to
little Anna's sorrow. Richie drove Julia and the little girl to
the train; there was no explanation needed between them; at
parting they looked straight into each other's eyes.

"Ask us to come again some day," Julia said. "Not too soon, but as
soon as you can. And don't let us ever feel that we've done
anything that will hurt or distress you, Richie."

"You and Anna are both angels," Richard answered. "Only tell me
that you forgive me, Julie; that things after this will be just as
they were before?"

Julia smiled, and bit a thoughtful under lip.

"This is March," she said. "We'll come and see you, let me see--in
July, and everything shall be just as it was before! Perhaps I am
really getting old," she said to herself, half laughing and half
sad, when she was in her own kitchen an hour or two later. "But,
while home is not exciting, somehow I'd rather be here than
philandering on the mountain in the moonlight with Richie!"

"What you smiling about, Julie?" her mother asked, from the
peaceful east side of the kitchen where her chair frequently stood
while Julia and Mrs. Torney were busy in that cheerful apartment.

"Just thinking it was nice to be home again, Mama!"

"I don't hold much with visiting, myself," said Mrs. Torney, who
was becoming something of a philosopher as she went into old age.
"But you can't get that through a young one's skull!" she added,
trimming the dangling pastry from a pie with masterly strokes of
her knife. "Either you have such a good time that your own home is
spoiled for you, for dear knows how long, or else you set around
wondering why on earth you ever come. And then you've got to have
the folks back to visit you, and wear yourself all out talking
like all possessed while you cook for 'em and make their beds. I
don't never feel clean when I've washed my face away from home
anyway, and I like my own bed under me. You couldn't get me to
visit anywheres now, if it was the Queen of Spain ast me!"

Julia laughed out merrily, and agreed with her aunt, glad to have
left the episode with Richie behind her. But it haunted her for
many days, nevertheless, rising like a disturbing mist between her
and her calm self-confidence, and shaking her contented conviction
that the renunciations necessary to her peace of mind had all been
made. She found fresh reason to gird herself in circumspection and
silence, and brooded, a little in discouragement, upon the
incessantly recurring problems of her life.

She went to visit the cabin on Tamalpais earlier even than she had
promised, however, for in June Barbara came home for a visit,
bringing two splendid little boys, with whom Anna fell instantly
in love, and a tiny baby in the care of a nurse. Julia spent a
good deal of her time in Sausalito during the visit, and more than
once she and Barbara took the four children to Mill Valley, and
spent a few days with Richie, quite as happy as the boys and Anna
were in the free country life.

Five years of marriage had somewhat changed Barbara; she was
thinner, and freckled rather than rosy, and she wore her thick
dark hair in a fashion Julia did not very much admire. Also she
seemed to care less for dress than she once had done, even though
what she wore was always the handsomest of its kind. But she was
an eagerly admiring and most devoted wife, calmly assuming that
the bronzed and silent "Francis" could do no wrong, and Julia
thought she had never seen a more charming and conscientious
mother. Barbara, whose husband's uncle was a lord, who had been
presented at the English court, and whose mail was peppered with
coats-of-arms, nursed her infant proudly and publicly, and was
heard to mention to old friends--not always women either--social
events that had occurred "just before Geordie came" or "when I was
expecting Arthur." Her rather thin face would brighten to its old
beauty when Geordie and Arthur, stamping in, bare kneed and
glowing, recounted to her the joys of Sausalito, and in evening
dress she was quite magnificent, and somehow seemed more at ease
than American women ever do. Her efficiency left even the capable
Julia gasping and outdistanced. Barbara was equal to every claim
husband, children, family, and friends could make. She came down
to an eight o'clock breakfast, a chattering little son on each
side of her, announcing briskly that the tiny Malcolm had already
had his bath. She started the little people on the day's orderly
round of work and play while opening letters and chatting with her
father; earned the housemaid's eternal affection by personally
dusting the big drawing-room and replacing the flowers; answered
the telephone in her pleasantly modulated voice; faced her husband
during his ten o'clock breakfast, and discussed the foreign news
with him in a manner Julia thought extraordinarily clever; and at
eleven came with the baby into her mother's sunny morning-room for
a little feminine gossip over Malcolm's second breakfast. Barbara
never left a note unanswered, no old friend was neglected; tea
hour always found the shady side porch full of callers, children
strayed from the candy on the centre table to the cakes near the
teapot, the doctor's collie lay panting in the doorway. Barbara's
rich soft laugh, the new tones that her voice had gained in the
past years, somehow dominated everything. Julia felt a vague new
restlessness and discontent assail her at this contact with
Barbara's full and happy life. Perhaps Barbara suspected it, for
her generous inclusion of Julia, when plans of any sort were
afoot, knew no limit. She won Anna's little heart with a thousand
affectionate advances; loved to have the glowing beauty of the
little girl as a foil for her own dark-haired boys.

"You're so busy--and necessary--and unself-conscious, Barbara,"
Julia said, "you make other women seem such fools!"

It was a heavenly July afternoon, and the two were following
Richie and the children down one of the mountain roads above Mill
Valley. Barbara, who had acquired an Englishwoman's love of
nursery picnics, had lured her husband to join them to-day, and
Julia had been pleasantly surprised to see how fatherly the
Captain was with his small boys, how willing to go for water and
tie dragging little shoe laces. But presently the soldier grew
restless, stared about him for a few moments, and finally decided
to leave the ladies and children to Richie's escort, and walk to
the summit of the mountain and back, as a means of working off
some excess of energy and gaining an appetite for dinner. He
apparently did not hear Barbara's warning not to be late, and her
entreaty to be careful, merely giving her a stolid glance in
answer to these eager suggestions, and remarking to the boys, who
begged to accompany him a little way: "Naow, naow, I tell you you
carn't, so don't make little arsses of yourselves blabbering
abaout it!"

This, however, was taken in good part by his family; there was
much waving of hands and many shouted good wishes as he walked
rapidly out of hearing.

"Poor Francis, I hope he's going to enjoy his walk," Barbara said,
as they started homeward. "He gets so bored out here in
California!"

"I wonder why?" Julia said, hiding a Californian's resentment.

"Oh, well, it IS different, Ju--you can't deny it! One wants to be
loyal, and all that," Barbara said, "but in England there's a
PURPOSE--there's a recognized order to life! They're not eternally
experimenting; they don't want to be idle and ignorant like our
women--they've got better things to do. There's a finish and a
pleasantness about life in London; men have more leisure to take
an interest in women's work; why, you've no idea how many
interesting, clever, charming men I know in London! How many does
one know here? And as for the WOMEN---"

It was then Julia said:

"Ah, well, you're different from other women. You're so busy--and
necessary--and unself-conscious, Barbara. You make other women
seem such fools!"

"Not necessarily," said Barbara, smiling. "And don't think I'm
horribly conceited, Julia, talking this way. It's only to you!"
They walked a little way without speaking, and then Barbara sat
down on a low bank, some quarter of a mile above Richie's cabin,
and added: "Do sit down, Ju. You and I are never alone, and I want
to talk to you. Julie, don't be angry--it's about Jim."

Julia's eyes immediately widened, her lips met firmly, she grew a
little pale.

"Go ahead," she said steadily. "Have you seen him?"

Barbara answered the question with another.

"You knew he was in London?"

"No," said Julia, "I didn't know it."

She had remained standing, and now Barbara urged her again to sit
down. But Julia would not, pleading that she would rather walk,
and in the end Barbara got up, and they began slowly to walk down
the road together.

"Tell me," Julia commanded then.

"Now, dearest girl," Barbara pleaded, "PLEASE don't get excited
over nothing. Jim's been in London nearly a year; in fact, he's
settled there. He's associated with one of the biggest consulting
surgeons we have, old Sir Peveril McCann. They met in Berlin. I
didn't know it until this spring--March it was. We'd just come up
from the country to meet Francis, home on a year's leave; it was
just before Malcolm arrived. Somebody spoke of this Doctor
Studdiford, and I said at once that it must be my foster brother.
I explained as well as I could that since Francis and I had been
travelling so much, Jim and I had fallen out of touch, and so on."

"Who told you about him?" Julia asked.

"A Mrs. Chancellor. She's quite a character," Barbara said. "Some
people like her; some don't. I don't--much. She's rich, and a
widow; she studies art, and she loves to get hold of interesting
people."

Julia winced at the vision of a plump, forty-year-old siren
sending coquettish side glances at an admiring Jim. Anger stirred
dully within her.

"Pretty?" she asked, in as nonchalant a voice as she could
command.

"Ivy Chancellor? No--she's really plain," Barbara said, "a sandy,
excitable little chatterbox, that's what SHE is! She's Lady Violet
Dray's daughter; Lady Violet's quite lovely. How much Jim admires
Ivy I can't say; she took him about with her everywhere; he was
always at the house."

This was too much. Julia felt the friendly earth sway under her, a
dry salty taste was in her mouth, a very hurricane of resentment
shook her heart.

"Oh, Barbara, do you see how he CAN?" she asked, in a stricken
voice.

"No, I don't!" Barbara answered, with a concerned glance at
Julia's white face. "Well, as I know him, I can't believe it's the
same Jim!"

"I wish you had seen him," Julia said, after an interval of
thought. Barbara said nothing for a few moments, then she
confessed suddenly:

"I DID see him, Julie."

"You did? Oh, Bab, and you never told me all this time!"

"Well, Mother and Aunt Sanna begged me not to, Ju, and Francis was
most emphatic about it," Barbara pleaded.

"Aunt Sanna--and Francis! But---" Julia's keen eyes read Barbara's
face like an open page. "Then there was more to it!" she declared.
"For they couldn't have minded my knowing just this!"

"I wish I had never mentioned Jim," Barbara said heartily. "It's
none of my business, anyway, only--only--it makes me so unhappy I
just can't bear it! I simply can't bear it!" And to Julia's
astonishment, Barbara, who rarely showed emotion, fumbled for her
handkerchief and began to cry. "I love Jim," pursued Barbara, with
that refreshed vehemence that follows a brief interval of tears.
"And you're just as dear to me as my own sisters--dearer! And I
can't BEAR to have you and that DARLING baby here alone, and Jim
off in trailing around after a little FOOL like Ivy Chancellor! I
can't bear it," said Barbara, drying her eyes, which threatened to
overflow again. "It's monstrous! You're--you're wonderful, of
course, Julie, but you can't make me think you're happy! And Jim
is WRETCHED. I've known him since I was a baby, and he can't fool
ME! He can bluff about his work and his club and all that as long
as he pleases! But he can't fool ME; I know he's utterly
miserable."

"And you saw him?" Julia asked.

They were in a little strip of woods just above Richard's cabin
now, and Julia seated herself on the low-hanging branch of an oak.
Her face, as she turned to Barbara, was full of resolute command.

"Sit down, Bab," she said, indicating a thick fallen log a few
feet away. "Tell me all about it."

"Francis would strangle me," Barbara murmured, seating herself
nevertheless. "And there isn't very much to it, anyway," she
added, with a bright air of candour. "I wrote Jim a line, and he
came to our house in Ludbroke Road, and we had a little talk. He's
fatter. He was awfully interested in some knee-cap operation---"

"Babbie!" Julia reproached her.

"And we talked about everything," Barbara hastened to say.

"Me?" Julia asked flatly.

"A little," Barbara admitted. "I had nurse bring the boys in--"

"Oh, Barbara, for God's sake tell me!" Julia said, in an agonized
burst.

"Oh, Julie--if only I'm doing the right thing!" Barbara answered
in distress.

"This IS the right thing," Julia assured her. "This is my affair."

"Francis and Mother--" Barbara began again, hesitatingly. But
immediately she dismissed the doubts with a shake of her head, and
suddenly assuming a confident air, she began: "I'll tell you
exactly what happened, Ju. Jim came one afternoon; I was all
alone, and we had tea. He's very much changed, Ju. He's harder, in
some way, and--well, changed. Jim never used to be able to conceal
his feelings, you know, but now--why, one feels that he's
dissembling all the time! He was so friendly, and cheerful, and
interested--and yet---There was something all wrong. He didn't
exactly EVADE the subject of you and Anna, but he just said 'Yes?'
or 'No?' when I talked of you---"

"I know exactly how," Julia said, wincing at some memory.

"I touched him on the quick finally," Barbara pursued; "something
I said about you made him colour up, that brick-red colour of his-
--"

"I know!" Julia said quickly again.

"But, Julia," Barbara added earnestly, "you've no IDEA how hard it
was! I told him how grieved and troubled we all were by this
silence between you, and I went and got that snapshot Rich took of
Anna, you know, the one with the collies. Well, way in the back of
that picture you were snapped, too, the tiniest little figure, for
you were way down by the road, and Anna close to the porch. But,
my dear, he hardly glanced at Anna; he said in a quick, hushed
sort of voice, 'What's she in black for?' Then I saw your picture
for the first time, and said, 'Why, that must be Julia!'
'Certainly, it's Julia,' he said. I told him your grandmother had
died, and he said, 'But she's still needed there, is she?' That
was the first sign of ANYTHING like naturalness. And, oh, Ju, if
only it had happened that Francis didn't come in then! But he did,
starving for his tea, and wondering who on earth the man that I
was sitting in the dark with was--it was so unfortunate! You know
Francis thinks we've all spoiled Jim, always, and he looked right
over him. I said, 'Francis, you remember my brother?' and Francis
said, with a really insulting accent, 'Perfectly!' Jim said
something about liking London and hoping to settle there, and
Francis said, 'Studdiford, I'm glad you've come to see my wife,
and I hope the affection you two have felt for years won't be hurt
by what I say. But I admire your own wife very deeply, and you've
put her in a most equivocal and humiliating position. I can't
pretend that I hope you'll settle here; you've caused the people
who love you sufficient distress as it is. I don't see that your
staying here is going to make anything any easier, while things
are as they are in California!' My dear," said Barbara with a
sigh, "Francis gets that way sometimes; English people do--there
seems to be a sort of moral obligation upon them to say what's
true, no matter how outrageously rude it sounds!"

"I had no idea Captain Fox felt that way," Julia said, touched.

"Oh, my dear! He's one of your warmest admirers. Well," Barbara
went on, "of course Jim ruffled up like a turkey cock. I didn't
dare say anything, and Francis, having done his worst, was really
pretty fair. Luckily, some other people came in, and later I went
with Jim to the nursery. Then he said to me, 'Do you think Julia's
position is equivocal, Bab?' And I said, 'Jim, I never knew any
one to care so little for public opinion as Julia. But all the
rumour and gossip, the unexplained mystery of it, are very, very
hard for her.' I said, 'Jim, aren't you going back?' and he said,
'Never.' Then he said, 'I think Francis is right. This way is
neither one thing nor the other. It ought to be settled. Not,' he
said, 'that I want to marry again!' I said, 'Jim, you COULDN'T
marry again, don't talk that way!' He said something about my
clinging to old ideas, and I said, 'Jim, don't tell me you have
given up your faith?' He said, very airily, 'I'm not telling you
anything, my dear girl, but if the law will set me free, perhaps
that's the best way of silencing Francis's remarks about Julia's
equivocal position!'"

Julia was silent for a while, staring beyond Barbara, her eyes
like those of a sick person, her face ashen. Barbara began to feel
frightened.

"So that's it," Julia said finally, in a tired, cold voice.

"Ju--it's too dreadful to hurt you this way!" Barbara said. "But
that's not all. The only reason I told you all this was because
Jim may be coming home; he may come on in October, and want to see
you. Francis thinks---But it seems too cruel to let him come on
and take you by surprise!"

"Oh, my God!" said Julia, in a low, tense tone, "what utter wreck
I have made of my life! Why is it," she said, springing up and
beginning to walk again, "why is it that I am so helpless, why
must I sit still and let the soul be torn out of my body! My child
must grow up fatherless--under a cloud---"

"Julie! Julie!" Barbara begged, wild with anxiety, as she kept
pace beside Julia on the dry brown grass. "Dearest, don't, or
you'll make me feel terribly for having told you!"

"Oh, no--no," Julia said, suddenly calm and weary. "You had to
tell me!" The two walked slowly on for a moment, in silence, then
Julia added passionately: "Oh, what a wretched, miserable
business! Oh, Bab, why do I simply have to go from one agony to
another? I'm so tired of being unhappy; I'm so wretched!" Her
voice fell, the fire went out of her tone. "I'm tired," she said,
in a voice that seemed to Barbara curiously in keeping with the
flat, toneless summer twilight, the dull brown hills, the
darkening sky, the dry slippery grass over which a cool swift
breeze was beginning to wander. "If Anna and I could only run away
from it all!" said Julia sombrely.

"Julie, just one thing." Barbara hesitated. "Shall you see Jim?"

Julia paused, and their eyes met in the gloom. Barbara thought she
had never seen anything more marked than the tragic intensity of
the other woman's face. Julia might have been a young priestess,
the problems of the world on her shoulders.

"That I can't say, Bab," she answered thoughtfully. And a moment
later they reached the cabin, and were welcomed by Richie and the
children.




CHAPTER VIII


It was in late September that the mail brought her a note from
Jim. Julia's heart felt a second of paralyzing cramp as she put
her hand on the letter; she read its dozen lines in a haze of
dancing light; the letters seemed to swim together.

Jim wrote that he was at home for a few days, and was most anxious
to see her, and to have a talk that would be of advantage to them
both. For obvious reasons, her home was not suitable; would she
suggest a time and place? He was always hers faithfully, James
Studdiford.

Anna, glowing and delicious, was leaning against Julia's shoulder
as Julia read and reread the little document. The mother looked
down obliquely at the little rose-leaf face, the blue, blue eyes,
the fresh, firm, baby mouth.

"When I am a grown-up girl," Anna said, with her sweet, mysterious
smile, "I shall have letters, and I will write answers, and write
the envelopes, too! And I'll write you letters, Mother, when you
go 'way and leave me with Grandma!"

"Will you?" asked Julia, rubbing the child's soft cheek with her
own.

"Every day!" Anna said. "Who's writing you with that cunning
little owl on the paper, Mother?"

"That's the Bohemian Club owl," Julia evaded, giving Anna only one
fair look at him before she closed the letter. She went to her
desk, and swiftly, unhesitatingly, wrote her reply. Jim must
excuse her, she could not see the advantage of their meeting, she
would much prefer not to see him. Briskly rubbing her blotter over
the flap of the sealed envelope, she had a vision of him,
interrupting his evening of talk with old friends to scratch off
the note to her, and felt that she detested him.

An unhappy week followed, in which Julia had time to feel that
almost any consequences would have been easier to bear than the
unassailable wall of silence and misgiving and doubt that hemmed
her in. Constant nervous terrors weakened her spiritually and
bodily, and she could not bear to have Anna for one moment out of
her sight. Mrs. Page and Mrs. Torney saw notice in the papers of
Jim's return, and suspected the cause of this new agitation in
Julia, but neither dared attempt to force her confidence.

"Men are the limit!" said Mrs. Torney to her sister, one day when
they were sitting together in the kitchen. "As I've said before,
it's a great pity there ain't nothing else to do but marry, and
nothing to marry but men! It's awful to think of the hundreds of
women who spend their happiest hours going about doing the
housework, and planning just what they'd do if their husbands was
to be taken off suddenly! Some girls can set around until they're
blue moulded, and never a feller to ask 'em, and others the
boys'll fret and pleg until they're fit to be tied, with nerves!
Evvy you couldn't marry off if she was Cleopatra on the Nile, and
poor Julia could hang smallpox flags all over her, and every man
in the place'd want her jest the same! He wants her back, you see
if he doesn't!"

"I don't know that he does," said Emeline, knitting needles
flashing slowly in her crippled fingers. "Maybe that's the
trouble."

"What'd he come on for, then?" demanded Mrs. Torney. "Jest showing
off, is he? Or is it another woman? The only difference between
men reely seems to be that some wear baggy pants and own up to
being sultans, and others don't!" She spread her fingers inside
the stocking she was darning, and eyed it severely. "The idea of a
man with a five-year-old girl sashaying round the country this way
is ridiculous, to begin with," said she indignantly.

"Has Ju seen him?" asked Mrs. Page.

"No, I'm pretty sure she hasn't," Mrs. Torney answered. "She acks
more like she was afraid to, than like she ackshally had. She'd be
real relieved to start fighting, but just now she's like a hen
that gets its chickens under its wings, and looks up and round and
about, and don't know whether it's a hawk or a fox or a man with a
knife that's after her!"

"I don't believe Julie hates him," said her mother. "I think she'd
go back to him, if only for Anna's sake--if it seemed best for
Anna."

"For that matter, she'd go keep house for the gorilla at the
Chutes if it seemed best for Anna!" Mrs. Torney concluded sagely.

It was only a day or two later that the telephone rang, and Julia,
answering it, as she always did now, with chill foreboding in her
heart, heard Barbara's voice.

"Julie, dear, is it you? Darling, we want you right away. It's
Dad, Julie--he's terribly ill!" Barbara's voice broke. "He's
terribly ill!"

"What is it?" Julia asked, tense and pale.

"Oh, we don't know!" Barbara gasped. "Julie--we--and Mother's
quite wonderful! Con's coming right away, Janey's here, and we've
wired Ted."

"Barbara, is it as bad as that?"

"I'm afraid so!" And again tears choked Barbara. "Of course we
don't know. He fell, right here in the garden. Think if he'd been
on the road, Julie, or in the street. That was the first thing
Mother said. Mother's too wonderful! Richie was here, they carried
him in. And he wrote Con's and Ted's and your name on a piece of
paper. We saw he was trying to say something, and gave him the
paper, and that's what he wrote! And Aunt Sanna in New York!"

Stricken, and beginning to realize for the first time what an
empty place would be left in the Sausalito group when the kindly
old doctor was gone, Julia hastily dressed herself for the hurried
trip. She must see Jim now; there was a sort of dramatic
satisfaction in the thought that he must know the accident of
their meeting at last to be none of her contriving. And she would
see Richie, too; her heart fluttered at the thought. She sat on
the boat, dreamily watching the gray water rush by, dreamily ready
for whatever might come. The day was dull and soft; boat whistles
droned all about them on the bay; from Alcatraz, shouldering
through an enveloping fog, came the steady ringing of a brass
gong.

Long drifts of fog had crept under the trees in the Toland garden,
the rose bushes were beaded with fine mist, the eaves dripped
steadily. Julia began to be shaken with nervous anticipation of
the moment when she must meet Jim. Would he meet her at the door,
or would they deliberately arrange--these loyal brothers and
sisters--that the dreaded moment should not come until they were
all about her? She gave a quick nervous glance about the big
hallway when a tearful maid admitted her. But it was only Barbara
who came forward, and Barbara's first word was that Jim and Richie
were not there; Dad had sent both on errands. "His mind is
absolutely clear," said Barbara shakenly. She herself was waiting
for an important telephone call, and occasionally pressing a
folded handkerchief to her eyes. The two women kissed, with sudden
tears on both sides, before Julia went noiselessly upstairs.
Constance and Theodora were in their mother's room, Mrs. Toland
with them. The mother had been crying, and was now only trying to
muster sufficient self-control to reenter the sickroom without
giving the beloved patient alarm. Julia's entrance was the signal
for fresh tears; but they all presently brightened a little, too,
and Julia persuaded Mrs. Toland to drink a cup of hot soup, "the
very first thing she's touched all day!" said all the girls
fondly.

Only Janey was with the invalid when Julia went into the sickroom,
a silent, white-faced Janey, who stared at Julia with sombre eyes.
The doctor lay high in pillows, looking oddly boyish in his white
nightgown in spite of his gray hair. A fire flickered in the old-
fashioned polished iron grate; outside the window twilight and the
fog were mingling. The room had some unfamiliar quality of ordered
emptiness already, as if life's highway must be cleared for the
coming of the great Destroyer.

Julia knelt down by the bed and laid her hand over the old man's
hand. To her surprise he opened his eyes. They moved from her face
to the clock on the mantel, as if he had lost count of time, and
had not expected her so soon.

"How are you, Dad?" she said, with infinite tenderness.

"He's better," Janey answered. "Aren't you, darling? You LOOK
better!"

The doctor's look, with its old benevolent twinkle, went from one
girl's face to the other.

"Know--too--much!" he said, with difficulty, in his eyes the
innocent triumph of the child who will not be deceived. Quite
unexpectedly, Julia felt her lip tremble, tears brimmed her eyes.
The invalid saw them, felt one drop hot on his hand.

"No--no--no!" he said, with pitying gentleness. And, with great
effort, he added, "Seen--Jimmy?"

"Not yet," stammered Julia, shaken to her very soul.

The doctor shut his eyes, his fingers still clinging to Julia's.
After perhaps two full minutes of silence, he whispered:

"Be good to Jimmy, Julia! Be good to him."

Julia could not answer. Barbara found her, in her own room, half
an hour later, crying bitterly. It was then quite dark. The two
had a long talk, ended only when Constance came flying in. Dad
seemed better, much brighter, was asking for Richie, wanted to
know if Ned had come.

Constance and Barbara went back to the sickroom, and Julia went
downstairs to find them. She entered the almost dark library,
where Richie and Ned were sitting before the fire. There was some
one with them; Julia knew in an instant who it was. Her heart
began to hammer, her breath failed her. A murmur of friendly low
voices ended with her entrance; the three dim forms rose in the
gloom.

"Con?" asked Richie. Julia touched a wall switch, and the great
lamp on the centre table bloomed into sudden light.

"No, it's Julia--they want you, Rich," she said, "and you, too,
Ned. Con says he's much brighter. He asked for you both."

"Hello, dear, I didn't know you were here," Richie said
affectionately, kindly eyes on her face. "But you mustn't cry,
Ju!" he added gently.

"I--I saw him," Julia said, mingled emotions making speech almost
impossible. "Isn't there ANY hope, Richie?"

"None at all," Jim said, leaving the fireplace to quietly join
Julia and Richie at the centre table.

The unforgotten voice! Every fibre in Julia's body thrilled to
mortal shock. She rallied her courage and endurance sternly; she
must not betray herself. Anger helped her, for she knew him well
enough to know that the situation for him was not devoid of a
certain artistic enjoyment.

"Yes, it may come to-night, it may come to-morrow," Richie
assented sorrowfully. "But it's the end, I'm afraid!"

Julia clung to his arm; never had Richie seemed so dear and good
to her.

"Your mother will die of it, Rich," she said, to say something.
The room seemed to her shouting with Jim's presence; she kept her
eyes on Richie's face. Ned, never more than an overgrown boy, put
his face in his hands and began to sob.

"Sh--h!" Jim warned them. Mrs. Toland came in.

"He's better--he wants to see you boys!" she said, tremulously
happy. Her eyes went from face to face. "Why, what's the matter?"
she demanded. "You don't think it's--do you, Richie? Do you, Jim?"

Richie merely flung up his head and set his lips. Jim put one arm
around her.

"He's pretty ill, dear," he said gently, and Julia found his
smooth tenderness infinitely less bearable than Richie's
bluntness.

"Why, but what are you talking about--what do you mean--I don't
know what you mean!" Mrs. Toland said bewilderedly. "Doctor Barr
has gone home, Richie; he said he wouldn't come back unless we
sent for him!" No one answered her, and as her pitiful look went
from Julia's grave face to Richard's sorrowful one, from Ned's
despairing figure by the fire to Jim's troubled look, terror
seemed to seize her. Her pretty middle-aged face wrinkled; she
began to cry bitterly.

Julia put her in a deep chair, knelt before her, trying rather to
calm than to comfort her, and after a while so far succeeded that
she could take the poor shaken old lady upstairs. She did not
glance again at Jim, although he opened the door for them, and
tried his best to catch her eye.

Between five and six o'clock he was summoned to the sickroom. They
were all there: the girls on their knees, Richard kneeling by his
father, his fingers on the failing pulse. Mrs. Toland was seated,
Julia kneeling beside her, holding both her cold hands. A sound of
subdued sobbing filled the air; no sound came from the dying man
except when a fluttering breath raised his chest. His eyes were
shut; he appeared to be sleeping.

The clock on the mantel struck six, and as if roused, Doctor
Toland stirred a little, and whispered, "Janey!" Poor Janey's head
went down against the white counterpane; she never dreamed that
the little-girl aunt, dead fifty years ago, with apple cheeks
under a slatted sun-bonnet, and more apples in her lunch bag, had
come in a vision of old orchard and sun-bathed river, to put her
warm little hand in her brother's again, and lead him home. And
before the clock struck again, Robert Toland, with not even a
twitch of his kind old face, went smiling away from earth in a
dream of childhood, and Richie, with a finger on the silent pulse,
and Jim, with a hand on the silent heart, had said together:
"Gone!"

An hour later Jim, standing thoughtful at an upper window, looked
down to see Richie bring the runabout to the front door. Down the
steps came Barbara, bare headed, and Julia, in her wide black hat
and flying veil. The three talked for a few moments together, the
light from the open hall door falling on their faces; then Julia
got into the car. She leaned out to say some last word to Barbara,
her face composed and sweetly grave, then turned to Richie, and
they were gone.

Jim would have found it difficult to analyze his own emotion.
Something in that look toward Barbara, so brave and quiet, so
bright with some inward serenity, stirred his heart. He went
downstairs to meet Barbara in the hall.

"Where's Rich?" asked Jim, in the hushed voice that had supplanted
all the usual noise and gayety of the house.

"He'll be right back," Barbara said apathetically. "He's driving
Julie to the boat."

For some reason Jim's heart sank. He had supposed them as
performing only some village errand, at the florist's, the drug
store, or the post office. A certain blank fell upon his spirits;
Julia had her grievance, of course, but she seemed singularly
indifferent to the--well, the appearances of things!

But Julia, alone on the boat, could have laughed in the joy of
escape, in the new sense of freedom on which she seemed to float.
Above all her sympathy for the family she so deeply loved, and
above the sorrow of her own very real personal loss, rose the
intoxicating conviction that Jim's sway over heart and soul was
gone; he was no longer godlike; no longer mysteriously powerful to
hurt or to enchant her; he was just a handsome man nearing forty,
not particularly interesting, not noticeably magnetic, not
remarkable in any way.

She caught the welcoming Anna to her heart when she reached the
Shotwell Street house, telling her sad news to the others over the
child's little shoulder. But the kisses she gave her daughter were
inspired by joy instead of sorrow, and Julia lay down to sleep
that night with a new content, and slept as she had not slept for
months. With a confidence amounting almost to indifference she
faced Jim on the day of the old doctor's funeral, her beauty
absolutely startling in its setting of demure black veil and
trailing sombre garments.

Jim watched her, some curious emotion that was compounded of
resentment and jealousy and astonishment darkening his face. So
dignified, so poised, so strangely, hauntingly lovely she seemed,
so much in demand and so quietly equal to all demands. Jim
flattered his vanity for a while with the assurance that she was
trying to impress as well as evade him, but could not long
preserve the illusion; there was no acting there.

"Julia," he said, when they were all at home again after the
funeral, "I want to see you alone for a few moments, if I may?"

Julia was in the dining-room, busy with a great sheaf of letters.
She gave a quick glance at the chair which Barbara had filled only
a moment ago, as if realizing for the first time that she had been
left alone.

"What is it?" she asked, dryly and unencouragingly.

Jim sat down, leaned back, folded his arms, and looked at her
steadily, in a manner that might have been confusing. But Julia
went on serenely opening, reading, and listing her letters.

"I want to ask how you are getting on, Julie," said Jim at last,
in a hurt tone. "I want to know if there is anything in the world
I can do for you?"

"Nothing, thank you!" Julia said pleasantly. "Financially, I am
very comfortable. You left me I don't know how many thousands in
the Crocker. I've never had one second's worry on that score, even
though I've never touched the capital--as you can easily find
out."

"My dear girl, do you think for one second I doubt you!" Jim said
uncomfortably. "You've been perfectly wonderful to do it, only you
must have scrimped yourself! But it wasn't about that. Surely,
Julia, you and I have things more important to say to each other,"
he added reproachfully.

"I don't know what's more important than money," she assured him
whimsically. "Of course I didn't want to use it at all; I should
have preferred to be self-supporting at any cost," she went on.
"But there was Anna and Mama to consider. And more than that,
there was your name, Jim; I didn't want to start every one talking
of the straits to which your wife had been reduced."

"Oh, for God's sake!" Jim growled. "Don't let's talk of money."
"That was all I meant to say," Julia said politely. "Is Mother
lying down?" she added naturally. Jim jerked his whole body
impatiently.

"I think she is!" he snapped. Julia opened a letter.

"Isn't that a pretty hand?" she asked. "English--it's Mrs.
Lawrence, the Consul's wife. What pretty hands English people
write!"

"You've changed very much," Jim observed, after a sulphurous
silence.

"I have?" Julia asked naively. "In what way?"

"Why didn't you want to see me?"

"Oh---" Julia laid the letter down, and for the first time gave
him her full attention. "I've changed my mind about that, Jim,"
she said frankly. "I thought at first that it was an unwise thing,
but I feel differently now. Of course you know," continued Julia,
with pretty childish gravity, "that for me there can be no
consideration of divorce; I shall never be any other man's wife,
and never be free. But if, as Bab says, you have come to feel that
you want something different, and if you have drifted so far from
your religion as to feel that a legal document can undo what was
solemnly done in the name of God, why then I shan't oppose it. You
can call it desertion or incompatibility, I don't care."

"Who said I wanted a divorce?" Jim demanded, in his ugliest tone.
His face was a dull, heavy red, and veins swelled on his forehead.

"My life is full and happy," Julia pursued contentedly, paying no
attention to his question. "I'm not very exacting, as you know.
Mama needs me, and I have everything I want."

"You talk very easily of divorce," Jim said, in an injured tone,
after a pause. "But is it fair to have it all arranged before I
say a word?"

Julia's answer was only a look--a full, clear, level look that
scorched him like a flame; her cheeks above the black of her gown
burned scarlet; she was growing angry.

Jim played with an empty envelope for a few minutes, fitting a
ringer tip to each corner and lifting it stiffly. Presently he
dropped it, folded his arms, and rested them on the table.

"This is a serious matter," he said gravely. "And we must think
about it. But you must forgive me for saying that it is a great
shock to come home and find you talking that way, Julie. I--God
knows I'm bad enough, but I DON'T think I deserve quite this!"
added Jim gently.

A long interval of silence, for Julia a busy interval, followed.

"When am I going to see Anna?" Jim asked, ending it.

"Whenever you want to," Julia said pleasantly. "I've familiarized
her with your picture; she'll be friendly at once; she always is.
Some day, when you are going to be here, I'll send her over for
the day. She loves Sausalito, and I really believe she'd do poor
Mother good."

"And when shall I come and see you--to talk about things?" Jim
asked humbly.

"My dear Jim," Julia answered briskly, "I cannot see the need of
our meeting again; I think it is most unwise--just a nervous
strain on both sides. What have we to discuss? I tell you that I
am perfectly willing to let you have your way. It's too bad, it's
a thing I detest--divorce; but the whole situation is unfortunate,
and we must make the best of it!"

Jim's stunned amazement showed in a return of his sullen colour
and the fixed glassy look in his eyes.

"What will people think of this, Ju? Every one will have to know
it--it will make a deuce of a lot of talk!" he said, trying to
scare her.

Julia shook her head, with just a suggestion of a smile.

"Much less than you think, Jim," she answered sensibly. "Society
long ago suspected that something was wrong; the announcement of a
divorce will only confirm it."

"We'll have the whole crowd of them buzzing about our heads," Jim
said, determined to touch her serenity by one phase or another.

"Oh, no, we won't!" Julia returned placidly. "The only
circumstances under which there would have been buzzing would have
been if I had tried to keep my place in society. I dropped out,
and they let me go without a murmur. No buzzing from San Francisco
society ever reaches Shotwell Street, and as for you, you'll be in
London."

"How do you know I'll be in London?" Jim growled, utterly
nonplussed.

Julia gave him a bright look over a letter, but did not answer,
and the man fell to worrying an envelope again. Moments passed,
the autumn twilight fell, Julia began to stack her letters in neat
piles.

Presently she quietly rose, and quietly left the room, without a
word, without a backward glance. Jim sat on in the dusk, staring
moodily ahead of him, his eyes half shut, the fingers of one big
hand drumming gently on the table.

A few days later he went out to Shotwell Street to see her. Julia
met him very quietly, and presented the little Anna with the
solicitous interest in the child's manner that she would have
shown had Jim been any casual friend. Anna, who was lovely in a
pale pink cotton garment a little too small for her, looked
seriously at her father, submitted to his kisses, her wondering
eyes never moving from his face, and wriggled out of his arms as
soon as she could.

"My God! She's beautiful, isn't she?" said Jim, under his breath.

"She looks very nice when she's clean and good," Julia agreed
practically, kissing Anna herself.

"'My God's' a bad word," Anna said gravely to her father, "isn't
it, Mother?"

"I wouldn't like to hear you say it," Julia answered. "Now trot
out to Aunt Regina, dear, and ask her to give you your lunch.
Mother'll be there immediately.

"She's exquisite," Jim said, when the child was gone. "You all
over again, Ju!"

"She's smarter than I was." Julia smiled dispassionately. "I've
taught her to read--simple things, of course; she writes a little,
and does wonders with her numerical chart. She's very cunning, she
has an unusual little mind, and occasionally says something that
proves she thinks!"

A silence followed. Sunshine was streaming into the sitting-room;
nasturtiums bloomed in Julia's window boxes; the net curtains
fanned softly to and fro in the soft autumn air. In the city, a
hundred whistles shrilled for noon.

"I hardly knew the place," Jim said, searching for something to
say. "You've made it over--the whole block looks better!"

"Gardens have come into fashion," Julia explained; "the Mission is
a wonderful place for gardens. And the change in my mother is more
marked," she went on, with perfunctory pleasantness; "you would
hardly know her. She is much thinner, of course, but so bright and
contented, and so brave!"

"I am going to meet her, I hope?" Jim suggested. Julia looked
troubled.

"I hardly see how," she said regretfully. "As things are I can't
exactly ask you to lunch, Jim. It would be most unnatural, and
they--they look to me for a certain principle," she went on. "They
know what these four years have meant for me; I couldn't begin now
to treat the whole thing casually and cheerfully."

"I don't expect you to," Jim said quickly. "I'm not taking this
lightly. I only want to think the thing well over before any step
is taken that we might regret."

Again Julia answered him with only a tolerant, bright look. She
stood up and busied herself with the potted fern that stood on the
centre table, breaking off dead leaves and gathering them into the
palm of her hand. Jim, feeling clumsy and helpless, stood up, too.
And as he watched her, a sudden agony of admiration broke out in
his heart. Her head was bent a little to one side, as if the
weight of the glorious braids bowed it; her thick lashes hid her
eyes; her sweet, firm mouth moved a little as she broke and
straightened the fern. Where the wide collar of her checked gown
was turned back at her throat, a triangle of her soft skin showed,
as white and pure as the white of daisy petals; her firm young
breast moved regularly under the fresh crisp gingham; the folds of
her skirt were short enough to show her slender ankles and square-
toed sensible low shoes tied with wide bows.

"You used not to be so cold, Julie," Jim said, baffled and
uncomfortable.

"I am not cold," she answered mildly. "I never was a very
demonstrative--never a very emotional person, I think. Three years
ago--two years ago, even--I would have gone on my knees to you,
Jim, begged you to come back, for Anna's sake as well as my own.
But that time has gone by. This life, I've come to see, is far
better for Anna than any child in our old set leads, and for me--
well, I'm happy. I never was so happy, or busy, or necessary, in
my life, as I am now."

"Do you mean that there's NO chance of a reconciliation?" Jim
asked huskily. Julia gave him a glance of honest surprise.

"Jim," she asked crisply, "do you mean that you came on with the
hope of a reconciliation? I thought you told Barbara something
very different from that!"

"I don't know what I came on for. I wish Barbara would mind her
own business," said Jim, feeling himself at a disadvantage.

"My dear Jim," Julia said with motherly kindness, "I know you so
well! You came on here determined to get a divorce, you want to be
free, you may already have in mind some other woman! But I've hurt
your feelings by making it all easy for you--by coming over to
your side. You wanted a fuss, tears, protests, a convulsion among
your old friends. And you find, instead, that all San Francisco
takes the situation for granted, and that I do, too. I've made my
own life, I have Anna, and more than enough money to live on; you
have your freedom; every one's satisfied."

"That's nonsense and you know it!" Jim exclaimed angrily. "There's
not one word of truth in it!" He began to pull on his gloves, a
handsome figure in his irreproachable trim black sack suit with
low oxfords showing a glimpse of gray hose, and an opal winking in
his gray silk scarf. "There's absolutely no reason in the world
why you should consider yourself as more or less than my wife," he
said. "There's no object in this sort of reckless talk. We've been
separated for a few years; it's no one's business but our own to
know why!"

"Oh, Jim--Jim!" Julia said, shaking her head.

"Don't talk that way to me!" he said fiercely. "I tell you I'm
serious! It's all nonsense--this talk of divorce! Why," he came so
near, and spoke in so menacing a tone, that Julia perforce lifted
her eyes to his, "this situation isn't all of my making," he said.
"I've not been ungenerous to you! Can't you be generous in your
turn, and talk the whole thing over reasonably?"

"I can't see the advantage of TALKING!" Julia answered in faint
impatience.

"No, because you want it your own way," said Jim. "You expect me
to give up my child completely, you refuse me even a hearing, you
won't discuss it!"

"But what do you want to discuss?" protested Julia. "The whole
situation is perfectly clear--we shall only quarrel!"

How well she knew the look he gave her, the hurt look of one whose
sentiment is dashed by cool reason! He suddenly caught her by the
shoulders.

"Look here, Julia!"

"Ah, Jim, please don't!" She twisted in a vain attempt to escape
his grip.

"Please don't what?"

"Don't--touch me!"

Jim dropped his hands at once, stepped back, with a look of one
mortally hurt.

"Certainly not--I beg your pardon!" he said punctiliously. He took
up his hat. "When do I see you again, Julia? Will you dine with me
to-morrow? Then we can talk."

"No, I don't think so," Julia said, after reflection.

"Have you another engagement?"

"Certainly not!" There was almost a flash of amusement in her
face; her glance toward the kitchen spoke volumes for the nature
of her engagements.

"Why do you say no, then?" asked Jim.

"Because I prefer not to do so," Julia answered, with sudden
spirit. "We look at this thing very differently, Jim," she added
roundly. "To me it is a tragedy--the saddest thing that ever
happened in my life; that you and I should have loved each other,
and should be less than nothing to each other now! It's like a
sorrow, something shameful, to hide and to forget. For years I was
haunted by the horror of a divorce, Jim; I never wrote to you, I
never begged you to come back, just because I was afraid of it! I
used to say to myself in the first awful weeks in this house:
'Never mind--it isn't as if we were divorced; we may be separated,
we may be estranged, but we are still man and wife!'" Tears came
to Julia's eyes, she shook her head as if to shake them away.
"I've hungered for you, Jim, until it seemed as if I must go mad!"
she went on, looking far beyond him now, and speaking in a low,
rapt voice as if to herself. "I've felt," she said, "as if I'd die
for just one more kiss from you, die just to have you take my big
coat off once more, and catch me in your arms, as you used to do
when we came back from dinner or the theatre! But one can't go on
suffering that way," said Julia, giving him a swift, uncertain
smile, "and gradually the pain goes, and the fever dies away, and
nothing is left but the cold, white scar!"

Jim had been staring at her like a man in a trance. Now he took a
step toward her, lightly caught her in one big arm.

"Ah, but Julia, wouldn't the love come back?" he asked tenderly,
his face close to her own. "Couldn't it all be forgotten and
forgiven? You've suffered, dear, but I've suffered, too. Can't we
comfort each other?"

"Please don't do that," Julia said coldly, wrenching herself free.
"This is no whim with me; I'm not following a certain line of
conduct because it's most effective. I've changed. I don't want to
analyze and dissect and discuss it; as I say, it seems to me too
sacred, too sad, to enjoy talking about!"

"You've not changed!" Jim asserted. "Women don't change that way."

"Then I'm not like other women," Julia said hotly. "Do believe me,
Jim. It's all just gone out of my life. You don't seem like the
man I loved, who was so sweet and generous to me. I've not
forgotten that old wonderful time; I just don't connect you with
it. You could kiss me a thousand times now, and it would only seem
like--well, like any one else! I look at you as one might look on
some old school friend, and wonder if I ever really loved you!"

She stopped, looking at him almost in appeal. Jim stood quite
still, staring fixedly at her; they remained so for a long minute.

"I see," he said then, very quietly. "I'm sorry."

And without another word he turned to the hall door and was gone.
Julia stood still in the hall for a few minutes, curiously numb.
All this was very terrible, very far reaching in its results, very
important, but she could not feel it now. She did feel very tired,
exhausted in every fibre of her body, confused and weary in mind.
She put her head in the kitchen door only long enough to say that
she was not hungry, and went upstairs to fling herself on her bed,
grateful for silence and solitude at last.

To Jim the world was turned upside down. He could hardly credit
his senses. His was not a quick brain; processes of thought with
him were slow and ruminative; he liked to be alone while he was
thinking. When he left Julia he went down to his club, found a
chair by a library window, and brooded over this unexpected and
unwelcome turn of events, viewing from all angles this new blow to
his pride. He did not believe her protestations of a change of
heart, nothing in his life tended to make such a belief easy. But
her coldness and stubbornness hurt him and upset the plans he had
been allowing to form of late in his mind.

All his life he had been following, with sunny adaptability, the
line of the least resistance. Thrown out of his groove by the
jealousy and resentment of the dark time in his married life, Jim
had realized himself as fairly cornered by Fate, and had run away
from the whole situation rather than own himself beaten. Rather
than admit that he must patiently accept what was so galling to
his pride, he had seized upon any alternative, paid any price.

And Germany had not been at all unpleasant. There was novelty in
every phase of his home and public life; there was his work; and,
for at least the first year, there was the balm for his conscience
that he would soon be going home to Julia. He had allowed himself
the luxury of moods, was angry with her, was scornful, was
forgiving. He showed new friends her beautiful pictures--told them
that she was prettier than that, no picture could do justice to
her colour.

Among the new friends there had been two sweet plain Englishwomen:
the widowed Lady Eileen Hungerford, and her sister, the Honourable
Phyllis. These had found the rich young American doctor charming,
and without a definite word or look had managed to convey to him
the assurance of their warmest sympathy. They could only guess at
his domestic troubles, but a hundred little half allusions and
significant looks lent spice to the friendship, and Jim became a
great favourite in the delightful circle the Englishwomen had
drawn about them.

The midsummer vacation was spent, with another doctor, in Norway,
and in September Jim went for a week or two to London, where
Eileen and Phyllis, delicately considerate of the possible claims
of the unknown wife, nevertheless persuaded him that he would be
mad to decline the offer of the big German hospital. So back to
Berlin he went, and in this second winter met old Professor
Sturmer, and Senta, his wife.

Senta was a Russian, the tiniest of women, wild, beautiful,
nineteen. She was a most dramatic and appealing little figure, and
she knew it well. She smoked and drank just as the young men of
her set did, she danced like a madwoman, she sang and rode and
skated with the fury of a witch. She was like a child, over-
dressed, overjewelled, her black hair fantastically arranged;
always talking, always unhappy, a perfect type of the young female
egotist. She liked to use reckless expressions, to curl herself up
on a couch, in a room dimly lighted, and scented with burning
pastilles, and discuss her marriage, her age, her appearance, her
effect upon other women. Senta's was an almost pathetic and very
obvious desire to be considered daring, pantherine, seductive,
dangerous.

Jim, fancying he understood her perfectly, played into her hand.
He would not flirt with her, but he took her at her own valuation,
and they saw a good deal of each other. Senta confessed to him,
read him love letters, wrote him dashing, penitent little notes,
and Jim scolded her in a brotherly way, laughed at her, and
sometimes delighted her by forbidding her to do this or that, or
by masterfully flinging some cherished note or photograph of hers
into the fire. He loved to hear her scold her maid in Russian; it
seemed to him very cunning when this stately gipsy of a child took
her seat in her box at the opera, or flung herself into the
carriage, later, all the more a madcap because of three hours of
playing the lady. He exchanged smiling looks over her little dark
head with her husband, when he dined at the Sturmers'; the good
professor was far more observing than was usually supposed; he
knew more of Jim's character, it is probable, than Jim did
himself; he knew that Senta was quite safe with the young
American, and he liked him. But Senta, who was quite unscrupulous,
was slow to realize it. She found this brotherly petting and
scolding very well for a time, but months went by, a whole year
went by, and there was no change in their relationship. Senta was
only precocious, she was neither clever nor well educated; she
based her campaign on the trashy novels she read, and deliberately
set herself to shake Jim from his calm pleasure in her society.

Then, suddenly, Jim was bored. Charm dropped from her like a rich,
enveloping cloak, and left only the pitiful little nude
personality, a bundle of childish egotisms and shallow pretences.
Once he had been proud to escort her everywhere, now her
complacent assumption that he should do so annoyed him; once he
had laughed out heartily at her constant interruption of the old
professor, her naive contention that she was never to be for one
second ignored; now she only worried him, and made him impatient.
Her invitations poured upon him, her affectedly deep voice,
reproachful or alluring, haunted his telephone. She challenged him
daringly, wickedly, across dinner tables, or from the centre of a
tea-table group, to say "why he didn't like her any more?"

Jim went to Italy, and Senta, chaperoned by her sister-in-law, a
gaunt woman of sixty, went, too, turning up at his hotels with the
naughty grace of a spoiled child, sure to be welcome. She eyed him
obliquely, while telling him that "people were beginning to talk."
She laughed, with a delight that Jim found maddening, when they
chanced to meet some friends from Berlin in a quiet side street in
Rome. Jim cut his vacation short, and went back to work.

This angered Senta for the first time, and perhaps began to
enlighten her. She came sulkily back to Berlin, and began to
spread abroad elaborate accounts of a quarrel between Jim and
herself. Jim so dreaded meeting her that he quite gave up
everything but men's society, but he could not quite escape from
the knowledge that the affair was discussed and criticised.

And at this most untimely moment old Professor Stunner died,
leaving a somewhat smaller fortune to his little widow than she
had expected, and naming his esteemed young friend, Herr Doctor
Studdiford, as her guardian and his executor. This again gave
Senta the prominence and picturesqueness she loved; to Jim it was
a most deplorable mischance; it was with difficulty that he
acquitted himself of his bare duty in the matter, his distaste for
his young ward growing stronger every moment. For weeks there was
no hour in which he was not made exquisitely uncomfortable by her
attitude of chastened devotion; eventually the hour came in which
he had to stab her pride, and stab deep. It was an ugly,
humiliating, exasperating business, and when at last it was over,
Jim found himself sick of Berlin, and yet sullenly unready to go
home to California, as if he had failed, as if he were under even
so faint a cloud.

Just then came a letter from Eileen, another from Phyllis. Wasn't
he ever coming to London any more? London was waiting to welcome
him. They had opened their little house in Prince's Gate, the
season was beginning, it was really extraordinarily jolly. Did he
know anything of the surgeon, Sir Peveril McCann? He had said such
charming things of Doctor Studdiford. He had said--but no, one
wasn't going to tell him anything that might, untold, make him
curious enough to come!

Jim went to London, revelling in clear English speech after years
of Teutonic gutturals, and rejoicing in the clean, clear-cut
personalities with which he came in contact. He loved the
wonderful London drawing-rooms, the well-ordered lives, the
atmosphere of the smart clubs and hotels, the plays and pictures
and books that were discussed and analyzed so inexhaustibly.

He found Eileen and Phyllis more charming than ever; and he very
much admired their aunt, stately Lady Violet Dray, and their
bright, clever, friendly cousin Ivy, who was as fresh and breezy
as the winds that blew over her native heather. Ivy was slender
and vivacious; her face was thin and a little freckled, and
covered with a fine blond down, which merged on her forehead into
the straight rise of her carrot-coloured hair. Her eyes were
sharply blue, set in thick, short, tawny lashes. She was an
enthusiastic sportswoman, well informed on all topics of the day,
assured of her position and sure of herself, equally at home in
her riding tweeds and mud-splashed derby, and the trailing satin
evening gowns that left her bony little shoulders bare, and were
embellished by matchless diamonds or pearls. There was no
sentiment in her, her best friends were of both sexes and all
ages, but she attached Jim to her train, patronized and bullied
him, and they became good friends.

Mrs. Chancellor talked well, and talked a great deal, and she
stimulated Jim to talk, too. Never in his life had so constant a
demand been made upon his conversational powers; and every hour
with her increased his admiration for Ivy and lessened his
valuation of his own wisdom. She was a thorough Englishwoman,
considering everything in life desirable only inasmuch as it was
British. Toward America her attitude was one of generous laughter
touched with impatience. She never for one moment considered
seriously anything American. Mrs. Chancellor thought all of it
really too funny-"rarely too fenny," as she pronounced it. Only
one thing made her more angry than the defence of anything
American, and that was dispraise of anything British. The history
of England was sacred to her: London was the crown and flower of
the world's civilization; English children, English servants,
English law, were all alike perfect, and she also had her
country's reverence for English slang, quoting and repeating it
with fondest appreciation and laughter. Nothing pleased her more
than to find Jim unfamiliar with some bit of slang that had been
used in England for twenty years; her laughter was fresh and
genuine as she explained it, and for days afterward she would tell
her friends of his unfamiliarity with what was an accepted part of
their language.

She took him to picture galleries, bewildering him with her swift
decisions. Jim might come to a stand before a portrait by Sargent.

"Isn't this wonderful, Ivy Green?" It was his own name for her,
and she liked it.

"That?" A sweeping glance would appraise it. "Yes, of course, it's
quite too extraordinary," she would concede briskly. "An
impossible creature, of course; one feels that he was laughing at
her all the time--it's not his best work, rarely!" And she would
drag Jim past forty interesting canvases to pounce upon some
obscure, small painting in a dark corner. "There!" she would say
triumphantly, "isn't that astonishing! So kyawiously frank, if you
know what I mean? It's most amazing--his sense of depth, if you
know what I mean? Rarely, to splash things on in that way, and to
grasp it." A clawed little hand would illustrate grasping. "It's
astonishing!"

Jim, staring at a picture of some sky, some beach, and a face of
rock, would murmur a somewhat bewildered appreciation, looking out
of the corner of his eye, at the same time, at the attractive
gondolier singing to his pretty lady passengers, on the right, or
the nice young peasant nursing her baby in a sunny window while
her mother peeled apples, on the left.

"Of course, it's the only thing here, this year, absolutely the
only one," Mrs. Chancellor would conclude. "The rest is just one
huge joke. I know Artie Holloway--Sir Arthur, he is--quite well,
and I told him so! He's a director."

"But I don't see how you know so much about it!" Jim would say
admiringly.

"One must know about such things, my dear boy," she always
answered serenely. "One isn't an oyster, after all!"

It was this dashing lady and not Barbara who first brought Jim's
mind to a sense of his own injustice to Julia, or rather to a
realization that the situation, as it stood, was fair to neither
Julia nor himself. Not that he ever mentioned Julia to Ivy; but
she knew, of course, of Julia's existence, and being a shrewd and
experienced woman she drew her own conclusions. One day she
expressed herself very frankly on the subject.

"You've taken the rooms above Sir Peveril's, eh?" she asked him.

"Well, yes," Jim answered, after a second's pause. "They're bully
rooms!"

"Oh, rather--they're quite the nicest in town," she stated. "But,
I say, my dear boy, wasn't the rent rather steep?"

"Not terrible." He mentioned it. "And I've taken 'em for five
years," he added.

"For--eh?" She brought her sandy lashes together and studied him
through them. "You're rarely going to stay then, you nice child?"

"Yes, Grandmother dear. Sir Peveril wants me. I've taken his
hospital work; people are really extraordinarily kind to me!" Jim
summarized.

"Oh, you've been vetted, there's no question of that," she agreed
thoughtfully. They were at tea in her own drawing-room, which was
crowded with articles handsome and hideous, Victorian lace tidies
holding their own with really fine old furniture, and exquisite
bits of oil or water colour sharing the walls with old steel
engravings in cumbersome frames. Now Ivy leaned back in her chair,
and stirred her tea, not speaking for a few minutes.

"There's just one thing," she said presently. "Before you come
here to stay, put your house in order. Don't leave everything at
haome in a narsty mess that'll have to be straightened aout later,
if you know what I mean? Get that all straight, and have it
understood, d'ye see?"

The colour came into Jim's face at so unexpected an attack, yet
speech was a relief, too.

"I don't know whether I CAN straighten it out," he confessed, with
a nervous laugh.

"It's not a divorce, eh?"

"No--not exactly."

"The gell's gone home to her people?"

"Yes." Jim cleared his throat. "Yes, she has."

"And there's a kiddie?"

"Anna--yes."

"Well, now." Mrs. Chancellor straightened in her chair, set her
cup down on a nearby table. "I take it the gell was the injured
one, eh?" said she.

Jim was a little surprised to find himself enjoying this cross-
examination immensely.

"Well--no. She had no definite cause to feel injured," he said.
"We quarrelled, and I came away in a hurry---"

"What, after a first quarrel?"

"No--o. It had been going on a long time."

"Is the cause of it still existing?" Mrs. Chancellor asked in a
businesslike way, after a pause.

"Well--yes."

"Can't be removed, eh? It's not religion?"

"It's an old love affair of hers," Jim admitted. The lady's eyes
twinkled.

"And you're jealous?" she smiled. But immediately her face grew
sober. "I see--she still cares for him, or imagines she does," she
said.

Jim felt it safest to let this guess stand.

"Of course, if she won't she won't," pursued Mrs. Chancellor
comfortably. "But the best thing you could do would be to bring
her on here!"

Jim shook his head sullenly and set his jaw.

"She won't, eh?" asked the lady, watching him thoughtfully.

"I don't want to do that," Jim persisted stubbornly.

"YOU don't want to?" She meditated this. "Yet she's young, and
beautiful, and presentable?" she asked, nodding her own head
slowly as he nodded affirmatives. "Yes, of course. Well, it's too
bad. One would have liked to meet her, take her about a bit. And
it would help you more than any one thing, my dear boy. Oh, don't
shake your head! Indeed it would. However, you must be definite,
one way or the other. You must either admit outright that you're
divorced, or you must tell an acceptable story. As it is--one
doesn't know what to say--whether she's impossible in some way--
just what the matter is, if you know what I mean?"

"I see," Jim said heavily.

"Go have a talk with her," commanded Mrs. Chancellor brightly.
"Finish it up, one way or another. You're doing her an injustice,
as it is, and you're not just to yourself. One can't shut a
marriage up in a box, you know, and forget it. There's always
leakage somewhere--much better make a clean breast of the whole
thing! You're not the first person who's made an unfortunate early
marriage, you know!"

"I loved my wife," said Jim, in vague, resentful self-defence.
"I'm naturally a domestic man. I loved my little girl---"

"Certainly you did," Mrs. Chancellor interrupted crisply. "And
perhaps she did, too! The details are all the same, you know. Some
people make a success of the thing, some people fail. I've been
married. I'm a little older than you are in years, and ages older
in experience--I know all about it. In every marriage there are
the elements of success, and in every one the makings of a
perfectly justifiable divorce. Some women couldn't live with a
saint who was a king and a Rothschild into the bargain; others
marry scamps and are perfectly happy whether they're being totally
ignored or being pulled around by the hair! But if you've made a
failure, admit it. Don't sulk. You'll find that doing something
definite about it is like cleaning the poison out of a wound;
you'll feel better! There, now, you've had your scolding, and
you've taken it very nicely. Ring for some hot water, and we'll
talk of something else!"

On just this casual, kindly advice Jim really did go home,
prepared to be very dignified with Julia; and to make the
separation definite and final, if not legal, or to bring her back,
however formally, as his wife, exactly as he saw fit.

And then came the meeting in the Toland library, when in one
stunning flash he saw her as she was: beautiful, dignified, and
charming, a woman to whom all eyes turned naturally and
admiringly, grave, sweet, and wise in a world full of pretence and
ignorance, selfishness and shallowness.

She spoke, and her voice went through him like a sword, a mist
rose before his eyes. He tried to remember that bitter resentment
upon which his pride had fed for more than four long years; he
battled with a mad desire to catch her in his arms, and to cry to
her and to all the world, "After all, you are still mine!"

He watched her, her beauty as fresh to him as if he had never seen
it before. Had those serious eyes, turned to Richie with such
sisterly concern, and so exquisitely blue in the soft lamplight,
ever met his with love and laughter brightening them? Had the
kindly arms that went so quickly about his mother, in her trouble,
ever answered the pressure of his own? She could look at him
dispassionately, entirely forgetful of herself in the presence of
death, but in the very sickroom his eyes could not leave her
little kneeling figure; whenever she spoke, he felt his heart
contract with a spasm of pain. It seemed to him that if he could
kneel before her, and feel the light pressure of her linked hands
about his neck, and have her lay that soft, sweet cheek of hers
against his, in heavenly token of forgiveness, he would be ready
to die of joy.

How far Julia was from this mood he was soon to learn, and no
phase of their courtship eight years ago had roused in him such
agonies of jealousy and longing as beset him now, when Julia,
quiet of pulse and level eyed, convinced him that she could very
contentedly exist without him.

All these things went confusedly through Jim's mind, as he sat at
his club window, staring blankly down at the dreary summer
twilight in the street. The club was a temporary wooden building,
roomy and comfortable enough, but facing on all four sides the
devastation of the great earthquake. Here and there a small brick
building stood in the ashy waste, and on the top of Nob Hill the
outline of the big Fairmont Hotel rose boldly against the gloom.
But, for the most part, the rising hills showed only one ruined
brick foundation after another, broken flights of stone steps
leading down to broken sidewalks, twisted, discoloured railings
smothered in rank, dry grass. Through this wreckage cable cars
moved, brightly lighted, and loaded with passengers, and to-night,
in the dusk, a steady wind was blowing, raising clouds of fine,
blinding dust.

Jim stared at it all heavily, his mind strangely attuned to the
dreary prospect. He felt puzzled and confused; he wanted to see
Julia again, to have her forgive and comfort him. When he thought
of the old times, of the devotion and tenderness he had taken so
much for granted, a sort of sickness seized him; he could have
groaned aloud. Only one thought was intolerable: that she would
not forgive him, and let him make up to her for the lost years,
and show her how deeply he loved her still!

He mused upon the exactions she might make, the advantages that
would appeal to her. Not jewels--she must have more jewels now
than she would ever wear, safely stored away somewhere. He
remembered giving her a certain chain of pearls, with a blinding
vision of the white young throat they encircled, and the kiss he
had set there with the gift. No, jewels were for such as Senta,
not for grave, stately Julia.

Nor would position tempt her. She was too wise to long for it; the
glory of a London season meant nothing to her; position was only a
word. She was happier in the Shotwell Street house, clipping roses
on a foggy morning; she was happier far when she scrambled over
the rough trails of the mountain with Richie than ever London
could make her. Position and wealth might have their value for
Ivy, but Julia cared as little as a bird for either.

And now it came to him that she was infinitely more fine, more
beautiful, and more clever than Senta, and that her pure and
fragrant freshness, her simple directness, her candid likes and
dislikes, would make Ivy seem no more than a jaded sophist, a
quoter of mere words, a worshipper of empty form.

To have Julia in London! To take her about, her bright face
dimpling in the shadow of a flowered hat, or framed in furs, or to
see her at the tea table, a shining slipper showing under the
flowing lines of her gown, the lovely child beside her, at once
enhancing and rivalling the mother's beauty--Jim's heart ached
with the pain and rapture of the dream.

He was roused by Richie, who came limping into the club library,
and over whose tired face came a bright smile at the sight of Jim.

"Hello!" said Richie, taking an opposite chair. His expression
grew solicitous at the sight of Jim's haggard face. "Headache, old
boy?" he asked sympathetically.

Jim shook his head. The big room was almost dark now, and they had
it quite to themselves.

"Thinking what a rotten mess I've made of everything, Rich," Jim
said desperately.

Richie took out a handkerchief and wiped the palms of his hands,
but did not answer.

"She'll never forgive me, I know that," Jim presently said. And as
Richie was again silent, he added: "Do you think she ever will?"

"I don't know," poor Richie said hesitatingly. "She's awfully
kind--Julia."

"She's an angel!" Jim agreed fervently. He sat with his head in
his hands for a few moments. Then he cleared his throat and said
huskily: "Look here, you know, Rich, I'm not such an utter damn
fool as I seem in this whole business. I can't explain, and,
looking back now, it all seems different; but I had a grievance,
or thought I had---God knows it wasn't awfully pleasant for me to
go away. But I HAD a reason."

"It wasn't anything you didn't know about before you were married,
I suppose?" asked Richie, with what Jim thought unearthly
prescience.

"No," Jim answered, with a startled look.

"Nor anything you'd particularly care to have the world know or
suspect?" pursued Richie. "Not anything Julia could change?"

"No," Jim said again. Richard leaned back in his chair.

"Some scrap with her people, or some old friends she wanted to
hang on to," he mused. Jim did not speak. "Well," said Richie,
"there would be plenty of people glad to be near Julia on any
terms."

"Oh, I know that," Jim said. And after a moment he burst out
again: "Richie, am I all wrong? Is it ALL on my side?"

"Lord, don't ask me," Richie said hastily. "The older I grow the
less I think I know about anything."

There was a silence. Richard clamped the arms of his chair with
big bony fingers and frowned thoughtfully at the floor.

"I wish to God I did know what to advise you, Jim,"  he said
presently. "I'd die for her--she knows that. But she's rare,
Julia; it's like trying to deal with some delicate frail little
lady out of Cranford, like trying to guess what Emily Bronte might
like, or Eugenie de Guerin! Julia's got life sized up, she likes
it--I don't know whether this conveys anything to you or not!--but
she likes it as much as if it was part of a play. You don't matter
to her any more; I don't; she sees things too big. She's quite
extraordinary; the most extraordinary person I ever knew, I think.
There's a completeness, a FINISH about her. She's not waiting for
any self-defence from you, Jim. It won't do you any good to tell
her why you did this or that. You thought this was justified, you
thought that was--certainly, she isn't disputing it. You did what
you did; now she's going to abide by it. You never dreamed thus
and so--very well, the worse for you! You want to hark back to
something that's long dead and gone; all right, only abide by your
decision. And afterward, when you realize that she's a thousand
times finer than the women you compare her to, and try to make her
like, then don't come crying to HER!"

A long silence, then Jim stood up.

"Well, I've made an utter mess of it, as I began by saying!" he
said, with a grim laugh. "Going to dine here, Rich? Let's eat
together. Here"--one big clever hand gave Richard just the help he
needed--"let me help you, old boy!"

"I thought I'd go home to Mill Valley," Richard said. "I can't
catch anything before the six-forty, but the horse is in the
village, and my boy will scare me up some soup and a salad. I'd
rather go. I like to wake in my own place."

"I wish you'd let me go with you, Rich," Jim said, with a
gentleness new to him. "I'm so sick of everything. I can't think
of anything I'd like so well."

"Sure, come along," Richard said, touched. "Everything's pretty
simple, you know, but I'll telephone Bruce and have him---"

"Cut out the telephoning," Jim interrupted. "Bread and coffee'll
do. And a fire, huh?"

"Sure," Richard said again, "there's always a fire."

"Great!" Jim approved. "We can smoke, and talk about---"

"About Ju," Richie supplied, with a gruff little laugh, as he
paused.

"About Ju," Jim repeated, with a long sigh.

Two days later he went to see her, to beg her to be his wife
again. He asked her to forget and forgive the past, to trust him
once more, to give him another chance to make her happy. He spoke
of the Harley Street house, of the new friends she would find, of
Barbara's nearness with the boys that Julia loved so well. He
spoke of Anna; for Anna's sake they must be together; their little
girl must not be sacrificed. Anna should have the prettiest
nursery in London, and in summer they would go down to Barbara,
and the cousins should play together.

Julia listened attentively, her head a little on one side, her
eyes following the movements of Anna herself, who was digging
about under the rose bushes in the backyard. Julia and Jim sat on
the steps that ran down from the kitchen porch. It was a soft,
hazy afternoon, with filmy streaks of white crossing the pale blue
sky, and sunshine, thin and golden, lying like a spell over
Julia's garden.

"I was a fool," said Jim. "There--I can't say more than that, Ju.
And I've paid for my folly. And, dearest, I'm so bitterly sorry! I
can't explain it. I don't understand it myself--I only know that
I'd give ten years off the end of my life to have the past five to
live over again. Forgive me, Ju. It's all gone out of my heart
now, all that old misery, and I never could hurt you again on that
score. It DOESN'T EXIST, any more, for me. Say that you'll forgive
me, and let me be the happiest and proudest man in the world--how
happy and proud--taking my wife and baby to England!"

The hint of a frown wrinkled Julia's forehead, her eyes were
sombre with her own thoughts.

"Think what it would mean to Mother, and to Bab, and to all of
us," Jim pursued, as she did not speak. "They've been so worried
about it--they care so much!"

"Yes, I know!" Julia said quickly, and fell silent again.

"Is it your own mother's need of you?" the man asked after a
pause.

"No." Julia gave a cautious glance at the kitchen door behind her.
"No--Aunt May is wonderful with her. Muriel's at home a good deal,
and Geraldine very near," she said. "And more than that, this
separation between you and me worries Mother terribly; she doesn't
understand it. She's very different in these days, Jim, so gentle
and good and brave--I never saw such a change! No, she'd love to
have me go if it was the best thing to do--it's not that---"

Her voice dropped on a note of fatigue. Her eyes continued to
dwell on the child in the garden.

"I've done all I can do," Jim said. "Don't punish me any more!"

Julia laughed in a worried fashion, not meeting his eyes.

"There you are," she said, faintly impatient, "assuming that I am
aggrieved about it, assuming that I am sitting back, sulking, and
waiting for you to humiliate yourself! My dear Jim, I'm not doing
anything of the kind. I don't hold you as wholly responsible for
all this--how could I? I know too well that I myself am--or was--
to blame. All these years, when people have been blaming you and
pitying me, I've longed to burst out with the truth, to tell them
what you were too chivalrous to tell! For your sake and Anna's I
couldn't do it, of course, but you may imagine that it's made me a
silent champion of yours, just the same! But our marriage was a
mistake, Jim," she went on slowly and thoughtfully. "It was all
very well for me to try to make myself over; I couldn't make you!
I never should have tried. Theoretically, I had made a clean
breast of it, and was forgiven; but actually, the law was too
strong. It's hard and strange that it should be so, isn't it? I
don't understand it; I never shall. For still it seems as if the
punishment followed, not so much the fact, as the fact's being
made known. If I had robbed some one fifteen years ago, or taken
the name of the Lord in vain, I wonder if it would have been the
same? As for keeping holy the seventh day, and honouring your
father and mother, and not coveting your neighbour's goods, how
little they seem to count! Even the most virtuous and rigid people
would forgive and forget fast enough in THOSE cases. It's all a
puzzle." Julia's voice and look, which had grown dreamy, now
brightened suddenly. "And so the best thing to do about it," she
went on, "seems to me to make your own conscience your moral law,
and feel that what you have repented truly, is truly forgiven. So
much for me." She met his eyes. "But, my dear Jim, I never could
take it for granted again that YOU felt so about it!"

"Then you do me an injustice," said Jim, "for I swear---"

"Oh, don't swear!" she interrupted. "I know you believe that now,
as you did once before. But I know you better than you do
yourself, Jim. Your attitude to me is always generous, but it's
always conventional, too. You never would remind me of all this, I
know that very well, but always, in your own heart, the
reservation would be there, the regret and the pity! I know that I
am a better woman and a stronger woman for all this thinking and
suffering; you never will believe that. Let us suppose that we
began again. Don't you know that the day would come when my
opinion would clash with that of some other woman in society, and
you, knowing what you know of me, would feel that I was not
qualified to judge in these things as other women are? Let us
suppose that I wanted to befriend a maid who had got herself into
trouble, or to take some wayward girl into my house for a trial;
how patient would you be with me, under the circumstances?"

"Of course, you can always think up perfectly hypothetical
circumstances!" Jim said impatiently.

"Marriage is difficult enough," Julia pursued. "But marriage with
a handicap is impossible! To feel that there is something you
can't change, that never will change, and that stands eternally
between you! No, marriage isn't for us, Jim, and we can only make
the best of it, having made the original mistake!"

"Don't ever say that again--it's not true!" Jim said, with a sort
of masterful anger. "Now, listen a moment. That isn't true, and
you don't believe it. I've told you what I think of myself. I was
blind, I was a fool. But that's past. Give me another chance. I'll
make you the happiest woman in the world, Julia. I love you. I'll
be so proud of you! You can have a dozen girls under your wing all
the time; you can answer the Queen back, and I'll never have even
a THOUGHT but what you're the finest and sweetest woman in the
world!"

The preposterous picture brought a shaky smile to Julia's lips and
a hint of tears to her eyes. She suddenly rose from her seat and
went down to the garden.

"Our talking it over does no good, Jim," she said, as he followed
her, and stood looking at her and at Anna. "It's all too fresh--
it's been too terrible for me--getting adjusted! I stand firm
here, I feel the ground under my feet. I don't want to go back to
feeling all wrong, all out of key, helpless to straighten
matters!"

"But we were happy!" he said, a passionate regret in his voice.
"Think of our day in Chicago, Ju, and the day we took a hansom cab
through Central Park--and were afraid the driver wasn't sober! And
do you remember the blue hat that WOULD catch on the electric
light, and the day the elevator stuck?"

"I think of it all so often, Jim," Julia answered, with a smile as
sad as tears could have been, and in the tender voice she might
have used in speaking of the dead. "Sometimes I fit whole days
together, just thinking of those old times. 'Then what did we do
after that lunch?' I think, or 'Where were we going that night
that we were in such a hurry?' and then by degrees it all comes
back." Julia drew a rose toward her on a tall bush, studied its
leaves critically. "That was the happiest time, wasn't it, Jim?"
she asked, with her April smile.

Jim felt as if a weight of inevitable sorrow were weighing him to
the ground. Julia's quiet assurance, her regretful firmness,
seemed to be breaking his heart. She was in white to-day, and in
the thin September sunlight, among the blossoming roses, she
somehow suggested the calm placidity of a nun who looks back at
her days in the world with a tender, smiling pity. The child had
left her play, and stood close to her mother's side, one of
Julia's hands caught in both her own.

"Anna," Jim said desperately, "won't you ask Mother to come to
London with Dad?"

Anna regarded him gravely. She did not understand the situation,
but she answered, with a child's curious instinct for the obvious
excuse:

"But Grandmother needs her!"

"I never asked you to give her up, Julie," Jim said, as if trying
to remind her that he had not been so merciless as she. Julia's
eyes widened with a quick alarm, her breast rose, but she answered
composedly:

"That I would have fought."

"And you have always had as much money--" Jim began again, trying
to rally the arguments with which he had felt sure to overwhelm
her.

"I spent that as much for your sake as for mine," Julia said
soberly. "She is a Studdiford. I wanted to be fair to Anna. But I
could do without it now, Jim; there are a thousand things--"

"Yes, I know!" he said in quick shame.

A silence fell, there seemed nothing else to be said. A great
space widened between them. Jim felt at the mercy of lonely and
desolate winds; he felt as if all colour had faded out of the
world, leaving it gray and cold. With the sickness of utter defeat
he dropped on one knee and kissed the wondering child, and then
turned to go.

"You won't--change your mind, Ju?" he asked huskily.

Julia was conscious of a strange weakening and loosening of bonds
throughout her entire system. Vague chills shook her, she felt
that tears were near, she had a hideous misgiving as to her power
to keep from fainting.

"I will let you know, Jim," she heard her own voice answer, very
low.

A moment later she and Anna were alone in the garden.

"What IS it, Mother?" Anna asked curiously, a dozen times. Julia
stood staring at the child blindly. One hand was about Anna's
neck, the loose curls falling soft and warm upon it, the other
Julia had pressed tight above her heart. She stood still as if
listening.

"What IS it, Mother?" asked the little girl again.

"Nothing!" Julia said then, in a sort of shallow whisper, with a
caught breath.

A second later she kissed the child hastily, and went quietly out
of the green gate which had so lately closed upon Jim. She went as
unquestioningly as an automaton moved by some irresistible power;
not only was all doubt gone from her mind, but all responsibility
seemed also shed.

The street was almost deserted, but Julia saw Jim instantly, a
full block away, and walking resolutely, if slowly. She drifted
silently after him, not knowing why she followed, nor what she
would say when they met, but conscious that she must follow and
that they would meet.

Jim walked to Eighteenth Street, turned north, and Julia, reaching
the corner, was in time to see him entering the shabby old church
where they had been married eight years ago. And instantly a
blinding vertigo, a suffocating rush of blood to her heart, made
her feel weak and cold with the sudden revelation that the hour of
change had come.

She climbed the dreary, well-remembered stairs slowly, and slipped
into one of the last pews, in the shadow of a gallery pillar.

Jim was kneeling, far up toward the altar, his head in his hands.
In all the big church, which was bleak and bare in the cold
afternoon light, there was no one else. The red altar light
flickered in its hanging glass cup; a dozen lighted candles, in a
great frame that held sockets for five times as many, guttered and
flared at the rail.

Minutes slipped by, and still the man knelt there motionless, and
still the woman sat watching him, her eyes brilliant and tender,
her heart flooded with a poignant happiness that carried before it
all the bitterness of the years. Julia felt born again. Like a
person long deaf, upon whose unsealed ears the roar of life bursts
suddenly again, she shrank away from the rush of emotion that
shook her. It was overpowering--dizzying--exhausting.

When Jim presently passed her she shrank into the shadow of her
pillar, but his face was sadder and more grave than Julia had ever
seen it, and he did not raise his eyes. She listened until his
echoing footsteps died away on the stairs; then the smile on her
face faded, and she sank on her knees and burst into tears.

But they were not tears of sorrow; instead, they seemed to Julia
infinitely soothing and refreshing. They seemed to carry her along
with the restful sweep of a river. She cried, hardly knowing that
she cried, and with no effort to stop the steady current of tears.

And when she presently sat back and dried her eyes, a delicious
ease and relaxation permeated her whole body. Like a convalescent,
weak and trembling, she drew great breaths of air, rejoicing that
the devastating fever and the burning illusions were gone, and
only the quiet weeks of getting well lay before her.

She sat in the church a long time, staring dreamily before her.
Odd thoughts and memories drifted through her mind now: she was
again a little girl of eight, slipping into the delicatessen store
in O'Farrell Street for pickles and pork sausage; now she was a
bride, with Jim in New York, moving through the dappled spring
sunlight of Fifth Avenue, on the top of a rocking omnibus. She
thought of the settlement house: winter rain streaming down its
windows, and she and Miss Toland dining on chops and apple pie,
each deep in a book as she ate; and she remembered Mark, poor
Mark, who had crossed her life only to bring himself bitter
unhappiness, and to leave her the sorrow of an ineffaceable stain!

Only thirty, yet what a long, long road already lay behind her,
how much sorrow, how much joy! What mistakes and cross purposes
had been tangled into her life and Jim's, Mark's and Richie's,
Barbara's and Sally's and Ted's--into all their lives!

"Perhaps that IS life," mused Julia, kneeling down to say one more
little prayer before she went away. "Perhaps my ideal of a clean-
swept, austere little cottage, and a few books, and a few friends,
and sunrises and sunsets--isn't life! It's all a tangle and a
struggle, ingratitude and poverty and dispute all mixed in with
love and joy and growth, and every one of us has to take his
share! I have one sort of trouble to bear, and Mother another, and
Jim, I suppose, a third; we can't choose them for ourselves any
more than we could choose the colour of our eyes! But loving each
other--loving each other, as I love Anna, makes everything easy;
it's the cure for it all--it makes everything easier to bear!" And
in a whisper, with a new appreciation of their meaning, she
repeated the familiar words, "Love fulfils the law!"

The next evening, just as the autumn twilight was giving way to
dusk, Julia opened the lower green gate of the Tolands' garden in
Sausalito, and went quietly up the steep path. Roses made dim
spots of colour here and there; under the trees it was almost
dark, though a soft light still lingered on the surface of the bay
just below. From the drawing-room windows pale lamplight fell in
clear bars across the gravel, but the hall was unlighted, the door
wide open.

Julia stepped softly inside, her heart beating fast. She had got
no farther than this minute, in her hastily made plans; now she
did not quite know what to do. She knew that Barbara and the boys
had gone back to Richie in Mill Valley. Captain Fox was duck
shooting in Novato, and Constance had returned to her own home.
But Ted and her little son should be here, Janey, Jim, and the
widowed mother.

Presently she found Mrs. Toland in the study, seated alone before
a dying fire. Julia kissed the shrivelled soft old cheek, catching
as she did so the faint odour of perfumed powder and fresh crepe.

"Where are the girls, darling, that you're here all alone?" she
asked affectionately.

"Oh, Julie dear! Isn't it nice to see you," Mrs. Toland said, "and
so fresh and rosy, like a breath of fresh air! Where are the
girls? Bab's with Richie, you know, and she took her boys and
Ted's Georgie with her, and Connie had to go home again. I think
Ted and Janey went out for a little walk before dinner."

"And haven't you been out, dear?"

Ready tears came to poor Mrs. Toland's eyes at the tender tone.
She began to beat lightly on Julia's hand with her own.

"I don't seem to want to, dearie," she said with difficulty; "the
girls keep telling me to, but--I don't know! I don't seem to want
to. Papa and I used to like to walk up and down in the garden---"

Speech became too difficult, and she stopped abruptly.

"I know," Julia said sorrowfully.

"It would have been thirty-five years this November," Mrs. Toland
presently said. "We were engaged in August and married in
November. Marriage is a wonderful thing, Julia--it's a wonderful
thing! Papa was very much smarter than I am--I always knew that!
But after a while people come to love each other partly for just
that--the differences between them! And you look back so
differently on the mistakes you have made. I've always been too
easy on the girls, and Ned, too, and Papa knew it, but he never
reproached me!" She wiped her eyes quietly. "You must have had a
sensible mother, Julie," she added, after a moment; "you're such a
wise little thing!"

"I don't believe she was very wise," Julia said, smiling, "any
more than I am! I may not make the mistakes with Anna that Mama
made with me, but I'll make others! It's a sort of miracle to see
her now, so brave and good and contented, after all the storms I
remember."

Mrs. Toland did not speak for a few moments, then she said:

"Julie, Jim's like a son of my own to me. You'll forgive a fussy
old woman, who loves her children, if she talks frankly to you?
Don't throw away all the future, dear. Not to-day--not to-morrow,
perhaps, but some time, when you can, forgive him! He's changed;
he's not what he used to be---"

Tears were in Julia's eyes now; she slipped to her knees beside
Mrs. Toland's chair, and they cried a little together.

"I came to see him," whispered Julia. "Where is he?"

"He came in about fifteen minutes ago. He's packing. You know his
room---"

Julia mounted the stairs slowly, noiselessly. It was quite dark
now throughout the airy, fragrant big halls, but a crack of light
came from under Jim's door.

She stood outside for a few long minutes, thrilling like a bride
with the realization that she had the right to enter here; where
Jim was, was her sanctuary against the world and its storms.

She knocked, and Jim shouted "Come in!" Julia opened the door and
faced him across a room full of the disorder of packing. Jim was
in his shirt sleeves, his hair rumpled and wild. She slipped
inside the door, and shut it behind her, a most appealing figure
in her black gown, with her uncovered bright hair loosened and
softly framing her April face.

"Jim," she said, her heart choking her, "will you take Anna and me
with you? I love you---"

There was time for no more. They were in each other's arms,
laughing, crying, murmuring now and then an incoherent word. Julia
clung to her husband like a storm-driven bird; it seemed to her
that her heart would burst in its ecstasy of content; if the big
arms about her had crushed breath from her body she would have
died uncaring.

Jim kissed her wet cheeks, her tumbled hair, her red lips that so
willingly met his own. And when at last the tears were dry, and
they could speak and could look at each other, there was no need
for words. Jim sat on the couch, and Julia sat on his knee, with
one arm laid loosely about his neck in a fashion they had loved
years ago, and what they said depended chiefly upon their eyes and
the tones of their voice.

"Oh, Jim--Jim!" Julia rested her cheek against his, "I have needed
you so!"

Jim tightened an arm about her.

"I adore you," he said simply, unashamed of his wet eyes. "Do you
love me?" To this Julia made no answer but a long sigh of utter
content.

"Do you?" repeated Jim, after an interval.

"Does this LOOK as if I did?" Julia murmured, not moving.

Silence again, and then Jim said, with a great sigh:

"Oh, Petty, what a long, long time!"

"Thank God it's over!" said Julia softly.

"What made you do it, dear?" Jim asked presently, in the course of
a long rambling talk. At that Julia did straighten up, so that her
eyes might meet his.

"Just seeing you--pray about it, Jim," she said, her eyes filling
again, although her lips were smiling. "I thought that, this time,
we would both pray, and that--even if there are troubles, Jim--
we'd remember that hour in St. Charles's, and think how we longed
for each other!"

And resting her cheek against his, Julia began to cry with joy,
and Jim clung to her, his own eyes brimming, and they were very
happy.




CHAPTER IX


September daylight, watery and uncertain, and very different from
the golden purity of California's September sunshine, fell in pale
oblongs upon the polished floor of a certain London drawing-room,
and battled with the dancing radiance of a coal fire that sent
cheering gleams and flashes of gold into the duskiest corners of
the room.

It was a beautiful room, and a part of a beautiful house, for the
American doctor and his wife, deciding to make the English capital
their home, had searched and waited patiently until in Camden Hill
Road they had discovered a house possessed of just the
irresistible combination of bigness and coziness, beauty and
simplicity, for which they had hoped. In the soft tones of the
rugs, the plain and comfortable chairs, the warm glow of a lamp
shade, or the gleam of a leather-bound book, there was at once a
suggestion of discrimination and of informal ease. And informal
yet strangely exhilarating the friends of Doctor and Mrs.
Studdiford found it. Very famous folk liked to sit in these deep
chairs, and talk on and on beside this friendly fire, while London
slept, and the big clock in the hall turned night into morning. No
hosts in London were more popular than the big, genial doctor, and
his clever, silent, and most beautiful wife. Mrs. Studdiford was
an essentially genuine person; the flowers in her drawing-room,
like the fruit on her table, were sure to be sensibly in season;
her clothes and her children's clothes were extraordinarily
simple, and her new English friends, simple and domestic as they
were, whatever their rank, found her to be one of themselves in
these things, and took her to their hearts.

Julia herself was sitting before the fire now, one slippered foot
to the blaze. Four years in London life had left her as lovely as
ever; perhaps there was even an increase of beauty in the lines of
her closed lips, a certain accentuation of the old spiritual
sweetness in her look. Her bright hair was still wound about her
head in loose braids, and her severely simple gown of Quaker gray
was relieved at the wrists and throat by transparent frills of
white. In her arms lay a baby less than a year old, a splendid
boy, whose eyes, through half-closed lids, were lazily studying
the fire. His little smocked white frock showed sturdy bare knees,
and the fine web of his yellow hair blew like a gold mist against
his mother's breast.

The room's only other occupant, a tall, handsome woman, in a tan
cloth suit, with rich furs, presently turned from the deep
curtained arch of a window. This was Barbara Fox, Lady Curriel
now, still thin, and still with a hint of sharpness and fatigue in
her browned face, yet with rare content and satisfaction written
there, too. Barbara's life was full, and every hour brought its
demand on her time, but she was a very happy woman, devoted to her
husband and her three small sons, and idolizing her baby daughter.
Her winters were devoted to the social and political interests
that played so large a part in her husband's life and her own, but
Julia knew that she was far more happy in the summers, when her
brood ran wild over the old manor house at High Darmley, and every
cottager stopped to salute the donkey cart and the shouting heirs
of "the big family."

"Not a sign of them!" said Barbara now, coming from the window to
the fire, and loosening her furs as she sat down opposite Julia.
"Is he asleep?" she added in a cautious undertone.

"Not he!" answered Julia, with a kiss for her son. "He's just
lying here and finking 'bout fings! I don't know where the others
can be," she went on, in evident reference to Barbara's vigil at
the window. "Jim said lunch, and it's nearly one o'clock now! Take
your things off, Babbie, and lunch with us?"

"Positively I mustn't, dear. I must be at home. I've to see the
paperers at two o'clock, and to-morrow morning early, you know, we
go back to the kiddies at the seaside."

"And they're all well?"

"Oh, splendid. Even Mary's out of doors all day, and digging in
the sand! We think Jim's right about Geordie's throat, by the way;
it ought to be done, I suppose, but it doesn't seem to trouble him
at all, and it can wait! Julie dear, why DON'T you and the boy and
Anna come down, if only for four or five days? Bring nurse, and
some old cottons, and a parasol, and we'll have a lovely, comfy
time!"

"But we're just home!" Julia protested laughingly. "I've hardly
got straightened out yet! However, I'll speak to Jim," she went
on. "This gentleman thinks he would like it, and Anna is frantic
to see the boys."

"And we must talk!" Barbara added coaxingly. "Is California
lovely?"

"Oh--" Julia raised her brows, with her grave smile. "Home is
home, Bab."

"And Mother looks well?"

"Your mother looks VERY well. But when she and Janey come on in
January you'll see for yourself. Janey's so pretty; I wish she'd
marry, but she never sees any one but Rich! Rich is simply
adorable; he had Con and her husband and little girl with him this
summer. Con's getting very fat--she's great fun! And Ted's very
much improved, Bab, very much more gentle and sweet. She told me
about Bob Carleton's death, poor fellow! She went to see him and
took George, and do you know, I don't think Ted will marry again,
although she's handsomer than ever!"

"And Sally's the perfect celebrity's wife?" Barbara asked, with a
smile.

"Sally? But I wrote you that," Julia laughed. "Yes, Keith was
giving a concert in Philadelphia when we went through at Easter.
So Jim and I made a special trip down to hear it, and, my dear!
The hall was packed, the women went simply crazy over him, and
he's really quite poetical looking, long hair and all that. And
Sally----I saw her at the hotel the next morning, and such a
manner! Protecting the privacy of the genius, don't you know, and
seeing reporters, and answering requests for autographs, and
declining invitations, here, there, and everywhere! I think she
has more fun than Keith does! He's quite helpless without her;
won't see a manager or answer a note, or even order a luncheon!
'Sally,' he says, handing her a card, 'what do I like? Tell them
not to ask me!' He worships her, and, of course, she worships him;
she even said to me that it was lucky there were no children--
Keith hated children!"

"Funny life!" Barbara mused, half laughing. "And your people are
well, Ju?" "Splendidly," Julia smiled. "Mama looks just the same;
she was simply wild about our Georgie--saw him nearly every day,
for if I couldn't go I sent nurse with him. My cousin Marguerite
is dead, you know, and her husband is really a very clever fellow,
a tailor, making lots of money. He and the three children have
come to live with Aunt May; Regina manages the whole crowd; it's
really the happiest sort of a home! Anna had beautiful times
there; she remembered it all, and Aunt May and Mama nearly spoiled
her!"

"You couldn't spoil her," Barbara said affectionately. "She is
really the dearest and most precious! Are you going to let La
Franz paint her?"

"No." Julia's motherly pride showed only in a sudden brightness in
her blue eyes. "And I hope no one will tell her that he asked!
Even at ten, Bab, they are quite sufficiently aware of admiration.
She had on a sort of greeny-yallery velvet gown the day we met
him, and really she was quite toothsome, if you ask an
unprejudiced observer. But Jim and I were wondering if it's wise
to make her QUITE so picturesque!"

"You can't help it," Barbara said. "She's just as lovely in a
Holland pinny, or a nightie, or a bathing suit! I declare she was
too lovely on the sands last year, with her straw-coloured hair,
and a straw-coloured hat, and her pink cheeks matching a pink
apron! She's going to be prettier than you are, Ju!"

"Well, at that she won't set the Thames afire!" Julia smiled.

"I don't know! You ought to be an absolutely happy woman, Julie."

Julia settled the baby's head more comfortably against her arm,
and raised earnest eyes.

"Is any one, Bab? Are you?"

"Well, yes, I think I am!" Lady Curriel said thoughtfully. "Of
course those months before Francis's uncle died were awfully hard
on us all, and then before Mary came I was wretched; but now--
there's really nothing, except that we do NOT live within our
income when we're in the town house, and that frets Francis a good
deal. Of course I try to economize in summer, and we catch up, but
it's an ever-present worry! And then our Geordie's throat, you
know, and being so far from Mother and Rich and the girls, of
course! But those things really don't count, Ju. And in the main
I'm absolutely happy and satisfied. I'm pleased with the way my
life has gone!"

"Pleased is mild," Julia agreed. "I'd be an utter ingrate to be
anything but pleased, looking back. Jim is exceptional, of course,
and Anna and this young person seem to me pretty nice in their
little ways! And when we went home this year it was really
pleasant and touching, I thought; all San Francisco was gracious;
we could have had five times as long a visit and not worn our
welcome out!"

"So much for having been presented," laughed Barbara.

"Well, I suppose so. Mama was wild with interest about it; she has
my photograph, in the gown I wore to the drawing-room, framed on
the wall. But Aunt May was dubious, isn't at all sure that she
admires the British royal family. She's a most delightful person!"
Julia laughed out gayly. "If ever I happen to speak of the Duchess
of This or Lady That, Mama's eyes fairly dance, but Aunt May isn't
going to be hoodwinked by any title. 'Ha!' she says. 'Do you think
they're one bit better in the sight of God than I am?' And I like
nothing better than to regale her on their silliness, tell her how
one has forty wigs, and another is so afraid of losing her
diamonds she has a man sit and watch them every night. Long
afterward I hear her exclaiming to herself, 'Wigs, indeed!' or
'Diamonds! Well, did you ever!'"

"When you come to think of it, Ju, ISN'T it odd to think of your
own people doing their own work, 'way out there on the very edge
of the western world, and you here, in a fair way to become a
London f'yvourite!"

"Doing their own work, indeed!" laughed Julia. "My good lady, you
forget Carrie. Carrie comes in every night to do the dishes, and
because she's coloured, my Aunt May has always felt that she stole
sugar and tea. However, we all laughed at Aunt May this year, when
it came to suspecting Carrie of stealing Regina's face powder! No,
but you're quite right, Bab," she went on more seriously. "It's
all very strange and dramatic. Saturday, when the Duchess came in
to welcome us, and flowers came from all sides, and the Penniscots
came to carry us off to dinner, I really felt, 'Lawk a mussy on
me, this can't be I!'"

"Well, then, where IS the pill in the jelly?" asked Barbara
solicitously.

Julia had flung back her head and was listening intently.
Footsteps and voices were unmistakably coming up the hall stairs.

"No pills--all jelly!" she had time to say smilingly, before the
door opened and three persons came into the room: Doctor
Studdiford, handsomer and more boyishly radiant than ever; Miss
Toland, quite gray, but erect and vigorous still; and little Anna,
a splendid, glowing ten-year-old, in the blue serge sailor suit
and round straw hat made popular by the little English princess.

Babel followed. Every one must kiss Barbara; little George must
come in for his full share of attention. Presently the beaming
Ellie was summoned, and the children went away with her; Barbara
carried off her aunt for a makeshift luncheon in the dismantled
Curriel mansion, and the Studdifords were left alone.

"We picked Aunt Sanna up at the corner," said Jim, one arm about
his wife as they stood in the window looking down at the departing
visitors, "and of course Anna must drag her along with us to see
the baby lion! I stopped at Lord Essels's, by the way, and it's a
perfect knit--can't tell where one bone stops and the other
begins!"

"Oh, Jimmy, you old miracle worker! Aren't you pleased?"

"Well, rath-ER! And young Lady Essels wants to call on you, Ju;
says you were the loveliest thing at the New Year's ball last
year! Remember when we rushed home to feed Georgie, and rushed
back again?"

"Oh, perfectly. I hope she will come; she looked sweet. And every
one's coming to our Tuesday dinner, Jim, except Ivy; notes from
them all. Ivy says Lady Violet is so ill that she can't promise,
but Phyllis is coming with the new husband. She wrote such a
cunning note! And--I'll see Ivy this afternoon, and I think I'll
tell her that I'm going to leave her place open; if she can't
come, why we'll just have to have a man over, that's all! It won't
be awfully formal anyway, Jimmy, at this time of the year!"

"Whatever you say, old lady!" Jim was thinking of something else.
"How do you feel about leaving the kids and going off for a little
run with the Parkes to-morrow night?" he asked. "He's found some
new place in which he wants us to dine and sleep. Home the next
morning."

"Well, I could do that," Julia said thoughtfully.

"You're terribly decent about leaving 'em," said Jim, who knew how
Julia hated to be away from Anna and George at night, "but,
really, I think this'll be fun--cards, you know, and a good
dinner."

"That's to-morrow?"

"To-morrow." Jim hesitated. "I know you're not crazy about them,"
he said.

"I don't DISLIKE them," Julia said brightly. "She's really lots of
fun, but of course he's the Honourable and he's a little spoiled.
But I'm really glad to go. Was Anna nice this morning?"

"Oh, she was lovely--held her little head up and trotted along,
asking INTELLIGENT questions, don't you know--not like a
chattering kid. She pitched right into me on the governess
question; she's all for Miss Percival's school, won't hear of a
governess for a minute!"

"And the stern parent compromised on Miss Percival?" smiled Julia.

"Well, I only promised for a year," Jim said, shamefaced. "And you
were against the governess proposition, too," he added accusingly.

"Absolutely," she assured him soothingly. "I love to have Anna
with me in the afternoons, and when Bab's in town we can send her
over there--she's no trouble!" Julia turned her face up for a
kiss. "Run and wash your hands, Doctor dear!" said she.

"Yes--and what are you going to do?" Jim asked jealously.

"I'm going to wait for you right here, and we'll go down
together," she said pacifically. Jim took another kiss.

"Happy?" he asked.

Just as he had asked her a thousand times in the past four years.
And always she had answered him, as she did now:

"Happiest woman in the world, Jim!"

The happiest woman in the world! Julia, left alone, still stood
dreaming in the curtained window, her eyes idly following the
quiet life of the sunny street below. A hansom clattered by, an
open carriage in which an old, old couple were taking an airing.
Half a square away she could see the Park, with gray-clad nurses
chatting over their racing charges or the tops of perambulators.

But Julia's thoughts were not with these. A little frown shaded
her eyes, and her mouth was curved by a smile more sad than sweet.
The happiest woman in the world! Yet, as she stood there, she felt
an utter disenchantment with life seize upon her; she felt an
overwhelming weariness in the battle that was not yet over. For
Julia knew now that life to her must be a battle; whatever the
years to come might hold for her, they could not hold more than an
occasional heavenly interval of peace. Peace for Jim, peace for
her mother, peace for her children and for all those whom she
loved; but for herself there must be times of an increasing
burden, an increasing weariness, and the gnawing of an undying
fight with utter discouragement. Her secret must never be anything
but a secret; and yet, to Julia, it sometimes seemed that her only
happiness in life would be to shout it to the whole world.

Not always, for there were, of course, serene long stretches of
happiness, confident times in which she was really what she seemed
to be, only beautiful, young, exceptionally fortunate and beloved.
But it was into these very placid intervals that the word or look
would enter, to bring her house of cards crashing about her head
once more.

Sometimes, not often, it was a mere casual acquaintance whose
chance remark set the old, old wound to throbbing; or sometimes it
was Barbara's or Miss Toland's praise: "You're so sweet and fine,
Ju--if only we'd all done with our opportunities as you have!"
Oftener it was Jim's voice that consciously or unconsciously on
his part stabbed Julia to the very soul. For him, the sting was
gone, because, at the first prick, Julia was there to take it and
bear it. No need to conceal from her now the bitterness of his
moods; she would meet him halfway. He was worrying about that old
affair? Ah, he mustn't do that--here were Julia's arms about him,
her lovely face close to his, her sweet and earnest sympathy ready
to probe bravely into his darkest thought, and find him some balm.
Still gowned from a ball, perhaps, jewelled, perfumed, dragging
her satin train after her, she would come straight into his arms,
with: "Something's worrying you, dearest, tell me what it is? I
LOVE you so---"

No resentment on Jim's part could live for a moment in this
atmosphere. He only wanted to tell her about it, to be soothed
like a small boy, to catch his beautiful wife in his arms, and win
from her lips again and again the assurance that she loved him and
him alone. What these scenes cost Julia's own fine sense of
delicacy and dignity, only Julia knew. They left her with a vague
feeling of shame, a consciousness of compromise. For a day or two
after such an episode a new hesitancy would mark her manner, a
certain lack of confidence lend pathos to the sweetness of her
voice.

But no outside influence ever could bring home to her the
realization of the shadow on her life as forcibly as did her own
inner musings, the testimony of her own soul. If she had but been
innocent, how easy to bear Jim's scorn, or the scorn of the whole
world! It was the bitter knowledge that she had taken her life in
her own hands nearly twenty years ago, and wrecked it more surely
than if she had torn out her own eyes, that made her heart sick
within her now. She, who loved dignity, who loved purity, who
loved strength, must carry to her grave the knowledge of her own
detestable weakness! She must instruct her daughter, guarding the
blue eyes and the active mind from even the knowledge of life's
ugly side, she must hold the highest standard of purity before her
son, knowing, as she knew, that far back at her life's beginning,
were those few hideous weeks that, in the eyes of the world, could
utterly undo the work of twenty strong and steadfast years! She
must be silent when she longed to cry aloud, she must train
herself to cry aloud at the thing that she had been. And she must
silently endure the terrible fact that her husband knew, and that
he would never forget. Over and over again her spirit shrank at
some new evidence of the fact that, with all his love for her, his
admiration, his loyalty, there was a reservation in her husband's
heart, a conviction--of which he was perhaps not conscious
himself--that Julia was not quite as other women. Her criticism of
others must be more gentle, her opinion less confidently offered.
Others might find in her exceptional charms, rare strength, and
rare wisdom--not Jim. For him she was always the exquisite
penitent, who had so royally earned a perpetually renewed
forgiveness, the little crippled playfellow whom it was his
delight to carry in his arms. His judgment for what concerned his
children was the wiser, and for her, too, when she longed to throw
herself into this work of reform or that--to expose herself, in
other words, to the very element from which a kind Providence had
seen fit to remove her. Obviously, on certain subjects there must
not be two opinions, in any house, and, whatever the usual custom,
obviously he was the person to decide in his own.

"Rich says you were not a saint yourself when you were in college,
Jim!" she had burst out once, long years ago, before their
separation. But only once. After all, the laws were not of Jim's
making; whatever he had done, he was a respecter of convention, a
keeper of the law of man. Julia had broken God's law, had
repented, and had been forgiven. But she had also broken the law
of man, for which no woman ever is forgiven. And though this
exquisite and finished woman, with her well-stored brain and
ripened mind, her position and her charm, was not the little Julia
Page of the old O'Farrell Street days, she must pay the price of
that other Julia's childish pride and ignorance still.

She must go on, listening, with her wise, wistful smile, to the
chatter of other women, wincing at a thousand little pricks that
even her husband could not see, winning him from his ugly moods
with that mixture of the child and the woman that his love never
could resist.

His love! After all he did love her and his children, and she
loved the three with every fibre of heart and soul. Julia ended
her reverie, as she always ended her reveries, with a new glow of
hope in her heart and a half smile on her lips. Their love would
save them all--love fulfilled the law.

"Julia!" said Jim, at the door, "where are you?"

She turned in her window recess.

"Not escaped, O Sultan!"

"Well"--he had his arm about her, his air was that of a humoured
child--"I didn't suppose you had! But I hate you to go down
without me!"

"Well, the poor abused boy!" Julia laughed. "Come, we'll go down
together!"

"What were you thinking of, standing there all that time?" he
asked.

"You principally, Doctor Studdiford!" Julia gave him a quick
sidewise glance.

"Glad I came out to the Mission to fix the Daley kid's arm?" Jim
asked.

"Glad!" said Julia softly, with a great sigh that belied her
smile. They took each other's hands, like children, and went down
the broad stairway together.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Story Of Julia Page, by Kathleen Norris





This etext was produced by Les Bowler, St. Ives, Dorset.

THE JOURNAL TO STELLA
by JONATHAN SWIFT.

With preface, introduction and notes by George A. Aitken.

[Numbers thus [5] refer to the Notes at the end, which are arranged by
"Introduction" or by "Letter 'number'".]



PREFACE



The history of the publication of the Journal to Stella is somewhat curious.
On Swift's death twenty-five of the letters, forming the closing portion of
the series, fell into the hands of Dr. Lyon, a clergyman who had been in
charge of Swift for some years.  The letters passed to a man named Wilkes, who
sold them for publication.  They accordingly appeared in 1766 in the tenth
volume of Dr. Hawkesworth's quarto edition of Swift's works; but the editor
made many changes in the text, including a suppression of most of the "little
language."  The publishers, however, fortunately for us, were public-spirited
enough to give the manuscripts (with one exception) to the British Museum,
where, after many years, they were examined by John Forster, who printed in
his unfinished "Life of Swift" numerous passages from the originals, showing
the manner in which the text had been tampered with by Hawkesworth.  Swift
himself, too, in his later years, obliterated many words and sentences in the
letters, and Forster was able to restore not a few of these omissions.  His
zeal, however, sometimes led him to make guesses at words which are quite
undecipherable.  Besides Forster's work, I have had the benefit of the careful
collation made by Mr. Ryland for his edition of 1897.  Where these authorities
differ I have usually found myself in agreement with Mr. Ryland, but I have
felt justified in accepting some of Forster's readings which were rejected by
him as uncertain; and the examination of the manuscripts has enabled me to
make some additions and corrections of my own.  Swift's writing is extremely
small, and abounds in abbreviations.  The difficulty of arriving at the true
reading is therefore considerable, apart from the erasures.

The remainder of the Journal, consisting of the first forty letters, was
published in 1768 by Deane Swift, Dr. Swift's second cousin.  These letters
had been given to Mrs. Whiteway in 1788, and by her to her son-in-law, Deane
Swift.  The originals have been lost, with the exception of the first, which,
by some accident, is in the British Museum; but it is evident that Deane Swift
took even greater liberties with the text than Hawkesworth.  He substituted
for "Ppt" the word "Stella," a name which Swift seems not to have used until
some years later; he adopted the name "Presto" for Swift, and in other ways
tried to give a greater literary finish to the letters.  The whole of the
correspondence was first brought together, under the title of the "Journal to
Stella", in Sheridan's edition of 1784.

Previous editions of the Journal have been but slightly annotated.  Swift's
letters abound with allusions to people of all classes with whom he came in
contact in London, and to others known to Esther Johnson in Ireland; and a
large proportion of these persons have been passed over in discreet silence by
Sir Walter Scott and others.  The task of the annotator has, of course, been
made easier of late years by the publication of contemporary journals and
letters, and of useful works of reference dealing with Parliament, the Army,
the Church, the Civil Service, and the like, besides the invaluable Dictionary
of National Biography.  I have also been assisted by a collection of MS. notes
kindly placed at my disposal by Mr. Thomas Seccombe.  I have aimed at brevity
and relevance, but it is hoped that the reader will find all the information
that is necessary.  Here and there a name has baffled research, but I have
been able to give definite particulars of a very large number of people--
noblemen and ladies in society in London or Dublin, Members of Parliament,
doctors, clergymen, Government officials, and others who have hitherto been
but names to the reader of the Journal.  I have corrected a good many errors
in the older notes, but in dealing with so large a number of persons, some of
whom it is difficult to identify, I cannot hope that I myself have escaped
pitfalls.

G. A. A.



INTRODUCTION.

When Swift began to write the letters known as the Journal to Stella, he was
forty-two years of age, and Esther Johnson twenty-nine.  Perhaps the most
useful introduction to the correspondence will be a brief setting forth of
what is known of their friendship from Stella's childhood, the more specially
as the question has been obscured by many assertions and theories resting on a
very slender basis of fact.

Jonathan Swift, born in 1667 after his father's death, was educated by his
uncle Godwin, and after a not very successful career at Trinity College,
Dublin, went to stay with his mother, Abigail Erick, at Leicester.  Mrs. Swift
feared that her son would fall in love with a girl named Betty Jones, but, as
Swift told a friend, he had had experience enough "not to think of marriage
till I settle my fortune in the world, which I am sure will not be in some
years; and even then, I am so hard to please that I suppose I shall put it off
to the other world."  Soon afterwards an opening for Swift presented itself.
Sir William Temple, now living in retirement at Moor Park, near Farnham, had
been, like his father, Master of the Irish Rolls, and had thus become
acquainted with Swift's uncle Godwin.  Moreover, Lady Temple was related to
Mrs. Swift, as Lord Orrery tells us.  Thanks to these facts, the application
to Sir William Temple was successful, and Swift went to live at Moor Park
before the end of 1689.  There he read to Temple, wrote for him, and kept his
accounts, and growing into confidence with his employer, "was often trusted
with matters of great importance."  The story--afterwards improved upon by
Lord Macaulay--that Swift received only 20 pounds and his board, and was not
allowed to sit at table with his master, is wholly untrustworthy.  Within
three years of their first intercourse, Temple had introduced his secretary to
William the Third, and sent him to London to urge the King to consent to a
bill for triennial Parliaments.

When Swift took up his residence at Moor Park he found there a little girl of
eight, daughter of a merchant named Edward Johnson, who had died young.  Swift
says that Esther Johnson was born on March 18, 1681; in the parish register of
Richmond,[1] which shows that she was baptized on March 20, 1680-81, her name
is given as Hester; but she signed her will "Esther," the name by which she
was always known.  Swift says, "Her father was a younger brother of a good
family in Nottinghamshire, her mother of a lower degree; and indeed she had
little to boast in her birth."  Mrs. Johnson had two children, Esther and Ann,
and lived at Moor Park as companion to Lady Giffard, Temple's widowed sister.
Another member of the household, afterwards to be Esther's constant companion,
was Rebecca Dingley, a relative of the Temple family.[2]  She was a year or
two older than Swift.

The lonely young man of twenty-two was both playfellow and teacher of the
delicate child of eight.  How he taught her to write has been charmingly
brought before us in the painting exhibited by Miss Dicksee at the Royal
Academy a few years ago; he advised her what books to read, and instructed
her, as he says, "in the principles of honour and virtue, from which she never
swerved in any one action or moment of her life."

By 1694 Swift had grown tired of his position, and finding that Temple, who
valued his services, was slow in finding him preferment, he left Moor Park in
order to carry out his resolve to go into the Church.  He was ordained, and
obtained the prebend of Kilroot, near Belfast, where he carried on a
flirtation with a Miss Waring, whom he called Varina.  But in May 1696 Temple
made proposals which induced Swift to return to Moor Park, where he was
employed in preparing Temple's memoirs and correspondence for publication, and
in supporting the side taken by Temple in the Letters of Phalaris controversy
by writing The Battle of the Books, which was, however, not published until
1704.  On his return to Temple's house, Swift found his old playmate grown
from a sickly child into a girl of fifteen, in perfect health.  She came, he
says, to be "looked upon as one of the most beautiful, graceful, and agreeable
young women in London, only a little too fat.  Her hair was blacker than a
raven, and every feature of her face in perfection."

On his death in January 1699, Temple left a will,[3] dated 1694, directing the
payment of 20 pounds each, with half a year's wages, to Bridget Johnson "and
all my other servants"; and leaving a lease of some land in Monistown, County
Wicklow, to Esther Johnson, "servant to my sister Giffard."  By a codicil of
February 1698, Temple left 100 pounds to "Mr. Jonathan Swift, now living with
me."  It may be added that by her will of 1722, proved in the following year,
Lady Giffard gave 20 pounds to Mrs. Moss--Mrs. Bridget Johnson, who had
married Richard Mose or Moss, Lady Giffard's steward.  The will proceeds:  "To
Mrs. Hester (sic) Johnson I give 10 pounds, with the 100 pounds I put into the
Exchequer for her life and my own, and declare the 100 pounds to be hers which
I am told is there in my name upon the survivorship, and for which she has
constantly sent over her certificate and received the interest.  I give her
besides my two little silver candlesticks."

Temple left in Swift's hands the task of publishing his posthumous works, a
duty which afterwards led to a quarrel with Lady Giffard and other members of
the family.  Many years later Swift told Lord Palmerston that he stopped at
Moor Park solely for the benefit of Temple's conversation and advice, and the
opportunity of pursuing his studies.  At Temple's death he was "as far to seek
as ever."  In the summer of 1699, however, he was offered and accepted the
post of secretary and chaplain to the Earl of Berkeley, one of the Lords
Justices, but when he reached Ireland he found that the secretaryship had been
given to another.  He soon, however, obtained the living of Laracor, Agher,
and Rathbeggan, and the prebend of Dunlavin in St. Patrick's Cathedral,
Dublin.  The total value of these preferments was about 230 pounds a year, an
income which Miss Waring seems to have thought enough to justify him in
marrying.  Swift's reply to the lady whom he had "singled out at first from
the rest of women" could only have been written with the intention of breaking
off the connection, and accordingly we hear no more of poor Varina.

At Laracor, a mile or two from Trim, and twenty miles from Dublin, Swift
ministered to a congregation of about fifteen persons, and had abundant
leisure for cultivating his garden, making a canal (after the Dutch fashion of
Moor Park), planting willows, and rebuilding the vicarage.  As chaplain to
Lord Berkeley, he spent much of his time in Dublin.  He was on intimate terms
with Lady Berkeley and her daughters, one of whom is best known by her married
name of Lady Betty Germaine; and through them he had access to the fashionable
society of Dublin.  When Lord Berkeley returned to England in April 1701,
Swift, after taking his Doctor's degree at Dublin, went with him, and soon
afterwards published, anonymously, a political pamphlet, A Discourse on the
Contests and Dissentions in Athens and Rome.  When he returned to Ireland in
September he was accompanied by Stella--to give Esther Johnson the name by
which she is best known--and her friend Mrs. Dingley.  Stella's fortune was
about 1500 pounds, and the property Temple had left her was in County Wicklow.
Swift, very much for his "own satisfaction, who had few friends or
acquaintance in Ireland," persuaded Stella--now twenty years old--that living
was cheaper there than in England, and that a better return was obtainable on
money.  The ladies took his advice, and made Ireland their home.  At first
they felt themselves strangers in Dublin; "the adventure looked so like a
frolic," Swift says, "the censure held for some time as if there were a secret
history in such a removal:  which however soon blew off by her excellent
conduct."  Swift took every step that was possible to avoid scandal.  When he
was away, the ladies occupied his rooms; when he returned, they went into
their own lodgings.  When he was absent, they often stopped at the vicarage at
Laracor, but if he were there, they moved to Trim, where they visited the
vicar, Dr. Raymond, or lived in lodgings in the town or neighbourhood.  Swift
was never with Stella except in the presence of a third person, and in 1726 he
said that he had not seen her in a morning "these dozen years, except once or
twice in a journey."

During a visit to England in the winter of 1703-4 we find Swift in
correspondence with the Rev. William Tisdall, a Dublin incumbent whom he had
formerly known at Belfast.  Tisdall was on friendly terms with Stella and Mrs.
Dingley, and Swift sent messages to them through him.  "Pray put them upon
reading," he wrote, "and be always teaching something to Mrs. Johnson, because
she is good at comprehending, remembering and retaining."  But the
correspondence soon took a different turn.  Tisdall paid his addresses to
Stella, and charged Swift with opposing his suit.  Tisdall's letters are
missing, but Swift's reply of April 20, 1704, puts things sufficiently
clearly.  "My conjecture is," he says, "that you think I obstructed your
inclinations to please my own, and that my intentions were the same with
yours.  In answer to all which I will, upon my conscience and honour, tell you
the naked truth.  First, I think I have said to you before that, if my
fortunes and humour served me to think of that state, I should certainly,
among all persons upon earth, make your choice; because I never saw that
person whose conversation I entirely valued but hers; this was the utmost I
ever gave way to.  And secondly, I must assure you sincerely that this regard
of mine never once entered into my head to be an impediment to you."  He had
thought Tisdall not rich enough to marry; "but the objection of your fortune
being removed, I declare I have no other; nor shall any consideration of my
own misfortune, in losing so good a friend and companion as her, prevail on
me, against her interest and settlement in the world, since it is held so
necessary and convenient a thing for ladies to marry, and that time takes off
from the lustre of virgins in all other eyes but mine.  I appeal to my letters
to herself whether I was your friend or not in the whole concern, though the
part I designed to act in it was purely passive."  He had even thought "it
could not be decently broken," without disadvantage to the lady's credit,
since he supposed it was known to the town; and he had always spoken of her in
a manner far from discouraging.  Though he knew many ladies of rank, he had
"nowhere met with an humour, a wit, or conversation so agreeable, a better
portion of good sense, or a truer judgment of men or things."  He envied
Tisdall his prudence and temper, and love of peace and settlement, "the
reverse of which has been the great uneasiness of my life, and is likely to
continue so."

This letter has been quoted at some length because of its great importance.
It is obviously capable of various interpretations, and some, like Dr.
Johnson, have concluded that Swift was resolved to keep Stella in his power,
and therefore prevented an advantageous match by making unreasonable demands.
I cannot see any ground for this interpretation, though it is probable that
Tisdall's appearance as a suitor was sufficiently annoying.  There is no
evidence that Stella viewed Tisdall's proposal with any favour, unless it can
be held to be furnished by Swift's belief that the town thought--rightly or
wrongly--that there was an engagement.  In any case, there could be no mistake
in future with regard to Swift's attitude towards Stella.  She was dearer to
him than anyone else, and his feeling for her would not change, but for
marriage he had neither fortune nor humour.  Tisdall consoled himself by
marrying another lady two years afterwards; and though for a long time Swift
entertained for him feelings of dislike, in later life their relations
improved, and Tisdall was one of the witnesses to Swift's will.

The Tale of a Tub was published in 1704, and Swift was soon in constant
intercourse with Addison and the other wits.  While he was in England in 1705,
Stella and Mrs. Dingley made a short visit to London.  This and a similar
visit in 1708 are the only occasions on which Stella is known to have left
Ireland after taking up her residence in that country.  Swift's influence over
women was always very striking.  Most of the toasts of the day were his
friends, and he insisted that any lady of wit and quality who desired his
acquaintance should make the first advances.  This, he says--writing in 1730--
had been an established rule for over twenty years.  In 1708 a dispute on this
question with one toast, Mrs. Long, was referred for settlement to Ginckel
Vanhomrigh, the son of the house where it was proposed that the meeting should
take place; and by the decision--which was in Swift's favour--"Mrs. Vanhomrigh
and her fair daughter Hessy" were forbidden to aid Mrs. Long in her
disobedience for the future.  This is the first that we hear of Hester or
Esther Vanhomrigh, who was afterwards to play so marked a part in the story of
Swift's life.  Born on February 14, 1690, she was now eighteen.  Her father,
Bartholomew Vanhomrigh, a Dublin merchant of Dutch origin, had died in 1703,
leaving his wife a fortune of some sixteen thousand pounds.  On the income
from this money Mrs. Vanhomrigh, with her two daughters, Hester and Mary, were
able to mix in fashionable society in London.  Swift was introduced to them by
Sir Andrew Fountaine early in 1708, but evidently Stella did not make their
acquaintance, nor indeed hear much, if anything, of them until the time of the
Journal.

Swift's visit to London in 1707-9 had for its object the obtaining for the
Irish Church of the surrender by the Crown of the First-Fruits and Twentieths,
which brought in about 2500 pounds a year.  Nothing came of Swift's interviews
with the Whig statesmen, and after many disappointments he returned to Laracor
(June 1709), and conversed with none but Stella and her card-playing friends,
and Addison, now secretary to Lord Wharton.[4]  Next year came the fall of the
Whigs, and a request to Swift from the Irish bishops that he would renew the
application for the First-Fruits, in the hope that there would be greater
success with the Tories.  Swift reached London in September 1710, and began
the series of letters, giving details of the events of each day, which now
form the Journal to Stella.  "I will write something every day to MD," he
says, "and make it a sort of journal; and when it is full I will send it,
whether MD writes or no; and so that will be pretty; and I shall always be in
conversation with MD, and MD with Presto."  It is interesting to note that by
way of caution these letters were usually addressed to Mrs. Dingley, and not
to Stella.

The story of Swift's growing intimacy with the Tory leaders, of the success of
his mission, of the increasing coolness towards older acquaintances, and of
his services to the Government, can best be read in the Journal itself.  In
the meantime the intimacy with the Vanhomrighs grew rapidly.  They were near
neighbours of Swift's, and in a few weeks after his arrival in town we find
frequent allusions to the dinners at their house (where he kept his best gown
and periwig), sometimes with the explanation that he went there "out of mere
listlessness," or because it was wet, or because another engagement had broken
down.  Only thrice does he mention the "eldest daughter":  once on her
birthday; once on the occasion of a trick played him, when he received a
message that she was suddenly very ill ("I rattled off the daughter"); and
once to state that she was come of age, and was going to Ireland to look after
her fortune.  There is evidence that "Miss Essy," or Vanessa, to give her the
name by which she will always be known, was in correspondence with Swift in
July 1710--while he was still in Ireland--and in the spring of 1711;[5] and
early in 1711 Stella seems to have expressed surprise at Swift's intimacy with
the family, for in February he replied, "You say they are of no consequence;
why, they keep as good female company as I do male; I see all the drabs of
quality at this end of the town with them."  In the autumn Swift seems to have
thought that Vanessa was keeping company with a certain Hatton, but Mrs. Long-
-possibly meaning to give him a warning hint--remarked that if this were so
"she is not the girl I took her for; but to me she seems melancholy."

In 1712 occasional letters took the place of the daily journal to "MD," but
there is no change in the affectionate style in which Swift wrote.  In the
spring he had a long illness, which affected him, indeed, throughout the year.
Other reasons which he gives for the falling off in his correspondence are his
numerous business engagements, and the hope of being able to send some good
news of an appointment for himself.  There is only one letter to Stella
between July 19 and September 15, and Dr. Birkbeck Hill argues that the poem
"Cadenus and Vanessa" was composed at that time.[6]  If this be so, it must
have been altered next year, because it was not until 1713 that Swift was made
a Dean.  Writing on April 19, 1726, Swift said that the poem "was written at
Windsor near fourteen years ago, and dated:  it was a task performed on a
frolic among some ladies, and she it was addressed to died some time ago in
Dublin, and on her death the copy shewn by her executor."  Several copies were
in circulation, and he was indifferent what was done with it; it was "only a
cavalier business," and if those who would not give allowances were malicious,
it was only what he had long expected.

From this letter it would appear that this remarkable poem was written in the
summer of 1712; whereas the title-page of the pamphlet says it was "written at
Windsor, 1713."  Swift visited Windsor in both years, but he had more leisure
in 1712, and we know that Vanessa was also at Windsor in that year.  In that
year, too, he was forty-four, the age mentioned in the poem.  Neither Swift
nor Vanessa forgot this intercourse:  years afterwards Swift wrote to her, "Go
over the scenes of Windsor. . . .  Cad thinks often of these"; and again,
"Remember the indisposition at Windsor."  We know that this poem was revised
in 1719, when in all probability Swift added the lines to which most exception
can be taken.  Cadenus was to be Vanessa's instructor:--

     "His conduct might have made him styled
      A father, and the nymph his child."

He had "grown old in politics and wit," and "in every scene had kept his
heart," so that he now "understood not what was love."  But he had written
much, and Vanessa admired his wit.  Cadenus found that her thoughts wandered--

     "Though she seemed to listen more
      To all he spoke than e'er before."

When she confessed her love, he was filled with "shame, disappointment, guilt,
surprise."  He had aimed only at cultivating the mind, and had hardly known
whether she was young or old.  But he was flattered, and though he could not
give her love, he offered her friendship, "with gratitude, respect, esteem."
Vanessa took him at his word, and said she would now be tutor, though he was
not apt to learn:--

     "But what success Vanessa met
      Is to the world a secret yet.
      Whether the nymph to please her swain
      Talks in a high romantic strain;
      Or whether he at last descends
      To act with less seraphic ends;
      Or, to compound the business, whether
      They temper love and books together,
      Must never to mankind be told,
      Nor shall the conscious Muse unfold."

Such is the poem as we now have it, written, it must be remembered, for
Vanessa's private perusal.  It is to be regretted, for her own sake, that she
did not destroy it.

Swift received the reward of his services to the Government--the Deanery of
St. Patrick's, Dublin--in April 1713.  Disappointed at what he regarded as
exile, he left London in June.  Vanessa immediately began to send him letters
which brought home to him the extent of her passion; and she hinted at
jealousy in the words, "If you are very happy, it is ill-natured of you not to
tell me so, except 'tis what is inconsistent with my own."  In his reply Swift
dwelt upon the dreariness of his surroundings at Laracor, and reminded her
that he had said he would endeavour to forget everything in England, and would
write as seldom as he could.

Swift was back again in the political strife in London in September, taking
Oxford's part in the quarrel between that statesman and Bolingbroke.  On the
fall of the Tories at the death of Queen Anne, he saw that all was over, and
retired to Ireland, not to return again for twelve years.  In the meantime the
intimacy with Vanessa had been renewed.  Her mother had died, leaving debts,
and she pressed Swift for advice in the management of her affairs.  When she
suggested coming to Ireland, where she had property, he told her that if she
took this step he would "see her very seldom."  However, she took up her abode
at Celbridge, only a few miles from Dublin.  Swift gave her many cautions, out
of "the perfect esteem and friendship" he felt for her, but he often visited
her.  She was dissatisfied, however, begging him to speak kindly, and at least
to counterfeit his former indulgent friendship.  "What can be wrong," she
wrote, "in seeing and advising an unhappy young woman?  You cannot but know
that your frowns make my life unsupportable."  Sometimes he treated the matter
lightly; sometimes he showed annoyance; sometimes he assured her of his esteem
and love, but urged her not to make herself or him "unhappy by imaginations."
He was uniformly unsuccessful in stopping Vanessa's importunity.  He
endeavoured, she said, by severities to force her from him; she knew she was
the cause of uneasy reflections to him; but nothing would lessen her
"inexpressible passion."

Unfortunately he failed--partly no doubt from mistaken considerations of
kindness, partly because he shrank from losing her affection--to take
effective steps to put an end to Vanessa's hopes.  It would have been better
if he had unhesitatingly made it clear to her that he could not return her
passion, and that if she could not be satisfied with friendship the intimacy
must cease.  To quote Sir Henry Craik, "The friendship had begun in literary
guidance:  it was strengthened by flattery:  it lived on a cold and almost
stern repression, fed by confidences as to literary schemes, and by occasional
literary compliments:  but it never came to have a real hold over Swift's
heart."

With 1716 we come to the alleged marriage with Stella.  In 1752, seven years
after Swift's death, Lord Orrery, in his Remarks on Swift, said that Stella
was "the concealed, but undoubted, wife of Dr. Swift. . . .  If my
informations are right, she was married to Dr. Swift in the year 1716, by Dr.
Ashe, then Bishop of Clogher."  Ten years earlier, in 1742, in a letter to
Deane Swift which I have not seen quoted before, Orrery spoke of the advantage
of a wife to a man in his declining years; "nor had the Dean felt a blow, or
wanted a companion, had he been married, or, in other words, had Stella
lived."  What this means is not at all clear.  In 1754, Dr. Delany, an old
friend of Swift's, wrote, in comment upon Orrery's Remarks, "Your account of
his marriage is, I am satisfied, true."  In 1789, George Monck Berkeley, in
his Literary Relics, said that Swift and Stella were married by Dr. Ashe, "who
himself related the circumstances to Bishop Berkeley, by whose relict the
story was communicated to me."  Dr. Ashe cannot have told Bishop Berkeley by
word of mouth, because Ashe died in 1717, the year after the supposed
marriage, and Berkeley was then still abroad.  But Berkeley was at the time
tutor to Ashe's son, and may therefore have been informed by letter, though it
is difficult to believe that Ashe would write about such a secret so soon
after the event.  Thomas Sheridan, on information received from his father,
Dr. Sheridan, Swift's friend, accepted the story of the marriage in his book
(1784), adding particulars which are of very doubtful authenticity; and
Johnson, in his Lives of the Poets, says that Dr. Madden told him that Stella
had related her "melancholy story" to Dr. Sheridan before her death.  On the
other hand, Dr. Lyon, Swift's attendant in his later years, disbelieved the
story of the marriage, which was, he said, "founded only on hearsay"; and Mrs.
Dingley "laughed at it as an idle tale," founded on suspicion.

Sir Henry Craik is satisfied with the evidence for the marriage.  Mr. Leslie
Stephen is of opinion that it is inconclusive, and Forster could find no
evidence that is at all reasonably sufficient; while Mr. Stanley Lane-Poole,
Mr. Churton Collins, and others are strongly of opinion that no such marriage
ever took place.  A full discussion of the evidence would involve the
consideration of the reliability of the witnesses, and the probability of
their having authentic information, and would be out of place here.  My own
opinion is that the evidence for the marriage is very far from convincing, and
this view seems to be confirmed by all that we know from his own letters of
Swift's relations with Stella.  It has been suggested that she was pained by
reports of Swift's intercourse with Vanessa, and felt that his feelings
towards herself were growing colder; but this is surmise, and no satisfactory
explanation has been given to account for a form of marriage being gone
through after so many years of the closest friendship.  There is no reason to
suppose that there was at the time any gossip in circulation about Stella, and
if her reputation was in question, a marriage of which the secret was
carefully kept would obviously be of no benefit to her.  Moreover, we are told
that there was no change in their mode of life; if they were married, what
reason could there be for keeping it a secret, or for denying themselves the
closer relationship of marriage?  The only possible benefit to Stella was that
Swift would be prevented marrying anyone else.  It is impossible, of course,
to disprove a marriage which we are told was secretly performed, without banns
or licence or witnesses; but we may reasonably require strong evidence for so
startling a step.  If we reject the tale, the story of Swift's connection with
Stella is at least intelligible; while the acceptance of this marriage
introduces many puzzling circumstances, and makes it necessary to believe that
during the remainder of Stella's life Swift repeatedly spoke of his wife as a
friend, and of himself as one who had never married.[7]  What right have we to
put aside Swift's plain and repeated statements?  Moreover, his attitude
towards Vanessa for the remaining years of her life becomes much more culpable
if we are to believe that he had given Stella the claim of a wife upon him.[8]

From 1719 onwards we have a series of poems to Stella, written chiefly in
celebration of her birthday.  She was now thirty-eight (Swift says, "Thirty-
four--we shan't dispute a year or more"), and the verses abound in laughing
allusions to her advancing years and wasting form.  Hers was "an angel's face
a little cracked," but all men would crowd to her door when she was fourscore.
His verses to her had always been

     "Without one word of Cupid's darts,
      Of killing eyes, or bleeding hearts;
      With friendship and esteem possessed,
      I ne'er admitted Love a guest."

Her only fault was that she could not bear the lightest touch of blame.  Her
wit and sense, her loving care in illness--to which he owed that fact that he
was alive to say it--made her the "best pattern of true friends."  She
replied, in lines written on Swift's birthday in 1721, that she was his pupil
and humble friend.  He had trained her judgment and refined her fancy and
taste:--

     "You taught how I might youth prolong
      By knowing what was right and wrong;
      How from my heart to bring supplies
      Of lustre to my fading eyes;
      How soon a beauteous mind repairs
      The loss of changed or falling hairs;
      How wit and virtue from within
      Send out a smoothness o'er the skin
      Your lectures could my fancy fix,
      And I can please at thirty-six."

In 1723 Vanessa is said to have written to Stella or to Swift--there are
discrepancies in the versions given by Sheridan and Lord Orrery, both of whom
are unreliable--asking whether the report that they were married was true.
Swift, we are told, rode to Celbridge, threw down Vanessa's letter in a great
rage, and left without speaking a word.[9]  Vanessa, whose health had been
failing for some time, died shortly afterwards, having cancelled a will in
Swift's favour.  She left "Cadenus and Vanessa" for publication, and when
someone said that she must have been a remarkable woman to inspire such a
poem, Stella replied that it was well known that the Dean could write finely
upon a broomstick.

Soon after this tragedy Swift became engrossed in the Irish agitation which
led to the publication of the Drapier's Letters, and in 1726 he paid a long-
deferred visit to London, taking with him the manuscript of Gulliver's
Travels.  While in England he was harassed by bad news of Stella, who had been
in continued ill-health for some years.  His letters to friends in Dublin show
how greatly he suffered.  To the Rev. John Worrall he wrote, in a letter which
he begged him to burn, "What you tell me of Mrs. Johnson I have long expected
with great oppression and heaviness of heart.  We have been perfect friends
these thirty-five years.  Upon my advice they both came to Ireland, and have
been ever since my constant companions; and the remainder of my life will be a
very melancholy scene, when one of them is gone, whom I most esteemed, upon
the score of every good quality that can possibly recommend a human creature."
He would not for the world be present at her death:  "I should be a trouble to
her, and a torment to myself."  If Stella came to Dublin, he begged that she
might be lodged in some airy, healthy part, and not in the Deanery, where too
it would be improper for her to die.  "There is not a greater folly," he
thinks, "than to contract too great and intimate a friendship, which must
always leave the survivor miserable."  To Dr. Stopford he wrote in similar
terms of the "younger of the two" "oldest and dearest friends I have in the
world."  "This was a person of my own rearing and instructing from childhood,
who excelled in every good quality that can possibly accomplish a human
creature. . . .  I know not what I am saying; but believe me that violent
friendship is much more lasting and as much engaging as violent love."  To Dr.
Sheridan he said, "I look upon this to be the greatest event that can ever
happen to me; but all my preparation will not suffice to make me bear it like
a philosopher nor altogether like a Christian.  There hath been the most
intimate friendship between us from our childhood, and the greatest merit on
her side that ever was in one human creature towards another."[10]  Pope
alludes in a letter to Sheridan to the illness of Swift's "particular friend,"
but with the exception of another reference by Pope, and of a curiously
flippant remark by Bolingbroke, the subject is nowhere mentioned in Swift's
correspondence with his literary and fashionable friends in London.

Swift crossed to Ireland in August, fearing the worst; but Stella rallied, and
in the spring of 1727 he returned to London.  In August, however, there came
alarming news, when Swift was himself suffering from giddiness and deafness.
To Dr. Sheridan he wrote that the last act of life was always a tragedy at
best:  "it is a bitter aggravation to have one's best friend go before one."
Life was indifferent to him; if he recovered from his disorder it would only
be to feel the loss of "that person for whose sake only life was worth
preserving.  I brought both those friends over that we might be happy together
as long as God should please; the knot is broken, and the remaining person you
know has ill answered the end; and the other, who is now to be lost, is all
that was valuable."  To Worrall he again wrote (in Latin) that Stella ought
not to be lodged at the Deanery; he had enemies who would place a bad
interpretation upon it if she died there.

Swift left London for Dublin in September; he was detained some days at
Holyhead by stress of weather, and in the private journal which he kept during
that time he speaks of the suspense he was in about his "dearest friend."[11]
In December Stella made a will--signed "Esther Johnson, spinster"--disposing
of her property in the manner Swift had suggested.  Her allusions to Swift are
incompatible with any such feeling of resentment as is suggested by Sheridan.
She died on January 28, 1728.  Swift could not bear to be present, but on the
night of her death he began to write his very interesting Character of Mrs.
Johnson, from which passages have already been quoted.  He there calls her
"the truest, most virtuous and valuable friend that I, or perhaps any other
person, was ever blessed with."  Combined with excellent gifts of the mind,
"she had a gracefulness, somewhat more than human, in every motion, word, and
action.  Never was so happy a conjunction of civility, freedom, easiness, and
sincerity."  Everyone treated her with marked respect, yet everyone was at
ease in her society.  She preserved her wit, judgment, and vivacity to the
last, but often complained of her memory.  She chose men rather than women for
her companions, "the usual topic of ladies' discourse being such as she had
little knowledge of and less relish."  "Honour, truth, liberality, good
nature, and modesty were the virtues she chiefly possessed, and most valued in
her acquaintance."  In some Prayers used by Swift during her last sickness, he
begged for pity for "the mournful friends of Thy distressed servant, who sink
under the weight of her present condition, and the fear of losing the most
valuable of our friends."  He was too ill to be present at the funeral at St.
Patrick's.  Afterwards, we are told, a lock of her hair was found in his desk,
wrapped in a paper bearing the words, "Only a woman's hair."

Swift continued to produce pamphlets manifesting growing misanthropy, though
he showed many kindnesses to people who stood in need of help.  He seems to
have given Mrs. Dingley fifty guineas a year, pretending that it came from a
fund for which he was trustee.  The mental decay which he had always feared--
"I shall be like that tree," he once said, "I shall die at the top"--became
marked about 1738.  Paralysis was followed by aphasia, and after acute pain,
followed by a long period of apathy, death relieved him in October 1745.  He
was buried by Stella's side, in accordance with his wishes.  The bulk of his
fortune was left to found a hospital for idiots and lunatics.

There has been much rather fruitless discussion respecting the reason or
reasons why Swift did not marry Stella; for if there was any marriage, it was
nothing more than a form.  Some have supposed that Swift resolved to remain
unmarried because the insanity of an uncle and the fits and giddiness to which
he was always subject led him to fear insanity in his own case.  Others,
looking rather to physical causes, have dwelt upon his coldness of temperament
and indisposition to love; upon the repugnance he often showed towards
marriage, and the tone of some of the verses on the subject written in his
later years.  Others, again, have found a cause in his parsimonious habits, in
his dread of poverty, the effects of which he had himself felt, and in the
smallness of his income, at least until he was middle-aged.[12]  It may well
be that one or all of these things influenced Swift's action.  We cannot say
more.  He himself, as we have seen, said, as early as 1704, that if his humour
and means had permitted him to think of marriage, his choice would have been
Stella.  Perhaps, however, there is not much mystery in the matter.  Swift
seems to have been wanting in passion; probably he was satisfied with the
affection which Stella gave him, and did not wish for more.  Such an
attachment as his usually results in marriage, but not necessarily.  It is not
sufficiently remembered that the affection began in Stella's childhood.  They
were "perfect friends" for nearly forty years, and her advancing years in no
way lessened his love, which was independent of beauty.  Whether Stella was
satisfied, who shall say?  Mrs. Oliphant thought that few women would be
disposed to pity Stella, or think her life one of blight or injury.  Mr.
Leslie Stephen says, "She might and probably did regard his friendship as a
full equivalent for the sacrifice. . . .  Is it better to be the most intimate
friend of a man of genius or the wife of a commonplace Tisdall?"  Whatever we
may surmise, there is nothing to prove that she was disappointed.  She was the
one star which brightened Swift's storm-tossed course; it is well that she was
spared seeing the wreck at the end.


The Journal to Stella is interesting from many points of view:  for its
bearing upon Swift's relations with Stella and upon his own character; for the
light which it throws upon the history of the time and upon prominent men of
the day; and for the illustrations it contains of the social life of people of
various classes in London and elsewhere.  The fact that it was written without
any thought of publication is one of its greatest attractions.  Swift jotted
down his opinions, his hopes, his disappointments, without thought of their
being seen by anybody but his correspondents.  The letters are transparently
natural.  It has been said more than once that the Journal, by the nature of
the case, contains no full-length portraits, and hardly any sketches.  Swift
mentions the people he met, but rarely stops to draw a picture of them.  But
though this is true, the casual remarks which he makes often give a vivid
impression of what he thought of the person of whom he is speaking, and in
many cases those few words form a chief part of our general estimate of the
man.  There are but few people of note at the time who are not mentioned in
these pages.  We see Queen Anne holding a Drawing-room in her bedroom:  "she
looked at us round with her fan in her mouth, and once a minute said about
three words to some that were nearest her."  We see Harley, afterwards the
Earl of Oxford, "a pure trifler," who was always putting off important
business; Bolingbroke, "a thorough rake"; the prudent Lord Dartmouth, the
other Secretary of State, from whom Swift could never "work out a dinner."
There is Marlborough, "covetous as Hell, and ambitious as the prince of it,"
yet a great general and unduly pressed by the Tories; and the volatile Earl of
Peterborough, "above fifty, and as active as one of five-and-twenty"--"the
ramblingest lying rogue on earth."  We meet poor Congreve, nearly blind, and
in fear of losing his commissionership; the kindly Arbuthnot, the Queen's
physician; Addison, whom Swift met more and more rarely, busy with the
preparation and production of Cato; Steele, careless as ever, neglecting
important appointments, and "governed by his wife most abominably"; Prior,
poet and diplomatist, with a "lean carcass"; and young Berkeley of Trinity
College, Dublin, "a very ingenious man and great philosopher," whom Swift
determined to favour as much as he could.  Mrs. Masham, the Duchess of
Somerset, the Duchess of Shrewsbury, the Duchess of Hamilton, Lady Betty
Germaine, and many other ladies appear with more or less distinctness; besides
a host of people of less note, of whom we often know little but what Swift
tells us.

Swift throws much light, too, on the daily life of his time.  The bellman on
his nightly rounds, calling "Paaast twelvvve o'clock"; the dinner at three, or
at the latest, four; the meetings at coffee-houses; the book-sales; the visit
to the London sights--the lions at the Tower, Bedlam, the tombs in Westminster
Abbey, and the puppet-show; the terrible Mohocks, of whom Swift stood in so
much fear; the polite "howdees" sent to friends by footmen; these and more are
all described in the Journal.  We read of curious habits and practices of
fashionable ladies; of the snuff used by Mrs. Dingley and others; of the
jokes--"bites," puns, and the like--indulged in by polite persons.  When Swift
lodged at Chelsea, he reached London either by boat, or by coach,--which was
sometimes full when he wanted it,--or by walking across the "Five Fields," not
without fear of robbers at night.  The going to or from Ireland was a serious
matter; after the long journey by road came the voyage (weather permitting) of
some fifteen hours, with the risk of being seized or pursued by French
privateers; and when Ireland was reached the roads were of the worst.  We have
glimpses of fashionable society in Dublin, of the quiet life at Laracor and
Trim, and of the drinking of the waters at Wexford, where visitors had to put
up with primitive arrangements:  "Mrs. Dingley never saw such a place in her
life."

Swift's own characteristics come out in the clearest manner in the Journal,
which gives all his hopes and fears during three busy years.  He was pleased
to find on his arrival in London how great a value was set on his friendship
by both political parties:  "The Whigs were ravished to see me, and would lay
hold on me as a twig while they are drowning;" but Godolphin's coldness
enraged him, so that he was "almost vowing vengeance."  Next day he talked
treason heartily against the Whigs, their baseness and ingratitude, and went
home full of schemes of revenge.  "The Tories drily tell me I may make my
fortune, if I please; but I do not understand them, or rather, I DO understand
them."  He realised that the Tories might not be more grateful than others,
but he thought they were pursuing the true interests of the public, and was
glad to contribute what was in his power.  His vanity was gratified by Harley
inviting him to the private dinners with St. John and Harcourt which were
given on Saturdays, and by their calling him Jonathan; but he did not hope too
much from their friendship:  "I said I believed they would leave me Jonathan,
as they found me. . .  but I care not."

Of Swift's frugal habits there is abundant evidence in the Journal.  When he
came to town he took rooms on a first floor, "a dining-room and bed-chamber,
at eight shillings a week; plaguy dear, but I spend nothing for eating, never
go to a tavern, and very seldom in a coach; yet after all it will be
expensive."  In November he mentions that he had a fire:  "I am spending my
second half-bushel of coals."  In another place he says, "People have so left
the town, that I am at a loss for a dinner. . . .  It cost me eighteenpence in
coach-hire before I could find a place to dine in."  Elsewhere we find:  "This
paper does not cost me a farthing:  I have it from the Secretary's office."
He often complains of having to take a coach owing to the dirty condition of
the streets:  "This rain ruins me in coach-hire; I walked away sixpennyworth,
and came within a shilling length, and then took a coach, and got a lift back
for nothing."[13]

Swift's arrogance--the arrogance, sometimes, of a man who is morbidly
suspicious that he may be patronised--is shown in the manner in which he
speaks of the grand ladies with whom he came in contact.  He calls the Duke of
Ormond's daughters "insolent drabs," and talks of his "mistress, Ophy Butler's
wife, who is grown a little charmless."  When the Duchess of Shrewsbury
reproached him for not dining with her, Swift said that was not so soon done;
he expected more advances from ladies, especially duchesses.  On another
occasion he was to have supped at Lady Ashburnham's, "but the drab did not
call for us in her coach, as she promised, but sent for us, and so I sent my
excuses."  The arrogance was, however, often only on the surface.  It is
evident that Swift was very kind in many cases.  He felt deeply for Mrs. Long
in her misfortunes, living and dying in an obscure country town.  On the last
illness of the poet Harrison he says, "I am very much afflicted for him, as he
is my own creature. . . .  I was afraid to knock at the door; my mind misgave
me."  He was "heartily sorry for poor Mrs. Parnell's death; she seemed to be
an excellent good-natured young woman, and I believe the poor lad is much
afflicted; they appeared to live perfectly well together."  Afterwards he
helped Parnell by introducing him to Bolingbroke and Oxford.  He found kind
words for Mrs. Manley in her illness, and Lady Ashburnham's death was
"extremely moving. . . .  She was my greatest favourite, and I am in excessive
concern for her loss."  Lastly, he was extraordinarily patient towards his
servant Patrick, who drank, stopped out at night, and in many ways tried
Swift's temper.  There were good points about Patrick, but no doubt the great
consideration which Swift showed him was due in part to the fact that he was a
favourite of the ladies in Dublin, and had Mrs. Vanhomrigh to intercede for
him.

But for the best example of the kindly side of Swift's nature, we must turn to
what he tells us in the Journal about Stella herself.  The "little language"
which Swift used when writing to her was the language he employed when playing
with Stella as a little child at Moor Park.  Thackeray, who was not much in
sympathy with Swift, said that he knew of "nothing more manly, more tender,
more exquisitely touching, than some of these notes."  Swift says that when he
wrote plainly, he felt as if they were no longer alone, but "a bad scrawl is
so snug it looks like a PMD."  In writing his fond and playful prattle, he
made up his mouth "just as if he were speaking it."[14]

Though Mrs. Dingley is constantly associated with Stella in the affectionate
greetings in the Journal, she seems to have been included merely as a cloak to
enable him to express the more freely his affection for her companion.  Such
phrases as "saucy girls," "sirrahs," "sauceboxes," and the like, are often
applied to both; and sometimes Swift certainly writes as if the one were as
dear to him as the other; thus we find, "Farewell, my dearest lives and
delights, I love you better than ever, if possible, as hope saved, I do, and
ever will. . . .  I can count upon nothing, nor will, but upon MD's love and
kindness. . . .  And so farewell, dearest MD, Stella, Dingley, Presto, all
together, now and for ever, all together."  But as a rule, notwithstanding
Swift's caution, the greetings intended for Stella alone are easily
distinguishable in tone.  He often refers to her weak eyes and delicate
health.  Thus he writes, "The chocolate is a present, madam, for Stella.
Don't read this, you little rogue, with your little eyes; but give it to
Dingley, pray now; and I will write as plain as the skies."  And again, "God
Almighty bless poor Stella, and her eyes and head:  what shall we do to cure
them, poor dear life?"  Or, "Now to Stella's little postscript; and I am
almost crazed that you vex yourself for not writing.  Can't you dictate to
Dingley, and not strain your dear little eyes?  I am sure 'tis the grief of my
soul to think you are out of order."  They had been keeping his birthday;
Swift wished he had been with them, rather than in London, where he had no
manner of pleasure:  "I say Amen with all my heart and vitals, that we may
never be asunder again ten days together while poor Presto lives."  A few days
later he says, "I wish I were at Laracor, with dear charming MD," and again,
"Farewell, dearest beloved MD, and love poor poor Presto, who has not had one
happy day since he left you."  "I will say no more, but beg you to be easy
till Fortune takes his course, and to believe MD's felicity is the great goal
I aim at in all my pursuits."  "How does Stella look, Madam Dingley?" he asks;
"pretty well, a handsome young woman still?  Will she pass in a crowd?  Will
she make a figure in a country church?"  Elsewhere he writes, on receipt of a
letter, "God Almighty bless poor dear Stella, and send her a great many
birthdays, all happy and healthy and wealthy, and with me ever together, and
never asunder again, unless by chance. . . .  I can hardly imagine you absent
when I am reading your letter or writing to you.  No, faith, you are just here
upon this little paper, and therefore I see and talk with you every evening
constantly, and sometimes in the morning."  The letters lay under Swift's
pillow, and he fondled them as if he were caressing Stella's hand.

Of Stella herself we naturally have no direct account in the Journal, but we
hear a good deal of her life in Ireland, and can picture what she was.  Among
her friends in and about Trim and Laracor were Dr. Raymond, the vicar of Trim,
and his wife, the Garret Wesleys, the Percevals, and Mr. Warburton, Swift's
curate.  At Dublin there were Archdeacon Walls and his family; Alderman
Stoyte, his wife and sister-in-law; Dean Sterne and the Irish Postmaster-
General, Isaac Manley.  For years these friends formed a club which met in
Dublin at each other's houses, to sup and play cards ("ombre and claret, and
toasted oranges"), and we have frequent allusions to Stella's indifferent
play, and the money which she lost, much to Mrs. Dingley's chagrin:  "Poor
Dingley fretted to see Stella lose that four and elevenpence t'other night."
Mrs. Dingley herself could hardly play well enough to hold the cards while
Stella went into the next room.  If at dinner the mutton was underdone, and
"poor Stella cannot eat, poor dear rogue," then "Dingley is so vexed."  Swift
was for ever urging Stella to walk and ride; she was "naturally a stout
walker," and "Dingley would do well enough if her petticoats were pinned up."
And we see Stella setting out on and returning from her ride, with her riband
and mask:  "Ah, that riding to Laracor gives me short sighs as well as you,"
he says; "all the days I have passed here have been dirt to those."

If the Journal shows us some of Swift's less attractive qualities, it shows
still more how great a store of humour, tenderness, and affection there was in
him.  In these letters we see his very soul; in his literary work we are
seldom moved to anything but admiration of his wit and genius.  Such daily
outpourings could never have been written for publication, they were meant
only for one who understood him perfectly; and everything that we know of
Stella--her kindliness, her wit, her vivacity, her loyalty--shows that she was
worthy of the confidence.

                                 ----------



JOURNAL TO STELLA


LETTER 1.[1]

CHESTER, Sept. 2, 1710.

Joe[2] will give you an account of me till I got into the boat; after which
the rogues made a new bargain, and forced me to give them two crowns, and
talked as if we should not be able to overtake any ship:  but in half an hour
we got to the yacht; for the ships lay by [to] wait for my Lord Lieutenant's
steward.  We made our voyage in fifteen hours just.  Last night I came to this
town, and shall leave it, I believe, on Monday.  The first man I met in
Chester was Dr. Raymond.[3]  He and Mrs. Raymond were here about levying a
fine, in order to have power to sell their estate.  They have found everything
answer very well.  They both desire to present their humble services to you:
they do not think of Ireland till next year.  I got a fall off my horse,
riding here from Parkgate,[4] but no hurt; the horse understanding falls very
well, and lying quietly till I get up.  My duty to the Bishop of Clogher.[5]
I saw him returning from Dunleary; but he saw not me.  I take it ill he was
not at Convocation, and that I have not his name to my powers.[6]  I beg you
will hold your resolution of going to Trim, and riding there as much as you
can.  Let the Bishop of Clogher remind the Bishop of Killala[7] to send me a
letter, with one enclosed to the Bishop of Lichfield.[8]  Let all who write to
me, enclose to Richard Steele, Esq., at his office at the Cockpit, near
Whitehall.[9]  But not MD; I will pay for their letters at St. James's Coffee-
house,[10] that I may have them the sooner.  My Lord Mountjoy[11] is now in
the humour that we should begin our journey this afternoon; so that I have
stole here again to finish this letter, which must be short or long
accordingly.  I write this post to Mrs. Wesley,[12] and will tell her, that I
have taken care she may have her bill of one hundred and fifteen pounds
whenever she pleases to send for it; and in that case I desire you will send
it her enclosed and sealed, and have it ready so, in case she should send for
it:  otherwise keep it.  I will say no more till I hear whether I go to-day or
no:  if I do, the letter is almost at an end.  My cozen Abigail is grown
prodigiously old.  God Almighty bless poo dee richar MD; and, for God's sake,
be merry, and get oo health.  I am perfectly resolved to return as soon as I
have done my commission, whether it succeeds or no.  I never went to England
with so little desire in my life.  If Mrs. Curry[13] makes any difficulty
about the lodgings, I will quit them and pay her from July 9 last, and Mrs.
Brent[14] must write to Parvisol[15] with orders accordingly.  The post is
come from London, and just going out; so I have only time to pray God to bless
poor richr MD FW FW MD MD ME ME ME.



LETTER 2.

LONDON, Sept. 9, 1710.

Got here last Thursday,[1] after five days' travelling, weary the first,
almost dead the second, tolerable the third, and well enough the rest; and am
now glad of the fatigue, which has served for exercise; and I am at present
well enough.  The Whigs were ravished to see me, and would lay hold on me as a
twig while they are drowning,[2] and the great men making me their clumsy
apologies, etc.  But my Lord Treasurer[3] received me with a great deal of
coldness, which has enraged me so, I am almost vowing revenge.  I have not yet
gone half my circle; but I find all my acquaintance just as I left them.  I
hear my Lady Giffard[4] is much at Court, and Lady Wharton[5] was ridiculing
it t'other day; so I have lost a friend there.  I have not yet seen her, nor
intend it; but I will contrive to see Stella's mother[6] some other way.  I
writ to the Bishop of Clogher from Chester; and I now write to the Archbishop
of Dublin.[7]  Everything is turning upside down; every Whig in great office
will, to a man, be infallibly put out; and we shall have such a winter as hath
not been seen in England.  Everybody asks me, how I came to be so long in
Ireland, as naturally as if here were my being; but no soul offers to make it
so:  and I protest I shall return to Dublin, and the Canal at Laracor,[8] with
more satisfaction than ever I did in my life.  The Tatler[9] expects every day
to be turned out of his employment; and the Duke of Ormond,[10] they say, will
be Lieutenant of Ireland.  I hope you are now peaceably in Presto's[11]
lodgings; but I resolve to turn you out by Christmas; in which time I shall
either do my business, or find it not to be done.  Pray be at Trim by the time
this letter comes to you; and ride little Johnson, who must needs be now in
good case.  I have begun this letter unusually, on the post-night, and have
already written to the Archbishop; and cannot lengthen this.  Henceforth I
will write something every day to MD, and make it a sort of journal; and when
it is full, I will send it, whether MD writes or no; and so that will be
pretty:  and I shall always be in conversation with MD, and MD with Presto.
Pray make Parvisol pay you the ten pounds immediately; so I ordered him.  They
tell me I am grown fatter, and look better; and, on Monday, Jervas[12] is to
retouch my picture.  I thought I saw Jack Temple[13] and his wife pass by me
to-day in their coach; but I took no notice of them.  I am glad I have wholly
shaken off that family.  Tell the Provost,[14] I have obeyed his commands to
the Duke of Ormond; or let it alone, if you please.  I saw Jemmy Leigh[15]
just now at the Coffee-house, who asked after you with great kindness:  he
talks of going in a fortnight to Ireland.  My service to the Dean,[16] and
Mrs. Walls, and her Archdeacon.[17]  Will Frankland's[18] wife is near
bringing to-bed, and I have promised to christen the child.  I fancy you had
my Chester letter the Tuesday after I writ.  I presented Dr. Raymond to Lord
Wharton[19] at Chester.  Pray let me know when Joe gets his money.[20]  It is
near ten, and I hate to send by the bellman.[21]  MD shall have a longer
letter in a week, but I send this only to tell I am safe in London; and so
farewell, etc.



LETTER 3.

LONDON, Sept. 9, 1710.

After seeing the Duke of Ormond, dining with Dr. Cockburn,[1] passing some
part of the afternoon with Sir Matthew Dudley[2] and Will Frankland, the rest
at St.  James's Coffee-house, I came home, and writ to the Archbishop of
Dublin and MD, and am going to bed.  I forgot to tell you, that I begged Will
Frankland to stand Manley's[3] friend with his father in this shaking season
for places.  He told me, his father was in danger to be out; that several were
now soliciting for Manley's place; that he was accused of opening letters;
that Sir Thomas Frankland[4] would sacrifice everything to save himself; and
in that, I fear, Manley is undone, etc.

l0.  To-day I dined with Lord Mountjoy at Kensington; saw my mistress, Ophy
Butler's[5] wife, who is grown a little charmless.  I sat till ten in the
evening with Addison and Steele:  Steele will certainly lose his Gazetteer's
place, all the world detesting his engaging in parties.[6]  At ten I went to
the Coffee-house, hoping to find Lord Radnor,[7] whom I had not seen.  He was
there; and for an hour and a half we talked treason heartily against the
Whigs, their baseness and ingratitude.  And I am come home, rolling
resentments in my mind, and framing schemes of revenge:  full of which (having
written down some hints) I go to bed.  I am afraid MD dined at home, because
it is Sunday; and there was the little half-pint of wine:  for God's sake, be
good girls, and all will be well.  Ben Tooke[8] was with me this morning.

11.  Seven, morning.  I am rising to go to Jervas to finish my picture, and
'tis shaving-day, so good-morrow MD; but don't keep me now, for I can't stay;
and pray dine with the Dean, but don't lose your money.  I long to hear from
you, etc.--Ten at night.  I sat four hours this morning to Jervas, who has
given my picture quite another turn, and now approves it entirely; but we must
have the approbation of the town.  If I were rich enough, I would get a copy
of it, and bring it over.  Mr. Addison and I dined together at his lodgings,
and I sat with him part of this evening; and I am now come home to write an
hour.  Patrick[9] observes, that the rabble here are much more inquisitive in
politics than in Ireland.  Every day we expect changes, and the Parliament to
be dissolved.  Lord Wharton expects every day to be out:  he is working like a
horse for elections; and, in short, I never saw so great a ferment among all
sorts of people.  I had a miserable letter from Joe last Saturday, telling me
Mr. Pratt[10] refuses payment of his money.  I have told it Mr. Addison, and
will to Lord Wharton; but I fear with no success.  However, I will do all I
can.

12.  To-day I presented Mr. Ford[11] to the Duke of Ormond; and paid my first
visit to Lord President,[12] with whom I had much discourse; but put him
always off when he began to talk of Lord Wharton in relation to me, till he
urged it:  then I said, he knew I never expected anything from Lord Wharton,
and that Lord Wharton knew that I understood it so.  He said that he had
written twice to Lord Wharton about me, who both times said nothing at all to
that part of his letter.  I am advised not to meddle in the affair of the
First-Fruits, till this hurry is a little over, which still depends, and we
are all in the dark.  Lord President told me he expects every day to be out,
and has done so these two months.  I protest, upon my life, I am heartily
weary of this town, and wish I had never stirred.

13.  I went this morning to the city, to see Mr. Stratford the Hamburg
merchant, my old schoolfellow;[13] but calling at Bull's[14] on Ludgate Hill,
he forced me to his house at Hampstead to dinner among a great deal of ill
company; among the rest Mr. Hoadley,[15] the Whig clergyman, so famous for
acting the contrary part to Sacheverell:[16]   but tomorrow I design again to
see Stratford.  I was glad, however, to be at Hampstead, where I saw Lady
Lucy[17] and Moll Stanhope.  I hear very unfortunate news of Mrs. Long;[18]
she and her comrade[19] have broke up house, and she is broke for good and
all, and is gone to the country:  I should be extremely sorry if this be true.

14.  To-day, I saw Patty Rolt,[20] who heard I was in town; and I dined with
Stratford at a merchant's in the city, where I drank the first Tokay wine I
ever saw; and it is admirable, yet not to the degree I expected.  Stratford is
worth a plum,[21] and is now lending the Government forty thousand pounds; yet
we were educated together at the same school and university.[22]  We hear the
Chancellor[23] is to be suddenly out, and Sir Simon Harcourt[24] to succeed
him:  I am come early home, not caring for the Coffee-house.

15.  To-day Mr. Addison, Colonel Freind,[25] and I, went to see the million
lottery[26] drawn at Guildhall.  The jackanapes of bluecoat boys gave
themselves such airs in pulling out the tickets, and showed white hands open
to the company, to let us see there was no cheat.  We dined at a country-house
near Chelsea, where Mr. Addison often retires; and to-night, at the Coffee-
house, we hear Sir Simon Harcourt is made Lord Keeper; so that now we expect
every moment the Parliament will be dissolved; but I forgot that this letter
will not go in three or four days, and that my news will be stale, which I
should therefore put in the last paragraph.  Shall I send this letter before I
hear from MD, or shall I keep it to lengthen?  I have not yet seen Stella's
mother, because I will not see Lady Giffard; but I will contrive to go there
when Lady Giffard is abroad.  I forgot to mark my two former letters; but I
remember this is Number 3, and I have not yet had Number 1 from MD; but I
shall by Monday, which I reckon will be just a fortnight after you had my
first.  I am resolved to bring over a great deal of china.  I loved it
mightily to-day.[27]  What shall I bring?

16.  Morning.  Sir John Holland,[28] Comptroller of the Household, has sent to
desire my acquaintance:  I have a mind to refuse him, because he is a Whig,
and will, I suppose, be out among the rest; but he is a man of worth and
learning.  Tell me, do you like this journal way of writing?  Is it not
tedious and dull?

Night.  I dined to-day with a cousin, a printer,[29] where Patty Rolt lodges,
and then came home, after a visit or two; and it has been a very insipid day.
Mrs. Long's misfortune is confirmed to me; bailiffs were in her house; she
retired to private lodgings; thence to the country, nobody knows where:  her
friends leave letters at some inn, and they are carried to her; and she writes
answers without dating them from any place.  I swear, it grieves me to the
soul.

17.  To-day I dined six miles out of town, with Will Pate,[30] the learned
woollen-draper; Mr. Stratford went with me; six miles here is nothing:  we
left Pate after sunset, and were here before it was dark.  This letter shall
go on Tuesday, whether I hear from MD or no.  My health continues pretty well;
pray God Stella may give me a good account of hers! and I hope you are now at
Trim, or soon designing it.  I was disappointed to-night:  the fellow gave me
a letter, and I hoped to see little MD's hand; and it was only to invite me to
a venison pasty to-day:  so I lost my pasty into the bargain.  Pox on these
declining courtiers!  Here is Mr. Brydges,[31] the Paymaster-General, desiring
my acquaintance; but I hear the Queen sent Lord Shrewsbury[32] to assure him
he may keep his place; and he promises me great assistance in the affair of
the First-Fruits.  Well, I must turn over this leaf to-night, though the side
would hold another line; but pray consider this is a whole sheet; it holds a
plaguy deal, and you must be content to be weary; but I'll do so no more.  Sir
Simon Harcourt is made Attorney-General, and not Lord Keeper.

18.  To-day I dined with Mr. Stratford at Mr. Addison's retirement near
Chelsea; then came to town; got home early, and began a letter to the
Tatler,[33] about the corruptions of style and writing, etc., and, having not
heard from you, am resolved this letter shall go to-night.  Lord Wharton was
sent for to town in mighty haste, by the Duke of Devonshire:[34]  they have
some project in hand; but it will not do, for every hour we expect a thorough
revolution, and that the Parliament will be dissolved.  When you see Joe, tell
him Lord Wharton is too busy to mind any of his affairs; but I will get what
good offices I can from Mr. Addison, and will write to-day to Mr. Pratt; and
bid Joe not to be discouraged, for I am confident he will get the money under
any Government; but he must have patience.

19.  I have been scribbling this morning, and I believe shall hardly fill this
side to-day, but send it as it is; and it is good enough for naughty girls
that won't write to a body, and to a good boy like Presto.  I thought to have
sent this to-night, but was kept by company, and could not; and, to say the
truth, I had a little mind to expect one post more for a letter from MD.
Yesterday at noon died the Earl of Anglesea,[35] the great support of the
Tories; so that employment of Vice-Treasurer of Ireland is again vacant.  We
were to have been great friends, and I could hardly have a loss that could
grieve me more.  The Bishop of Durham[36] died the same day.  The Duke of
Ormond's daughter[37] was to visit me to-day at a third place by way of
advance,[38] and I am to return it to-morrow.  I have had a letter from Lady
Berkeley, begging me for charity to come to Berkeley Castle, for company to my
lord,[39] who has been ill of a dropsy; but I cannot go, and must send my
excuse to-morrow.  I am told that in a few hours there will be more removals.

20.  To-day I returned my visits to the Duke's daughters;[40] the insolent
drabs came up to my very mouth to salute me.  Then I heard the report
confirmed of removals; my Lord President Somers; the Duke of Devonshire, Lord
Steward; and Mr. Boyle,[41] Secretary of State, are all turned out to-day.  I
never remember such bold steps taken by a Court:  I am almost shocked at it,
though I did not care if they were all hanged.  We are astonished why the
Parliament is not yet dissolved, and why they keep a matter of that importance
to the last.  We shall have a strange winter here, between the struggles of a
cunning provoked discarded party, and the triumphs of one in power; of both
which I shall be an indifferent spectator, and return very peaceably to
Ireland, when I have done my part in the affair I am entrusted with, whether
it succeeds or no.  To-morrow I change my lodgings in Pall Mall for one in
Bury Street,[42] where I suppose I shall continue while I stay in London.  If
anything happens tomorrow, I will add it.--Robin's Coffee-house.[43]  We have
great news just now from Spain; Madrid taken, and Pampeluna.  I am here ever
interrupted.

21.  I have just received your letter, which I will not answer now; God be
thanked all things are so well.  I find you have not yet had my second:  I had
a letter from Parvisol, who tells me he gave Mrs. Walls a bill of twenty
pounds for me, to be given to you; but you have not sent it.  This night the
Parliament is dissolved:  great news from Spain; King Charles and Stanhope are
at Madrid, and Count Staremberg has taken Pampeluna.  Farewell.  This is from
St. James's Coffee-house.  I will begin my answer to your letter to-night, but
not send it this week.  Pray tell me whether you like this journal way of
writing.--I don't like your reasons for not going to Trim.  Parvisol tells me
he can sell your horse.  Sell it, with a pox?  Pray let him know that he shall
sell his soul as soon.  What? sell anything that Stella loves, and may
sometimes ride? It is hers, and let her do as she pleases:  pray let him know
this by the first that you know goes to Trim.  Let him sell my grey, and be
hanged.



LETTER 4.

LONDON, Sept. 21, 1710.

Here must I begin another letter, on a whole sheet, for fear saucy little MD
should be angry, and think MUCH that the paper is too LITTLE.  I had your
letter this night, as told you just and no more in my last; for this must be
taken up in answering yours, saucebox.  I believe I told you where I dined to-
day; and to-morrow I go out of town for two days to dine with the same company
on Sunday; Molesworth[1] the Florence Envoy, Stratford, and some others.  I
heard to-day that a gentlewoman from Lady Giffard's house had been at the
Coffee-house to inquire for me.  It was Stella's mother, I suppose.  I shall
send her a penny-post letter[2] to-morrow, and contrive to see her without
hazarding seeing Lady Giffard, which I will not do until she begs my pardon.

22.  I dined to-day at Hampstead with Lady Lucy, etc., and when I got home
found a letter from Joe, with one enclosed to Lord Wharton, which I will send
to his Excellency, and second it as well as I can; but to talk of getting the
Queen's order is a jest.  Things are in such a combustion here, that I am
advised not to meddle yet in the affair I am upon, which concerns the clergy
of a whole kingdom; and does he think anybody will trouble the Queen about
Joe?  We shall, I hope, get a recommendation from the Lord Lieutenant to the
trustees for the linen business, and I hope that will do; and so I will write
to him in a few days, and he must have patience.  This is an answer to part of
your letter as well as his.  I lied; it is to-morrow I go to the country, and
I won't answer a bit more of your letter yet.

23.  Here is such a stir and bustle with this little MD of ours; I must be
writing every night; I can't go to bed without a word to them; I can't put out
my candle till I have bid them good-night:  O Lord, O Lord!  Well, I dined the
first time to-day, with Will Frankland and his fortune:  she is not very
handsome.  Did I not say I would go out of town to-day?  I hate lying abroad
and clutter; I go tomorrow in Frankland's chariot, and come back at night.
Lady Berkeley has invited me to Berkeley Castle, and Lady Betty Germaine[3] to
Drayton in Northamptonshire; and I'll go to neither.  Let me alone, I must
finish my pamphlet.  I have sent a long letter to Bickerstaff:[4] let the
Bishop of Clogher smoke[5] it if he can.  Well, I'll write to the Bishop of
Killala; but you might have told him how sudden and unexpected my journey was
though.  Deuce take Lady S---; and if I know D---y, he is a rawboned-faced
fellow, not handsome, nor visibly so young as you say:  she sacrifices two
thousand pounds a year, and keeps only six hundred.  Well, you have had all my
land journey in my second letter, and so much for that.  So, you have got into
Presto's lodgings; very fine, truly!  We have had a fortnight of the most
glorious weather on earth, and still continues:  I hope you have made the best
of it.  Ballygall[6] will be a pure[7] good place for air, if Mrs. Ashe makes
good her promise.  Stella writes like an emperor:  I am afraid it hurts your
eyes; take care of that pray, pray, Mrs. Stella.  Can't you do what you will
with your own horse?  Pray don't let that puppy Parvisol sell him.  Patrick is
drunk about three times a week, and I bear it, and he has got the better of
me; but one of these days I will positively turn him off to the wide world,
when none of you are by to intercede for him.--Stuff--how can I get her
husband into the Charter-house? get a ---- into the Charter-house.--Write
constantly!  Why, sirrah, don't I write every day, and sometimes twice a day
to MD?  Now I have answered all your letter, and the rest must be as it can
be:  send me my bill.  Tell Mrs. Brent what I say of the Charter-house.  I
think this enough for one night; and so farewell till this time to-morrow.

24.  To-day I dined six miles out of town at Will Pate's, with Stratford,
Frankland, and the Molesworths,[8] and came home at night, and was weary and
lazy.  I can say no more now, but good-night.

25.  I was so lazy to-day that I dined at next door,[9] and have sat at home
since six, writing to the Bishop of Clogher, Dean Sterne, and Mr. Manley:  the
last, because I am in fear for him about his place, and have sent him my
opinion, what I and his other friends here think he ought to do.  I hope he
will take it well.  My advice was, to keep as much in favour as possible with
Sir Thomas Frankland, his master here.

26.  Smoke how I widen the margin by lying in bed when I write.  My bed lies
on the wrong side for me, so that I am forced often to write when I am up.
Manley, you must know, has had people putting in for his place already; and
has been complained of for opening letters.  Remember that last Sunday,
September 24, 1710, was as hot as midsummer.  This was written in the morning;
it is now night, and Presto in bed.  Here's a clutter, I have gotten MD's
second letter, and I must answer it here.  I gave the bill to Tooke, and so--
Well, I dined to-day with Sir John Holland the Comptroller, and sat with him
till eight; then came home, and sent my letters, and writ part of a
lampoon,[10] which goes on very slow:  and now I am writing to saucy MD; no
wonder, indeed, good boys must write to naughty girls.  I have not seen your
mother yet; my penny-post letter, I suppose, miscarried:  I will write
another.  Mr. S---- came to see me; and said M---- was going to the country
next morning with her husband (who I find is a surly brute); so I could only
desire my service to her.

27.  To-day all our company dined at Will Frankland's, with Steele and Addison
too.  This is the first rainy day since I came to town; I cannot afford to
answer your letter yet.  Morgan,[11] the puppy, writ me a long letter, to
desire I would recommend him for purse-bearer or secretary to the next Lord
Chancellor that would come with the next Governor.  I will not answer him; but
beg you will say these words to his father Raymond,[12] or anybody that will
tell him:  That Dr. Swift has received his letter; and would be very ready to
serve him, but cannot do it in what he desires, because he has no sort of
interest in the persons to be applied to.  These words you may write, and let
Joe, or Mr. Warburton,[13] give them to him:  a pox on him!  However, it is by
these sort of ways that fools get preferment.  I must not end yet, because I
cannot say good-night without losing a line, and then MD would scold; but now,
good-night.

28.  I have the finest piece of Brazil tobacco for Dingley that ever was
born.[14]  You talk of Leigh; why, he won't be in Dublin these two months:  he
goes to the country, then returns to London, to see how the world goes here in
Parliament.  Good-night, sirrahs; no, no, not night; I writ this in the
morning, and looking carelessly I thought it had been of last night.  I dined
to-day with Mrs. Barton[15] alone at her lodgings; where she told me for
certain, that Lady S----  was with child when she was last in England, and
pretended a tympany, and saw everybody; then disappeared for three weeks, her
tympany was gone, and she looked like a ghost, etc.  No wonder she married
when she was so ill at containing.  Connolly[16] is out; and Mr. Roberts in
his place, who loses a better here, but was formerly a Commissioner in
Ireland.  That employment cost Connolly three thousand pounds to Lord Wharton;
so he has made one ill bargain in his life.

29.  I wish MD a merry Michaelmas.  I dined with Mr. Addison, and Jervas the
painter, at Addison's country place; and then came home, and writ more to my
lampoon.  I made a Tatler since I came:  guess which it is, and whether the
Bishop of Clogher smokes it.  I saw Mr. Sterne[17] to-day:  he will do as you
order, and I will give him chocolate for Stella's health.  He goes not these
three weeks.  I wish I could send it some other way.  So now to your letter,
brave boys.  I don't like your way of saving shillings:  nothing vexes me but
that it does not make Stella a coward in a coach.[18] I don't think any lady's
advice about my ear signifies twopence:  however I will, in compliance to you,
ask Dr. Cockburn.  Radcliffe[19] I know not, and Barnard[20] I never see.
Walls will certainly be stingier for seven years, upon pretence of his
robbery.  So Stella puns again; why, 'tis well enough; but I'll not second it,
though I could make a dozen:  I never thought of a pun since I left Ireland.--
Bishop of Clogher's bill?  Why, he paid it to me; do you think I was such a
fool to go without it?  As for the four shillings, I will give you a bill on
Parvisol for it on t'other side of this paper; and pray tear off the two
letters I shall write to him and Joe, or let Dingley transcribe and send them;
though that to Parvisol, I believe, he must have my hand for.  No, no, I'll
eat no grapes; I ate about six the other day at Sir John Holland's; but would
not give sixpence for a thousand, they are so bad this year.  Yes, faith, I
hope in God Presto and MD will be together this time twelvemonth.  What then?
Last year I suppose I was at Laracor; but next I hope to eat my Michaelmas
goose at my two little gooses' lodgings.  I drink no aile (I suppose you mean
ale); but yet good wine every day, of five and six shillings a bottle.  O
Lord, how much Stella writes! pray don't carry that too far, young women, but
be temperate, to hold out.  To-morrow I go to Mr. Harley.[21] Why, small hopes
from the Duke of Ormond:  he loves me very well, I believe, and would, in my
turn, give me something to make me easy; and I have good interest among his
best friends.  But I don't think of anything further than the business I am
upon.  You see I writ to Manley before I had your letter, and I fear he will
be out.  Yes, Mrs. Owl, Bligh's corpse[22] came to Chester when I was there;
and I told you so in my letter, or forgot it.  I lodge in Bury Street, where I
removed a week ago.  I have the first floor, a dining-room, and bed-chamber,
at eight shillings a week; plaguy deep, but I spend nothing for eating, never
go to a tavern, and very seldom in a coach; yet after all it will be
expensive.  Why do you trouble yourself, Mistress Stella, about my instrument?
I have the same the Archbishop gave me; and it is as good now the bishops are
away.  The Dean friendly! the Dean be poxed:  a great piece of friendship
indeed, what you heard him tell the Bishop of Clogher; I wonder he had the
face to talk so:  but he lent me money, and that's enough.  Faith, I would not
send this these four days, only for writing to Joe and Parvisol.  Tell the
Dean that when the bishops send me any packets, they must not write to me at
Mr. Steele's; but direct for Mr. Steele, at his office at the Cockpit, and let
the enclosed be directed for me:  that mistake cost me eighteenpence the other
day.

30.  I dined with Stratford to-day, but am not to see Mr. Harley till
Wednesday:  it is late, and I send this before there is occasion for the bell;
because I would have Joe have his letter, and Parvisol too; which you must so
contrive as not to cost them double postage.  I can say no more, but that I
am, etc.



LETTER 5.

LONDON, Sept. 30, 1710.

Han't I brought myself into a fine praemunire,[1] to begin writing letters in
whole sheets? and now I dare not leave it off.  I cannot tell whether you like
these journal letters:  I believe they would be dull to me to read them over;
but, perhaps, little MD is pleased to know how Presto passes his time in her
absence.  I always begin my last the same day I ended my former.  I told you
where I dined to-day at a tavern with Stratford:  Lewis,[2] who is a great
favourite of Harley's, was to have been with us; but he was hurried to Hampton
Court, and sent his excuse; and that next Wednesday he would introduce me to
Harley.  'Tis good to see what a lamentable confession the Whigs all make me
of my ill usage:  but I mind them not.  I am already represented to Harley as
a discontented person, that was used ill for not being Whig enough; and I hope
for good usage from him.  The Tories drily tell me, I may make my fortune, if
I please; but I do not understand them--or rather, I do understand them.

Oct. 1.  To-day I dined at Molesworth's, the Florence Envoy; and sat this
evening with my friend Darteneuf,[3] whom you have heard me talk of; the
greatest punner of this town next myself.  Have you smoked the Tatler that I
writ?[4]  It is much liked here, and I think it a pure[5] one.  To-morrow I go
with Delaval,[6] the Portugal Envoy, to dine with Lord Halifax near Hampton
Court.[7]  Your Manley's brother, a Parliament-man here, has gotten an
employment;[8] and I am informed uses much interest to preserve his brother:
and, to-day, I spoke to the elder Frankland to engage his father (Postmaster
here); and I hope he will be safe, although he is cruelly hated by all the
Tories of Ireland.  I have almost finished my lampoon, and will print it for
revenge on a certain great person.[9]  It has cost me but three shillings in
meat and drink since I came here, as thin as the town is.  I laugh to see
myself so disengaged in these revolutions.  Well, I must leave off, and go
write to Sir John Stanley,[10] to desire him to engage Lady Hyde as my
mistress to engage Lord Hyde[11] in favour of Mr. Pratt.[12]

2.  Lord Halifax was at Hampton Court at his lodgings, and I dined with him
there with Methuen,[13] and Delaval, and the late Attorney-General.[14] I went
to the Drawing-room before dinner (for the Queen was at Hampton Court), and
expected to see nobody; but I met acquaintance enough.  I walked in the
gardens, saw the cartoons of Raphael, and other things; and with great
difficulty got from Lord Halifax, who would have kept me to-morrow to show me
his house and park, and improvements.  We left Hampton Court at sunset, and
got here in a chariot and two horses time enough by starlight.  That's
something charms me mightily about London; that you go dine a dozen miles off
in October, stay all day, and return so quickly:  you cannot do anything like
this in Dublin.[15] I writ a second penny post letter to your mother, and hear
nothing of her.  Did I tell you that Earl Berkeley died last Sunday was
se'nnight, at Berkeley Castle, of a dropsy?  Lord Halifax began a health to me
to-day; it was the Resurrection of the Whigs, which I refused unless he would
add their Reformation too and I told him he was the only Whig in England I
loved, or had any good opinion of.

3.  This morning Stella's sister[16] came to me with a letter from her mother,
who is at Sheen; but will soon be in town, and will call to see me:  she gave
me a bottle of palsy water,[17] a small one, and desired I would send it you
by the first convenience, as I will; and she promises a quart bottle of the
same:  your sister looked very well, and seems a good modest sort of girl.  I
went then to Mr. Lewis, first secretary to Lord Dartmouth,[18] and favourite
to Mr. Harley, who is to introduce me to-morrow morning.  Lewis had with him
one Mr. Dyot,[19] a Justice of Peace, worth twenty thousand pounds, a
Commissioner of the Stamp Office, and married to a sister of Sir Philip
Meadows,[20] Envoy to the Emperor.  I tell you this, because it is odds but
this Mr. Dyot will be hanged; for he is discovered to have counterfeited
stamped paper, in which he was a Commissioner; and, with his accomplices, has
cheated the Queen of a hundred thousand pounds.  You will hear of it before
this come to you, but may be not so particularly; and it is a very odd
accident in such a man.  Smoke Presto writing news to MD.  I dined to-day with
Lord Mountjoy at Kensington, and walked from thence this evening to town like
an emperor.  Remember that yesterday, October 2, was a cruel hard frost, with
ice; and six days ago I was dying with heat.  As thin as the town is, I have
more dinners than ever; and am asked this month by some people, without being
able to come for pre-engagements.  Well, but I should write plainer, when I
consider Stella cannot read,[21] and Dingley is not so skilful at my ugly
hand.  I had tonight a letter from Mr. Pratt, who tells me Joe will have his
money when there are trustees appointed by the Lord Lieutenant for receiving
and disposing the linen fund; and whenever those trustees are appointed, I
will solicit whoever is Lord Lieutenant, and am in no fear of succeeding.  So
pray tell or write him word, and bid him not be cast down; for Ned
Southwell[22] and Mr. Addison both think Pratt in the right.  Don't lose your
money at Manley's to-night, sirrahs.

4.  After I had put out my candle last night, my landlady came into my room,
with a servant of Lord Halifax, to desire I would go dine with him at his
house near Hampton Court; but I sent him word, I had business of great
importance that hindered me, etc.  And to-day I was brought privately to Mr.
Harley, who received me with the greatest respect and kindness imaginable:  he
has appointed me an hour on Saturday at four, afternoon, when I will open my
business to him; which expression I would not use if I were a woman.  I know
you smoked it; but I did not till I writ it.  I dined to-day at Mr. Delaval's,
the Envoy for Portugal, with Nic Rowe[23] the poet, and other friends; and I
gave my lampoon to be printed.  I have more mischief in my heart; and I think
it shall go round with them all, as this hits, and I can find hints.  I am
certain I answered your 2d letter, and yet I do not find it here.  I suppose
it was in my 4th:  and why N. 2d, 3d; is it not enough to say, as I do, 1, 2,
3? etc.  I am going to work at another Tatler:[24]  I'll be far enough but I
say the same thing over two or three times, just as I do when I am talking to
little MD; but what care I? they can read it as easily as I can write it:  I
think I have brought these lines pretty straight again.  I fear it will be
long before I finish two sides at this rate.  Pray, dear MD, when I
occasionally give you any little commission mixed with my letters, don't
forget it, as that to Morgan and Joe, etc., for I write just as I can
remember, otherwise I would put them all together.  I was to visit Mr. Sterne
to-day, and give him your commission about handkerchiefs:  that of chocolate I
will do myself, and send it him when he goes, and you'll pay me when the
GIVER'S BREAD,[25] etc.  To-night I will read a pamphlet, to amuse myself.
God preserve your dear healths!

5.  This morning Delaval came to see me, and we went together to
Kneller's,[26] who was not in town.  In the way we met the electors for
Parliament-men:[27]  and the rabble came about our coach, crying, "A Colt, a
Stanhope," etc.  We were afraid of a dead cat, or our glasses broken, and so
were always of their side.  I dined again at Delaval's; and in the evening, at
the Coffee-house, heard Sir Andrew Fountaine[28] was come to town.  This has
been but an insipid sort of day, and I have nothing to remark upon it worth
threepence:  I hope MD had a better, with the Dean, the Bishop, or Mrs.
Walls.[29]  Why, the reason you lost four and eightpence last night but one at
Manley's was, because you played bad games:  I took notice of six that you had
ten to one against you:  Would any but a mad lady go out twice upon Manilio;
Basto, and two small diamonds?[30] Then in that game of spades, you blundered
when you had ten-ace; I never saw the like of you:  and now you are in a huff
because I tell you this.  Well, here's two and eightpence halfpenny towards
your loss.

6.  Sir Andrew Fountaine came this morning, and caught me writing in bed.  I
went into the city with him; and we dined at the Chop-house with Will
Pate,[31] the learned woollen-draper:  then we sauntered at China-shops[32]
and booksellers; went to the tavern, drank two pints of white wine, and never
parted till ten:  and now I am come home, and must copy out some papers I
intend for Mr. Harley, whom I am to see, as I told you, to-morrow afternoon;
so that this night I shall say little to MD, but that I heartily wish myself
with them, and will come as soon as I either fail, or compass my business.  We
now hear daily of elections; and, in a list I saw yesterday of about twenty,
there are seven or eight more Tories than in the last Parliament; so that I
believe they need not fear a majority, with the help of those who will vote as
the Court pleases.  But I have been told that Mr. Harley himself would not let
the Tories be too numerous, for fear they should be insolent, and kick against
him; and for that reason they have kept several Whigs in employments, who
expected to be turned out every day; as Sir John Holland the Comptroller, and
many others.  And so get you gone to your cards, and your claret and orange,
at the Dean's; and I'll go write.

7.  I wonder when this letter will be finished:  it must go by Tuesday, that's
certain; and if I have one from MD before, I will not answer it, that's as
certain too.  'Tis now morning, and I did not finish my papers for Mr. Harley
last night; for you must understand Presto was sleepy, and made blunders and
blots.  Very pretty that I must be writing to young women in a morning fresh
and fasting, faith.  Well, good-morrow to you; and so I go to business, and
lay aside this paper till night, sirrahs.--At night.  Jack How[33] told Harley
that if there were a lower place in hell than another, it was reserved for his
porter, who tells lies so gravely, and with so civil a manner.  This porter I
have had to deal with, going this evening at four to visit Mr. Harley, by his
own appointment.  But the fellow told me no lie, though I suspected every word
he said.  He told me his master was just gone to dinner, with much company,
and desired I would come an hour hence:  which I did, expecting to hear Mr.
Harley was gone out; but they had just done dinner.  Mr. Harley came out to
me, brought me in, and presented to me his son-in-law Lord Doblane[34] (or
some such name) and his own son,[35] and, among others, Will Penn[36] the
Quaker:  we sat two hours drinking as good wine as you do; and two hours more
he and I alone; where he heard me tell my business; entered into it with all
kindness; asked for my powers, and read them; and read likewise a memorial[37]
I had drawn up, and put it in his pocket to show the Queen; told me the
measures he would take; and, in short, said everything I could wish:  told me,
he must bring Mr. St. John[38] (Secretary of State) and me acquainted; and
spoke so many things of personal kindness and esteem for me, that I am
inclined half to believe what some friends have told me, that he would do
everything to bring me over.  He has desired to dine with me (what a comical
mistake was that!).  I mean he has desired me to dine with him on Tuesday; and
after four hours being with him, set me down at St. James's Coffee-house in a
hackney-coach.  All this is odd and comical, if you consider him and me.  He
knew my Christian name very well.  I could not forbear saying thus much upon
this matter, although you will think it tedious.  But I'll tell you; you must
know, 'tis fatal[39] to me to be a scoundrel and a prince the same day:  for,
being to see him at four, I could not engage myself to dine at any friend's;
so I went to Tooke,[40] to give him a ballad, and dine with him; but he was
not at home:  so I was forced to go to a blind[41] chop-house, and dine for
tenpence upon gill-ale,[42] bad broth, and three chops of mutton; and then go
reeking from thence to the First Minister of State.  And now I am going in
charity to send Steele a Tatler, who is very low of late.  I think I am
civiller than I used to be; and have not used the expression of "you in
Ireland" and "we in England" as I did when I was here before, to your great
indignation.--They may talk of the you know what;[43] but, gad, if it had not
been for that, I should never have been able to get the access I have had; and
if that helps me to succeed, then that same thing will be serviceable to the
Church.  But how far we must depend upon new friends, I have learnt by long
practice, though I think among great Ministers, they are just as good as old
ones.  And so I think this important day has made a great hole in this side of
the paper; and the fiddle-faddles of tomorrow and Monday will make up the
rest; and, besides, I shall see Harley on Tuesday before this letter goes.

8.  I must tell you a great piece of refinement[44] of Harley.  He charged me
to come to him often:  I told him I was loth to trouble him in so much
business as he had, and desired I might have leave to come at his levee; which
he immediately refused, and said, that was not a place for friends to come to.
'Tis now but morning; and I have got a foolish trick, I must say something to
MD when I wake, and wish them a good-morrow; for this is not a shaving-day,
Sunday, so I have time enough:  but get you gone, you rogues, I must go write:
Yes, 'twill vex me to the blood if any of these long letters
should miscarry:  if they do, I will shrink to half-sheets again; but then
what will you do to make up the journal? there will be ten days of Presto's
life lost; and that will be a sad thing, faith and troth.--At night.  I was at
a loss today for a dinner, unless I would have gone a great way, so I dined
with some friends that board hereabout,[45] as a spunger;[46] and this evening
Sir Andrew Fountaine would needs have me go to the tavern; where, for two
bottles of wine, Portugal and Florence, among three of us, we had sixteen
shillings to pay; but if ever he catches me so again, I'll spend as many
pounds:  and therefore I have it among my extraordinaries but we had a neck of
mutton dressed a la Maintenon, that the dog could not eat:  and it is now
twelve o'clock, and I must go sleep.  I hope this letter will go before I have
MD's third.  Do you believe me? and yet, faith, I long for MD's third too and
yet I would have it to say, that I writ five for two.  I am not fond at all of
St. James's Coffee-house,[47] as I used to be.  I hope it will mend in winter;
but now they are all out of town at elections, or not come from their country
houses.  Yesterday I was going with Dr. Garth[48] to dine with Charles
Main,[49] near the Tower, who has an employment there:  he is of Ireland; the
Bishop of Clogher knows him well:  an honest, good-natured fellow, a thorough
hearty laugher, mightily beloved by the men of wit:  his mistress is never
above a cook-maid.  And so, good-night, etc.

9.  I dined to-day at Sir John Stanley's; my Lady Stanley[50] is one of my
favourites:  I have as many here as the Bishop of Killala has in Ireland.  I
am thinking what scurvy company I shall be to MD when I come back:  they know
everything of me already:  I will tell you no more, or I shall have nothing to
say, no story to tell, nor any kind of thing.  I was very uneasy last night
with ugly, nasty, filthy wine, that turned sour on my stomach.  I must go to
the tavern:  oh, but I told you that before.  To-morrow I dine at Harley's,
and will finish this letter at my return; but I can write no more now, because
of the Archbishop:  faith, 'tis true; for I am going now to write to him an
account of what I have done in the business with Harley:[51] and, faith, young
women, I'll tell you what you must count upon, that I never will write one
word on the third side in these long letters.

10.  Poor MD's letter was lying so huddled up among papers, I could not find
it:  I mean poor Presto's letter.  Well, I dined with Mr. Harley to-day, and
hope some things will be done; but I must say no more:  and this letter must
be sent to the post-house, and not by the bellman.[52] I am to dine again
there on Sunday next; I hope to some good issue.  And so now, soon as ever I
can in bed, I must begin my 6th to MD as gravely as if I had not written a
word this month:  fine doings, faith!  Methinks I don't write as I should,
because I am not in bed:  see the ugly wide lines.  God Almighty ever bless
you, etc.

Faith, this is a whole treatise; I'll go reckon the lines on the other sides.
I've reckoned them.[53]



LETTER 6.

LONDON, Oct. 10, 1710.

So, as I told you just now in the letter I sent half an hour ago, I dined with
Mr. Harley to-day, who presented me to the Attorney-General, Sir Simon
Harcourt, with much compliment on all sides, etc.  Harley told me he had shown
my memorial to the Queen, and seconded it very heartily; and he desires me to
dine with him again on Sunday, when he promises to settle it with Her Majesty,
before she names a Governor:[1] and I protest I am in hopes it will be done,
all but the forms, by that time; for he loves the Church.  This is a popular
thing, and he would not have a Governor share in it; and, besides, I am told
by all hands, he has a mind to gain me over.  But in the letter I writ last
post (yesterday) to the Archbishop, I did not tell him a syllable of what Mr.
Harley said to me last night, because he charged me to keep it secret; so I
would not tell it to you, but that, before this goes, I hope the secret will
be over.  I am now writing my poetical "Description of a Shower in London,"
and will send it to the Tatler.[2]  This is the last sheet of a whole quire I
have written since I came to town.  Pray, now it comes into my head, will you,
when you go to Mrs. Walls, contrive to know whether Mrs. Wesley[3] be in town,
and still at her brother's, and how she is in health, and whether she stays in
town.  I writ to her from Chester, to know what I should do with her note; and
I believe the poor woman is afraid to write to me:  so I must go to my
business, etc.

11.  To-day at last I dined with Lord Mountrath,[4] and carried Lord Mountjoy,
and Sir Andrew Fountaine with me; and was looking over them at ombre till
eleven this evening like a fool:  they played running ombre half-crowns; and
Sir Andrew Fountaine won eight guineas of Mr. Coote;[5] so I am come home
late, and will say but little to MD this night.  I have gotten half a bushel
of coals, and Patrick, the extravagant whelp, had a fire ready for me; but I
picked off the coals before I went to bed.  It is a sign London is now an
empty place, when it will not furnish me with matter for above five or six
lines in a day.  Did you smoke in my last how I told you the very day and the
place you were playing at ombre?  But I interlined and altered a little, after
I had received a letter from Mr. Manley, that said you were at it in his
house, while he was writing to me; but without his help I guessed within one
day.  Your town is certainly much more sociable than ours.  I have not seen
your mother yet, etc.

12.  I dined to-day with Dr. Garth and Mr. Addison, at the Devil Tavern[6] by
Temple Bar, and Garth treated; and 'tis well I dine every day, else I should
be longer making out my letters:  for we are yet in a very dull state, only
inquiring every day after new elections, where the Tories carry it among the
new members six to one.  Mr. Addison's election[7] has passed easy and
undisputed; and I believe if he had a mind to be chosen king, he would hardly
be refused.  An odd accident has happened at Colchester:  one Captain
Lavallin,[8] coming from Flanders or Spain, found his wife with child by a
clerk of Doctors' Commons, whose trade, you know, it is to prevent
fornications:  and this clerk was the very same fellow that made the discovery
of Dyot's[9] counterfeiting the stamp-paper.  Lavallin has been this fortnight
hunting after the clerk, to kill him; but the fellow was constantly employed
at the Treasury, about the discovery he made:  the wife had made a shift to
patch up the business, alleging that the clerk had told her her husband was
dead and other excuses; but t'other day somebody told Lavallin his wife had
intrigues before he married her:  upon which he goes down in a rage, shoots
his wife through the head, then falls on his sword; and, to make the matter
sure, at the same time discharges a pistol through his own head, and died on
the spot, his wife surviving him about two hours, but in what circumstances of
mind and body is terrible to imagine.  I have finished my poem on the
"Shower," all but the beginning; and am going on with my Tatler.  They have
fixed about fifty things on me since I came:  I have printed but three.[10]
One advantage I get by writing to you daily, or rather you get, is, that I
shall remember not to write the same things twice; and yet, I fear, I have
done it often already:  but I will mind and confine myself to the accidents of
the day; and so get you gone to ombre, and be good girls, and save your money,
and be rich against Presto comes, and write to me now and then:  I am thinking
it would be a pretty thing to hear sometimes from saucy MD; but do not hurt
your eyes, Stella, I charge you.

13.  O Lord, here is but a trifle of my letter written yet; what shall Presto
do for prattle-prattle, to entertain MD?  The talk now grows fresher of the
Duke of Ormond for Ireland; though Mr. Addison says he hears it will be in
commission, and Lord Galway[11] one.  These letters of mine are a sort of
journal, where matters open by degrees; and, as I tell true or false, you will
find by the event whether my intelligence be good; but I do not care twopence
whether it be or no.--At night.  To-day I was all about St. Paul's, and up at
the top like a fool, with Sir Andrew Fountaine and two more; and spent seven
shillings for my dinner like a puppy:  this is the second time he has served
me so; but I will never do it again, though all mankind should persuade me,
unconsidering puppies!  There is a young fellow here in town we are all fond
of, and about a year or two come from the University, one Harrison,[12] a
little pretty fellow, with a great deal of wit, good sense, and good nature;
has written some mighty pretty things; that in your 6th Miscellanea,[13] about
the Sprig of an Orange, is his:  he has nothing to live on but being governor
to one of the Duke of Queensberry's[14] sons for forty pounds a year.  The
fine fellows are always inviting him to the tavern, and make him pay his club.
Henley[15] is a great crony of his:  they are often at the tavern at six or
seven shillings reckoning, and he always makes the poor lad pay his full
share.  A colonel and a lord were at him and me the same way to-night:  I
absolutely refused, and made Harrison lag behind, and persuaded him not to go
to them.  I tell you this, because I find all rich fellows have that humour of
using all people without any consideration of their fortunes; but I will see
them rot before they shall serve me so.  Lord Halifax is always teasing me to
go down to his country house, which will cost me a guinea to his servants, and
twelve shillings coach-hire; and he shall be hanged first.  Is not this a
plaguy silly story?  But I am vexed at the heart; for I love the young fellow,
and am resolved to stir up people to do something for him:  he is a Whig, and
I will put him upon some of my cast Whigs; for I have done with them; and they
have, I hope, done with this kingdom for our time.  They were sure of the four
members for London above all places, and they have lost three in the four.[16]
Sir Richard Onslow,[17] we hear, has lost for Surrey; and they are overthrown
in most places.  Lookee, gentlewomen, if I write long letters, I must write
you news and stuff, unless I send you my verses; and some I dare not; and
those on the "Shower in London" I have sent to the Tatler, and you may see
them in Ireland.  I fancy you will smoke me in the Tatler I am going to write;
for I believe I have told you the hint.  I had a letter sent me tonight from
Sir Matthew Dudley, and found it on my table when I came in.  Because it is
extraordinary, I will transcribe it from beginning to end.  It is as follows:
"Is the Devil in you?  Oct. 13, 1710."  I would have answered every particular
passage in it, only I wanted time.  Here is enough for to-night, such as it
is, etc.

14.  Is that tobacco at the top of the paper,[18] or what?  I do not remember
I slobbered.  Lord, I dreamt of Stella, etc., so confusedly last night, and
that we saw Dean Bolton[19] and Sterne[20] go into a shop:  and she bid me
call them to her, and they proved to be two parsons I know not; and I walked
without till she was shifting, and such stuff, mixed with much melancholy and
uneasiness, and things not as they should be, and I know not how:  and it is
now an ugly gloomy morning.--At night.  Mr. Addison and I dined with Ned
Southwell, and walked in the Park; and at the Coffee-house I found a letter
from the Bishop of Clogher, and a packet from MD.  I opened the Bishop's
letter; but put up MD's, and visited a lady just come to town; and am now got
into bed, and going to open your little letter:  and God send I may find MD
well, and happy, and merry, and that they love Presto as they do fires.  Oh, I
will not open it yet! yes I will! no I will not!  I am going; I cannot stay
till I turn over.[21]  What shall I do?  My fingers itch; and now I have it in
my left hand; and now I will open it this very moment.--I have just got it,
and am cracking the seal, and cannot imagine what is in it; I fear only some
letter from a bishop, and it comes too late; I shall employ nobody's credit
but my own.  Well, I see though--  Pshaw, 'tis from Sir Andrew Fountaine.
What, another!  I fancy that's from Mrs. Barton;[22] she told me she would
write to me; but she writes a better hand than this:  I wish you would
inquire; it must be at Dawson's[23] office at the Castle.  I fear this is from
Patty Rolt, by the scrawl.  Well, I will read MD's letter.  Ah, no; it is from
poor Lady Berkeley, to invite me to Berkeley Castle this winter; and now it
grieves my heart:  she says, she hopes my lord is in a fair way of
recovery;[24] poor lady! Well, now I go to MD's letter:  faith, it is all
right; I hoped it was wrong.  Your letter, N.3, that I have now received, is
dated Sept. 26; and Manley's letter, that I had five days ago, was dated Oct.
3, that's a fortnight difference:  I doubt it has lain in Steele's office, and
he forgot.  Well, there's an end of that:  he is turned out of his place;[25]
and you must desire those who send me packets, to enclose them in a paper
directed to Mr. Addison, at St. James's Coffee-house:  not common letters, but
packets:  the Bishop of Clogher may mention it to the Archbishop when he sees
him.  As for your letter, it makes me mad:  slidikins, I have been the best
boy in Christendom, and you come with your two eggs a penny.--Well; but stay,
I will look over my book:  adad, I think there was a chasm between my N.2 and
N.3.  Faith, I will not promise to write to you every week; but I will write
every night, and when it is full I will send it; that will be once in ten
days, and that will be often enough:  and if you begin to take up the way of
writing to Presto, only because it is Tuesday, a Monday bedad it will grow a
task; but write when you have a mind.--No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no--Agad,
agad, agad, agad, agad, agad; no, poor Stellakins.[26]  Slids, I would the
horse were in your--chamber!  Have not I ordered Parvisol to obey your
directions about him?  And han't I said in my former letters that you may
pickle him, and boil him, if you will?  What do you trouble me about your
horses for?  Have I anything to do with them?--Revolutions a hindrance to me
in my business?  Revolutions to me in my business?  If it were not for the
revolutions, I could do nothing at all; and now I have all hopes possible,
though one is certain of nothing; but to-morrow I am to have an answer, and am
promised an effectual one.  I suppose I have said enough in this and a former
letter how I stand with new people; ten times better than ever I did with the
old; forty times more caressed.  I am to dine to-morrow at Mr. Harley's; and
if he continues as he has begun, no man has been ever better treated by
another.  What you say about Stella's mother, I have spoken enough to it
already.  I believe she is not in town; for I have not yet seen her.  My
lampoon is cried up to the skies; but nobody suspects me for it, except Sir
Andrew Fountaine:  at least they say nothing of it to me.  Did not I tell you
of a great man who received me very coldly?[27]  That's he; but say nothing;
'twas only a little revenge.  I will remember to bring it over.  The Bishop of
Clogher has smoked my Tatler,[28] about shortening of words, etc.  But, God
So![29] etc.

15.  I will write plainer if I can remember it; for Stella must not spoil her
eyes, and Dingley can't read my hand very well; and I am afraid my letters are
too long:  then you must suppose one to be two, and read them at twice.  I
dined to-day with Mr. Harley:  Mr. Prior[30] dined with us.  He has left my
memorial with the Queen, who has consented to give the First-Fruits and
Twentieth Parts,[31] and will, we hope, declare it to-morrow in the Cabinet.
But I beg you to tell it to no person alive; for so I am ordered, till in
public:  and I hope to get something of greater value.  After dinner came in
Lord Peterborow:[32]  we renewed our acquaintance, and he grew mightily fond
of me.  They began to talk of a paper of verses called "Sid Hamet."  Mr.
Harley repeated part, and then pulled them out, and gave them to a gentleman
at the table to read, though they had all read them often.  Lord Peterborow
would let nobody read them but himself:  so he did; and Mr. Harley bobbed[33]
me at every line, to take notice of the beauties.  Prior rallied Lord
Peterborow for author of them; and Lord Peterborow said he knew them to be
his; and Prior then turned it upon me, and I on him.  I am not guessed at all
in town to be the author; yet so it is:  but that is a secret only to you.[34]
Ten to one whether you see them in Ireland; yet here they run prodigiously.
Harley presented me to Lord President of Scotland,[35] and Mr. Benson,[36]
Lord of the Treasury.  Prior and I came away at nine, and sat at the
Smyrna[37] till eleven, receiving acquaintance.

16.  This morning early I went in a chair, and Patrick before it, to Mr.
Harley, to give him another copy of my memorial, as he desired; but he was
full of business, going to the Queen, and I could not see him; but he desired
I would send up the paper, and excused himself upon his hurry.  I was a little
baulked; but they tell me it is nothing.  I shall judge by next visit.  I
tipped his porter with half a crown; and so I am well there for a time at
least.  I dined at Stratford's in the City, and had Burgundy and Tokay:  came
back afoot like a scoundrel:  then went with Mr. Addison and supped with Lord
Mountjoy, which made me sick all night.  I forgot that I bought six pounds of
chocolate for Stella, and a little wooden box; and I have a great piece of
Brazil tobacco for Dingley,[38] and a bottle of palsy-water[39] for Stella:
all which, with the two handkerchiefs that Mr. Sterne has bought, and you must
pay him for, will be put in the box, directed to Mrs. Curry's, and sent by Dr.
Hawkshaw,[40] whom I have not seen; but Sterne has undertaken it.  The
chocolate is a present, madam, for Stella.  Don't read this, you little rogue,
with your little eyes; but give it to Dingley, pray now; and I will write as
plain as the skies:  and let Dingley write Stella's part, and Stella dictate
to her, when she apprehends her eyes, etc.

17.  This letter should have gone this post, if I had not been taken up with
business, and two nights being late out; so it must stay till Thursday.  I
dined to-day with your Mr. Sterne,[41] by invitation, and drank Irish
wine;[42] but, before we parted, there came in the prince of puppies, Colonel
Edgworth;[43] so I went away.  This day came out the Tatler, made up wholly of
my "Shower," and a preface to it.  They say it is the best thing I ever writ,
and I think so too.  I suppose the Bishop of Clogher will show it you.  Pray
tell me how you like it.  Tooke is going on with my Miscellany.[44] I'd give a
penny the letter to the Bishop of Killaloe[45] was in it:  'twould do him
honour.  Could not you contrive to say, you hear they are printing my things
together; and that you with the bookseller had that letter among the rest:
but don't say anything of it as from me.  I forget whether it was good or no;
but only having heard it much commended, perhaps it may deserve it.  Well, I
have to-morrow to finish this letter in, and then I will send it next day.  I
am so vexed that you should write your third to me, when you had but my
second, and I had written five, which now I hope you have all:  and so I tell
you, you are saucy, little, pretty, dear rogues, etc.

18.  To-day I dined, by invitation, with Stratford and others, at a young
merchant's in the City, with Hermitage and Tokay, and stayed till nine, and am
now come home.  And that dog Patrick is abroad, and drinking, and I cannot I
get my night-gown.  I have a mind to turn that puppy away:  he has been drunk
ten times in three weeks.  But I han't time to say more; so good-night, etc.

19.  I am come home from dining in the city with Mr. Addison, at a merchant's;
and just now, at the Coffee-house, we have notice that the Duke of Ormond was
this day declared Lord Lieutenant at Hampton Court, in Council.  I have not
seen Mr. Harley since; but hope the affair is done about First-Fruits.  I will
see him, if possible, to-morrow morning; but this goes to-night.  I have sent
a box to Mr. Sterne, to send to you by some friend:  I have directed it for
Mr. Curry, at his house; so you have warning when it comes, as I hope it will
soon.  The handkerchiefs will be put in some friend's pocket, not to pay
custom.  And so here ends my sixth, sent when I had but three of MD's:  now I
am beforehand, and will keep so; and God Almighty bless dearest MD, etc.



LETTER 7.

LONDON, Oct. 19, 1710.

Faith, I am undone! this paper is larger than the other, and yet I am
condemned to a sheet; but, since it is MD, I did not value though I were
condemned to a pair.  I told you in my letter to-day where I had been, and how
the day passed; and so, etc.

20.  To-day I went to Mr. Lewis, at the Secretary's office, to know when I
might see Mr. Harley; and by and by comes up Mr. Harley himself, and appoints
me to dine with him to-morrow.  I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh,[1] and went to
wait on the two Lady Butlers;[2] but the porter answered they were not at
home:  the meaning was, the youngest, Lady Mary, is to be married to-morrow to
Lord Ashburnham,[3] the best match now in England, twelve thousand pounds a
year, and abundance of money.  Tell me how my "Shower" is liked in Ireland:  I
never knew anything pass better here.  I spent the evening with Wortley
Montagu[4] and Mr. Addison, over a bottle of Irish wine.  Do they know
anything in Ireland of my greatness among the Tories?  Everybody reproaches me
of it here; but I value them not.  Have you heard of the verses about the "Rod
of Sid Hamet"?  Say nothing of them for your life.  Hardly anybody suspects me
for them; only they think nobody but Prior or I could write them.  But I doubt
they have not reached you.  There is likewise a ballad full of puns on the
Westminster Election,[5] that cost me half an hour:  it runs, though it be
good for nothing.  But this is likewise a secret to all but MD.  If you have
them not, I will bring them over.

21.  I got MD's fourth to-day at the Coffee-house.  God Almighty bless poor,
dear Stella, and her eyes and head!  What shall we do to cure them? poor, dear
life!  Your disorders are a pull-back for your good qualities.  Would to
Heaven I were this minute shaving your poor, dear head, either here or there!
Pray do not write, nor read this letter, nor anything else; and I will write
plainer for Dingley to read from henceforward, though my pen is apt to ramble
when I think whom I am writing to.  I will not answer your letter until I tell
you that I dined this day with Mr. Harley, who presented me to the Earl of
Stirling,[6] a Scotch lord; and in the evening came in Lord Peterborow.  I
stayed till nine before Mr. Harley would let me go, or tell me anything of my
affair.  He says the Queen has now granted the First-Fruits and Twentieth
Parts; but he will not give me leave to write to the Archbishop, because the
Queen designs to signify it to the Bishops in Ireland in form; and to take
notice, that it was done upon a memorial from me; which, Mr. Harley tells me
he does to make it look more respectful to me, etc.; and I am to see him on
Tuesday.  I know not whether I told you that, in my memorial which was given
to the Queen, I begged for two thousand pounds a year more, though it was not
in my commission; but that, Mr. Harley says, cannot yet be done, and that he
and I must talk of it further:  however, I have started it, and it may follow
in time.  Pray say nothing of the First-Fruits being granted, unless I give
leave at the bottom of this.  I believe never anything was compassed so soon,
and purely done by my personal credit with Mr. Harley, who is so excessively
obliging, that I know not what to make of it, unless to show the rascals of
the other party that they used a man unworthily who had deserved better.  The
memorial given to the Queen from me speaks with great plainness of Lord
Wharton.  I believe this business is as important to you as the Convocation
disputes from Tisdall.[7]  I hope in a month or two all the forms of settling
this matter will be over; and then I shall have nothing to do here.  I will
only add one foolish thing more, because it is just come into my head.  When
this thing is made known, tell me impartially whether they give any of the
merit to me, or no; for I am sure I have so much, that I will never take it
upon me.--Insolent sluts! because I say Dublin, Ireland, therefore you must
say London, England:  that is Stella's malice.--Well, for that I will not
answer your letter till to-morrow-day, and so and so:  I will go write
something else, and it will not be much; for 'tis late.

22.  I was this morning with Mr. Lewis, the under-secretary to Lord Dartmouth,
two hours, talking politics, and contriving to keep Steele in his office of
stamped paper:  he has lost his place of Gazetteer, three hundred pounds a
year, for writing a Tatler,[8] some months ago, against Mr. Harley, who gave
it him at first, and raised the salary from sixty to three hundred pounds.
This was devilish ungrateful; and Lewis was telling me the particulars:  but I
had a hint given me, that I might save him in the other employment:  and leave
was given me to clear matters with Steele.  Well, I dined with Sir Matthew
Dudley, and in the evening went to sit with Mr. Addison, and offer the matter
at distance to him, as the discreeter person; but found party had so possessed
him, that he talked as if he suspected me, and would not fall in with anything
I said.  So I stopped short in my overture, and we parted very drily; and I
shall say nothing to Steele, and let them do as they will; but, if things
stand as they are, he will certainly lose it, unless I save him; and therefore
I will not speak to him, that I may not report to his disadvantage.  Is not
this vexatious? and is there so much in the proverb of proffered service?
When shall I grow wise?  I endeavour to act in the most exact points of honour
and conscience; and my nearest friends will not understand it so.  What must a
man expect from his enemies?  This would vex me, but it shall not; and so I
bid you good-night, etc.

23.  I know 'tis neither wit nor diversion to tell you every day where I dine;
neither do I write it to fill my letter; but I fancy I shall, some time or
other, have the curiosity of seeing some particulars how I passed my life when
I was absent from MD this time; and so I tell you now that I dined to-day at
Molesworth's, the Florence Envoy, then went to the Coffee-house, where I
behaved myself coldly enough to Mr. Addison, and so came home to scribble.  We
dine together to-morrow and next day by invitation; but I shall alter my
behaviour to him, till he begs my pardon, or else we shall grow bare
acquaintance.  I am weary of friends; and friendships are all monsters, but
MD's.

24.  I forgot to tell you, that last night I went to Mr. Harley's, hoping--
faith, I am blundering, for it was this very night at six; and I hoped he
would have told me all things were done and granted:  but he was abroad, and
came home ill, and was gone to bed, much out of order, unless the porter lied.
I dined to-day at Sir Matthew Dudley's, with Mr. Addison, etc.

25.  I was to-day to see the Duke of Ormond; and, coming out, met Lord
Berkeley of Stratton,[9] who told me that Mrs. Temple,[10] the widow, died
last Saturday, which, I suppose, is much to the outward grief and inward joy
of the family.  I dined to-day with Addison and Steele, and a sister of Mr.
Addison, who is married to one Mons.  Sartre,[11] a Frenchman, prebendary of
Westminster, who has a delicious house and garden; yet I thought it was a sort
of monastic life in those cloisters, and I liked Laracor better.  Addison's
sister is a sort of a wit, very like him.  I am not fond of her, etc.

26.  I was to-day to see Mr. Congreve,[12] who is almost blind with cataracts
growing on his eyes; and his case is, that he must wait two or three years,
until the cataracts are riper, and till he is quite blind, and then he must
have them couched; and, besides, he is never rid of the gout, yet he looks
young and fresh, and is as cheerful as ever.  He is younger by three years or
more than I; and I am twenty years younger than he.  He gave me a pain in the
great toe, by mentioning the gout.  I find such suspicions frequently, but
they go off again.  I had a second letter from Mr. Morgan,[13] for which I
thank you:  I wish you were whipped, for forgetting to send him that answer I
desired you in one of my former, that I could do nothing for him of what he
desired, having no credit at all, etc.  Go, be far enough, you negligent
baggages.  I have had also a letter from Parvisol, with an account how my
livings are set; and that they are fallen, since last year, sixty pounds.  A
comfortable piece of news!  He tells me plainly that he finds you have no mind
to part with the horse, because you sent for him at the same time you sent him
my letter; so that I know not what must be done.  It is a sad thing that
Stella must have her own horse, whether Parvisol will or no.  So now to answer
your letter that I had three or four days ago.  I am not now in bed, but am
come home by eight; and, it being warm, I write up.  I never writ to the
Bishop of Killala, which, I suppose, was the reason he had not my letter.  I
have not time, there is the short of it.--As fond as the Dean[14] is of my
letter, he has not written to me.  I would only know whether Dean Bolton[15]
paid him the twenty pounds; and for the rest, he may kiss--And that you may
ask him, because I am in pain about it, that Dean Bolton is such a whipster.
'Tis the most obliging thing in the world in Dean Sterne to be so kind to you.
I believe he knows it will please me, and makes up, that way, his other
usage.[16]  No, we have had none of your snow, but a little one morning; yet I
think it was great snow for an hour or so, but no longer.  I had heard of Will
Crowe's[17] death before, but not the foolish circumstance that hastened his
end.  No, I have taken care that Captain Pratt[18] shall not suffer by Lord
Anglesea's death.[19]  I will try some contrivance to get a copy of my picture
from Jervas.  I will make Sir Andrew Fountaine buy one as for himself, and I
will pay him again, and take it, that is, provided I have money to spare when
I leave this.--Poor John! is he gone? and Madam Parvisol[20] has been in town!
Humm.  Why, Tighe[21] and I, when he comes, shall not take any notice of each
other; I would not do it much in this town, though we had not fallen out.--I
was to-day at Mr. Sterne's lodging:  he was not within; and Mr. Leigh is not
come to town; but I will do Dingley's errand when I see him.  What do I know
whether china be dear or no?  I once took a fancy of resolving to grow mad for
it, but now it is off; I suppose I told you in some former letter.  And so you
only want some salad-dishes, and plates, and etc.  Yes, yes, you shall.  I
suppose you have named as much as will cost five pounds.--Now to Stella's
little postscript; and I am almost crazed that you vex yourself for not
writing.  Cannot you dictate to Dingley, and not strain your little, dear
eyes?  I am sure it is the grief of my soul to think you are out of order.
Pray be quiet; and, if you will write, shut your eyes, and write just a line,
and no more, thus, "How do you do, Mrs. Stella?"  That was written with my
eyes shut.  Faith, I think it is better than when they are open:  and then
Dingley may stand by, and tell you when you go too high or too low.--My
letters of business, with packets, if there be any more occasion for such,
must be enclosed to Mr. Addison, at St. James's Coffee-house:  but I hope to
hear, as soon as I see Mr. Harley, that the main difficulties are over, and
that the rest will be but form.--Take two or three nutgalls, take two or three
---galls, stop your receipt in your--I have no need on't.  Here is a clutter!
Well, so much for your letter, which I will now put up in my letter-partition
in my cabinet, as I always do every letter as soon as I answer it.  Method is
good in all things.  Order governs the world.  The Devil is the author of
confusion.  A general of an army, a minister of state; to descend lower, a
gardener, a weaver, etc.  That may make a fine observation, if you think it
worth finishing; but I have not time.  Is not this a terrible long piece for
one evening?  I dined to-day with Patty Rolt at my cousin Leach's,[22] with a
pox, in the City:  he is a printer, and prints the Postman, oh hoo, and is my
cousin, God knows how, and he married Mrs. Baby Aires of Leicester; and my
cousin Thomson was with us:  and my cousin Leach offers to bring me acquainted
with the author of the Postman;[23] and says he does not doubt but the
gentleman will be glad of my acquaintance; and that he is a very ingenious
man, and a great scholar, and has been beyond sea.  But I was modest and said,
may be the gentleman was shy, and not fond of new acquaintance; and so put it
off:  and I wish you could hear me repeating all I have said of this in its
proper tone, just as I am writing it.  It is all with the same cadence with
"Oh hoo," or as when little girls say, "I have got an apple, miss, and I won't
give you some."  It is plaguy twelvepenny weather this last week, and has cost
me ten shillings in coach and chair hire.  If the fellow that has your money
will pay it, let me beg you to buy Bank Stock with it, which is fallen near
thirty per cent. and pays eight pounds per cent. and you have the principal
when you please:  it will certainly soon rise.  I would to God Lady Giffard
would put in the four hundred pounds she owes you,[24] and take the five per
cent. common interest, and give you the remainder.  I will speak to your
mother about it when I see her.  I am resolved to buy three hundred pounds of
it for myself, and take up what I have in Ireland; and I have a contrivance
for it, that I hope will do, by making a friend of mine buy it as for himself,
and I will pay him when I can get in my money.  I hope Stratford will do me
that kindness.  I'll ask him tomorrow or next day.

27.  Mr. Rowe[25] the poet desired me to dine with him to-day.  I went to his
office (he is under-secretary in Mr. Addison's place that he had in England),
and there was Mr. Prior; and they both fell commending my "Shower" beyond
anything that has been written of the kind:  there never was such a "Shower"
since Danae's, etc.  You must tell me how it is liked among you.  I dined with
Rowe; Prior could not come:  and after dinner we went to a blind tavern,[26]
where Congreve, Sir Richard Temple,[27] Estcourt,[28] and Charles Main,[29]
were over a bowl of bad punch.  The knight sent for six flasks of his own wine
for me, and we stayed till twelve.  But now my head continues pretty well; I
have left off my drinking, and only take a spoonful mixed with water, for fear
of the gout, or some ugly distemper; and now, because it is late, I will, etc.

28.  Garth and Addison and I dined to-day at a hedge[30] tavern; then I went
to Mr. Harley, but he was denied, or not at home:  so I fear I shall not hear
my business is done before this goes.  Then I visited Lord Pembroke,[31] who
is just come to town; and we were very merry talking of old things; and I hit
him with one pun.  Then I went to see the Ladies Butler, and the son of a
whore of a porter denied them:  so I sent them a threatening message by
another lady, for not excepting me always to the porter.  I was weary of the
Coffee-house, and Ford[32] desired me to sit with him at next door; which I
did, like a fool, chatting till twelve, and now am got into bed.  I am afraid
the new Ministry is at a terrible loss about money:  the Whigs talk so, it
would give one the spleen; and I am afraid of meeting Mr. Harley out of
humour.  They think he will never carry through this undertaking.  God knows
what will come of it.  I should be terribly vexed to see things come round
again:  it will ruin the Church and clergy for ever; but I hope for better.  I
will send this on Tuesday, whether I hear any further news of my affair or
not.

29.  Mr. Addison and I dined to-day with Lord Mountjoy; which is all the
adventures of this day.--I chatted a while to-night in the Coffee-house, this
being a full night; and now am come home, to write some business.

30.  I dined to-day at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's, and sent a letter to poor Mrs.
Long,[33] who writes to us, but is God knows where, and will not tell anybody
the place of her residence.  I came home early, and must go write.

31.  The month ends with a fine day; and I have been walking, and visiting
Lewis, and concerting where to see Mr. Harley.  I have no news to send you.
Aire,[34] they say, is taken, though the Whitehall letters this morning say
quite the contrary:  'tis good, if it be true.  I dined with Mr. Addison and
Dick Stewart, Lord Mountjoy's brother;[35] a treat of Addison's.  They were
half-fuddled, but not I; for I mixed water with my wine, and left them
together between nine and ten; and I must send this by the bellman, which
vexes me, but I will put it off no longer.  Pray God it does not miscarry.  I
seldom do so; but I can put off little MD no longer.  Pray give the under note
to Mrs. Brent.

I am a pretty gentleman; and you lose all your money at cards, sirrah Stella.
I found you out; I did so.

I am staying before I can fold up this letter, till that ugly D is dry in the
last line but one.  Do not you see it?  O Lord, I am loth to leave you, faith-
-but it must be so, till the next time.  Pox take that D; I will blot it, to
dry it.



LETTER 8.

LONDON, Oct. 31, 1710.

So, now I have sent my seventh to your fourth, young women; and now I will
tell you what I would not in my last, that this morning, sitting in my bed, I
had a fit of giddiness:  the room turned round for about a minute, and then it
went off, leaving me sickish, but not very:  and so I passed the day as I told
you; but I would not end a letter with telling you this, because it might vex
you:  and I hope in God I shall have no more of it.  I saw Dr. Cockburn[1] to-
day, and he promises to send me the pills that did me good last year; and
likewise has promised me an oil for my ear, that he has been making for that
ailment for somebody else.

Nov. 1.  I wish MD a merry new year.  You know this is the first day of it
with us.[2]  I had no giddiness to-day; but I drank brandy, and have bought a
pint for two shillings.  I sat up the night before my giddiness pretty late,
and writ very much; so I will impute it to that.  But I never eat fruit, nor
drink ale; but drink better wine than you do, as I did to-day with Mr. Addison
at Lord Mountjoy's:  then went at five to see Mr. Harley, who could not see me
for much company; but sent me his excuse, and desired I would dine with him on
Friday; and then I expect some answer to this business, which must either be
soon done, or begun again; and then the Duke of Ormond and his people will
interfere for their honour, and do nothing.  I came home at six, and spent my
time in my chamber, without going to the Coffee-house, which I grow weary of;
and I studied at leisure, writ not above forty lines, some inventions of my
own, and some hints, and read not at all, and this because I would take care
of Presto, for fear little MD should be angry.

2.  I took my four pills last night, and they lay an hour in my throat, and so
they will do to-night.  I suppose I could swallow four affronts as easily.  I
dined with Dr. Cockburn to-day, and came home at seven; but Mr. Ford has been
with me till just now, and it is near eleven.  I have had no giddiness to-day.
Mr.  Dopping[3] I have seen; and he tells me coldly, my "Shower" is liked well
enough; there's your Irish judgment!  I writ this post to the Bishop of
Clogher.  It is now just a fortnight since I heard from you.  I must have you
write once a fortnight, and then I will allow for wind and weather.  How goes
ombre?  Does Mrs. Walls[4] win constantly, as she used to do?  And Mrs.
Stoyte;[5] I have not thought of her this long time:  how does she?  I find we
have a cargo of Irish coming for London:  I am sorry for it; but I never go
near them.  And Tighe is landed; but Mrs. Wesley,[6] they say, is going home
to her husband, like a fool.  Well, little monkeys mine, I must go write; and
so goodnight.

3.  I ought to read these letters I write, after I have done; for, looking
over thus much, I found two or three literal mistakes, which should not be
when the hand is so bad.  But I hope it does not puzzle little Dingley to
read, for I think I mend:  but methinks, when I write plain, I do not know
how, but we are not alone, all the world can see us.  A bad scrawl is so snug,
it looks like a PMD.[7]  We have scurvy Tatlers of late:  so pray do not
suspect me.  I have one or two hints I design to send him, and never any more:
he does not deserve it.  He is governed by his wife most abominably,[8] as bad
as ----.  I never saw her since I came; nor has he ever made me an invitation:
either he dares not, or is such a thoughtless Tisdall[9] fellow, that he never
minds[10] it.  So what care I for his wit? for he is the worst company in the
world, till he has a bottle of wine in his head.  I cannot write straighter in
bed, so you must be content.--At night in bed.  Stay, let me see where's this
letter to MD among these papers?  Oh! here.  Well, I will go on now; but I am
very busy (smoke the new pen.)  I dined with Mr. Harley to-day, and am invited
there again on Sunday.  I have now leave to write to the Primate and
Archbishop of Dublin, that the Queen has granted the First-Fruits; but they
are to take no notice of it, till a letter is sent them by the Queen's orders
from Lord Dartmouth, Secretary of State, to signify it.  The bishops are to be
made a corporation, to dispose of the revenue, etc.; and I shall write to the
Archbishop of Dublin to-morrow (I have had no giddiness to-day).  I know not
whether they will have any occasion for me longer to be here; nor can I judge
till I see what letter the Queen sends to the bishops, and what they will do
upon it.  If despatch be used, it may be done in six weeks; but I cannot
judge.  They sent me to-day a new Commission, signed by the Primate and
Archbishop of Dublin,[11] and promise me letters to the two archbishops here;
but mine a ---- for it all.  The thing is done, and has been so these ten
days; though I had only leave to tell it to-day.  I had this day likewise a
letter from the Bishop of Clogher, who complains of my not writing; and, what
vexes me, says he knows you have long letters from me every week.  Why do you
tell him so?  'Tis not right, faith:  but I won't be angry with MD at
distance.  I writ to him last post, before I had his; and will write again
soon, since I see he expects it, and that Lord and Lady Mountjoy[12] put him
off upon me, to give themselves ease.  Lastly, I had this day a letter from a
certain naughty rogue called MD, and it was N. 5; which I shall not answer to-
night, I thank you.  No, faith, I have other fish to fry; but to-morrow or
next day will be time enough.  I have put MD's commissions in a memorandum
paper.  I think I have done all before, and remember nothing but this to-day
about glasses and spectacles and spectacle cases.  I have no commission from
Stella, but the chocolate and handkerchiefs; and those are bought, and I
expect they will be soon sent.  I have been with, and sent to, Mr. Sterne, two
or three times to know; but he was not within.  Odds my life, what am I doing?
I must go write and do business.

4.  I dined to-day at Kensington, with Addison, Steele, etc., came home, and
writ a short letter to the Archbishop of Dublin, to let him know the Queen has
granted the thing, etc.  I writ in the Coffee-house, for I stayed at
Kensington till nine, and am plaguy weary; for Colonel Proud[13] was very ill
company, and I will never be of a party with him again; and I drank punch, and
that and ill company has made me hot.

5.  I was with Mr. Harley from dinner to seven this night, and went to the
Coffee-house, where Dr. Davenant[14] would fain have had me gone and drink a
bottle of wine at his house hard by, with Dr. Chamberlen,[15] but the puppy
used so many words, that I was afraid of his company; and though we promised
to come at eight, I sent a messenger to him, that Chamberlen was going to a
patient, and therefore we would put it off till another time:  so he, and the
Comptroller,[16] and I, were prevailed on by Sir Matthew Dudley to go to his
house, where I stayed till twelve, and left them.  Davenant has been teasing
me to look over some of his writings that he is going to publish; but the
rogue is so fond of his own productions, that I hear he will not part with a
syllable; and he has lately put out a foolish pamphlet, called The Third Part
of Tom Double; to make his court to the Tories, whom he had left.

6.  I was to-day gambling[17] in the City to see Patty Rolt, who is going to
Kingston, where she lodges; but, to say the truth, I had a mind for a walk to
exercise myself, and happened to be disengaged:  for dinners are ten times
more plentiful with me here than ever, or than in Dublin.  I won't answer your
letter yet, because I am busy.  I hope to send this before I have another from
MD:  it would be a sad thing to answer two letters together, as MD does from
Presto.  But when the two sides are full, away the letter shall go, that is
certain, like it or not like it; and that will be about three days hence, for
the answering-night will be a long one.

7.  I dined to-day at Sir Richard Temple's, with Congreve, Vanbrugh,
Lieutenant-General Farrington,[18] etc.  Vanbrugh, I believe I told you, had a
long quarrel with me about those verses on his house;[19] but we were very
civil and cold.  Lady Marlborough used to tease him with them, which had made
him angry, though he be a good-natured fellow.  It was a Thanksgiving-day,[20]
and I was at Court, where the Queen passed us by with all Tories about her;
not one Whig:  Buckingham,[21] Rochester,[22] Leeds,[23] Shrewsbury, Berkeley
of Stratton, Lord Keeper Harcourt, Mr. Harley, Lord Pembroke, etc.; and I have
seen her without one Tory.  The Queen made me a curtsey, and said, in a sort
of familiar way to Presto, "How does MD?"  I considered she was a Queen, and
so excused her.[24]  I do not miss the Whigs at Court; but have as many
acquaintance there as formerly.

8.  Here's ado and a clutter!  I must now answer MD's fifth; but first you
must know I dined at the Portugal Envoy's[25] to-day, with Addison, Vanbrugh,
Admiral Wager,[26] Sir Richard Temple,[27] Methuen,[28] etc.  I was weary of
their company, and stole away at five, and came home like a good boy, and
studied till ten, and had a fire, O ho! and now am in bed.  I have no
fireplace in my bed-chamber; but 'tis very warm weather when one's in bed.
Your fine cap,[29] Madam Dingley, is too little, and too hot:  I will have
that fur taken off; I wish it were far enough; and my old velvet cap is good
for nothing.  Is it velvet under the fur?  I was feeling, but cannot find:  if
it be, 'twill do without it else I will face it; but then I must buy new
velvet:  but may be I may beg a piece.  What shall I do?  Well, now to rogue
MD's letter.  God be thanked for Stella's eyes mending; and God send it holds;
but faith you writ too much at a time:  better write less, or write it at ten
times.  Yes, faith, a long letter in a morning from a dear friend is a dear
thing.  I smoke a compliment, little mischievous girls, I do so.  But who are
those WIGGS that think I am turned Tory?  Do you mean Whigs?  Which WIGGS and
WAT do you mean?  I know nothing of Raymond, and only had one letter from him
a little after I came here.[Pray remember Morgan.)  Raymond is indeed like to
have much influence over me in London, and to share much of my conversation.
I shall, no doubt, introduce him to Harley, and Lord Keeper, and the Secretary
of State.  The Tatler upon Ithuriel's spear[30] is not mine, madam.  What a
puzzle there is betwixt you and your judgment!  In general you may be
sometimes sure of things, as that about STYLE,[31] because it is what I have
frequently spoken of; but guessing is mine a----, and I defy mankind, if I
please.  Why, I writ a pamphlet when I was last in London, that you and a
thousand have seen, and never guessed it to be mine.  Could you have guessed
the "Shower in Town" to be mine?  How chance you did not see that before your
last letter went? but I suppose you in Ireland did not think it worth
mentioning.  Nor am I suspected for the lampoon; only Harley said he smoked
me; (have I told you so before?) and some others knew it.  'Tis called "The
Rod of Sid Hamet."  And I have written several other things that I hear
commended, and nobody suspects me for them; nor you shall not know till I see
you again.  What do you mean, "That boards near me, that I dine with now and
then?"  I know no such person:  I do not dine with boarders.  What the pox!
You know whom I have dined with every day since I left you, better than I do.
What do you mean, sirrah?  Slids, my ailment has been over these two months
almost.  Impudence, if you vex me, I will give ten shillings a week for my
lodging; for I am almost st--k out of this with the sink, and it helps me to
verses in my "Shower."[32]  Well, Madam Dingley, what say you to the world to
come?  What ballad?  Why go look, it was not good for much:  have patience
till I come back:  patience is a gay thing as, etc.  I hear nothing of Lord
Mountjoy's coming for Ireland.  When is Stella's birthday? in March?  Lord
bless me, my turn at Christ Church;[33] it is so natural to hear you write
about that, I believe you have done it a hundred times; it is as fresh in my
mind, the verger coming to you; and why to you?  Would he have you preach for
me?  O, pox on your spelling of Latin, Johnsonibus atque, that is the way.
How did the Dean get that name by the end?  'Twas you betrayed me:  not I,
faith; I'll not break his head.  Your mother is still in the country, I
suppose; for she promised to see me when she came to town.  I writ to her four
days ago, to desire her to break it to Lady Giffard, to put some money for you
in the Bank, which was then fallen thirty per cent.  Would to God mine had
been here, I should have gained one hundred pounds, and got as good interest
as in Ireland, and much securer.  I would fain have borrowed three hundred
pounds; but money is so scarce here, there is no borrowing, by this fall of
stocks.  'Tis rising now, and I knew it would:  it fell from one hundred and
twenty-nine to ninety-six.  I have not heard since from your mother.  Do you
think I would be so unkind not to see her, that you desire me in a style so
melancholy?  Mrs. Raymond,[34] you say, is with child:  I am sorry for it; and
so is, I believe, her husband.  Mr. Harley speaks all the kind things to me in
the world; and, I believe, would serve me, if I were to stay here; but I
reckon in time the Duke of Ormond may give me some addition to Laracor.  Why
should the Whigs think I came to England to leave them?  Sure my journey was
no secret.  I protest sincerely, I did all I could to hinder it, as the Dean
can tell you, although now I do not repent it.  But who the Devil cares what
they think?  Am I under obligations in the least to any of them all?  Rot 'em,
for ungrateful dogs; I will make them repent their usage before I leave this
place.  They say here the same thing of my leaving the Whigs; but they own
they cannot blame me, considering the treatment I have had.  I will take care
of your spectacles, as I told you before, and of the Bishop of Killala's; but
I will not write to him, I have not time.  What do you mean by my fourth,
Madam Dinglibus?  Does not Stella say you have had my fifth, Goody Blunder?
You frighted me till I looked back.  Well, this is enough for one night.  Pray
give my humble service to Mrs. Stoyte and her sister, Kate is it, or
Sarah?[35]  I have forgot her name, faith.  I think I will even (and to Mrs.
Walls and the Archdeacon) send this to-morrow:  no, faith, that will be in ten
days from the last.  I will keep it till Saturday, though I write no more.
But what if a letter from MD should come in the meantime?  Why then I would
only say, "Madam, I have received your sixth letter; your most humble servant
to command, Presto"; and so conclude.  Well, now I will write and think a
little, and so to bed, and dream of MD.

9.  I have my mouth full of water, and was going to spit it out, because I
reasoned with myself, how could I write when my mouth was full?  Han't you
done things like that, reasoned wrong at first thinking?  Well, I was to see
Mr. Lewis this morning, and am to dine a few days hence, as he tells me, with
Mr. Secretary St. John; and I must contrive to see Harley soon again, to
hasten this business from the Queen.  I dined to-day at Lord Mountrath's,[36]
with Lord Mountjoy,[37] etc.; but the wine was not good, so I came away,
stayed at the Coffee-house till seven, then came home to my fire, the
maidenhead of my second half-bushel, and am now in bed at eleven, as usual.
'Tis mighty warm; yet I fear I should catch cold this wet weather, if I sat an
evening in my room after coming from warm places:  and I must make much of
myself, because MD is not here to take care of Presto; and I am full of
business, writing, etc., and do not care for the Coffee-house; and so this
serves for all together, not to tell it you over and over, as silly people do;
but Presto is a wiser man, faith, than so, let me tell you, gentlewomen.  See,
I am got to the third side; but, faith, I will not do that often; but I must
say something early to-day, till the letter is done, and on Saturday it shall
go; so I must leave something till to-morrow, till to-morrow and next day.

10.  O Lord, I would this letter was with you with all my heart!  If it should
miscarry, what a deal would be lost!  I forgot to leave a gap in the last line
but one for the seal, like a puppy; but I should have allowed for night,
goodnight; but when I am taking leave, I cannot leave a bit, faith; but I
fancy the seal will not come there.  I dined to-day at Lady Lucy's, where they
ran down my "Shower"; and said, "Sid Hamet" was the silliest poem they ever
read; and told Prior so, whom they thought to be author of it.  Don't you
wonder I never dined there before?  But I am too busy, and they live too far
off; and, besides, I do not like women so much as I did.  (MD, you must know,
are not women.)  I supped to-night at Addison's, with Garth, Steele, and Mr.
Dopping; and am come home late.  Lewis has sent to me to desire I will dine
with some company I shall like.  I suppose it is Mr. Secretary St. John's
appointment.  I had a letter just now from Raymond, who is at Bristol, and
says he will be at London in a fortnight, and leave his wife behind him; and
desires any lodging in the house where I am:  but that must not be.  I shall
not know what to do with him in town:  to be sure, I will not present him to
any acquaintance of mine; and he will live a delicate life, a parson and a
perfect stranger!  Paaast twelvvve o'clock,[38] and so good-night, etc.  Oh!
but I forgot, Jemmy Leigh is come to town; says he has brought Dingley's
things, and will send them with the first convenience.  My parcel, I hear, is
not sent yet.  He thinks of going for Ireland in a month, etc.  I cannot write
tomorrow, because--what, because of the Archbishop; because I will seal my
letter early; because I am engaged from noon till night; because of many kind
of things; and yet I will write one or two words to-morrow morning, to keep up
my journal constant, and at night I will begin my ninth.

11.  Morning by candlelight.  You must know that I am in my nightgown every
morning between six and seven, and Patrick is forced to ply me fifty times
before I can get on my nightgown; and so now I will take my leave of my own
dear MD for this letter, and begin my next when I come home at night.  God
Almighty bless and protect dearest MD.  Farewell, etc.

This letter's as long as a sermon, faith.



LETTER 9.

LONDON, Nov. 11, 1710.

I dined to-day, by invitation, with the Secretary of State, Mr. St. John.  Mr.
Harley came in to us before dinner, and made me his excuses for not dining
with us, because he was to receive people who came to propose advancing money
to the Government:  there dined with us only Mr. Lewis, and Dr. Freind[1]
(that writ "Lord Peterborow's Actions in Spain").  I stayed with them till
just now between ten and eleven, and was forced again to give my eighth to the
bellman, which I did with my own hands, rather than keep it till next post.
The Secretary used me with all the kindness in the world.  Prior came in after
dinner; and, upon an occasion, he (the Secretary) said, "The best thing I ever
read is not yours, but Dr. Swift's on Vanbrugh"; which I do not reckon so very
good neither.[2]  But Prior was damped, until I stuffed him with two or three
compliments.  I am thinking what a veneration we used to have for Sir William
Temple, because he might have been Secretary of State at fifty; and here is a
young fellow, hardly thirty, in that employment.[3]  His father is a man of
pleasure,[4] that walks the Mall, and frequents St. James's Coffee-house, and
the chocolate-houses; and the young son is principal Secretary of State.  Is
there not something very odd in that?  He told me, among other things, that
Mr. Harley complained he could keep nothing from me, I had the way so much of
getting into him.  I knew that was a refinement; and so I told him, and it was
so:  indeed, it is hard to see these great men use me like one who was their
betters, and the puppies with you in Ireland hardly regarding me:  but there
are some reasons for all this, which I will tell you when we meet.  At coming
home, I saw a letter from your mother, in answer to one I sent her two days
ago.  It seems she is in town; but cannot come out in a morning, just as you
said; and God knows when I shall be at leisure in an afternoon:  for if I
should send her a penny-post letter, and afterwards not be able to meet her,
it would vex me; and, besides, the days are short, and why she cannot come
early in a morning, before she is wanted, I cannot imagine.  I will desire her
to let Lady Giffard know that she hears I am in town; and that she would go to
see me, to inquire after you.  I wonder she will confine herself so much to
that old beast's humour.  You know I cannot in honour see Lady Giffard, and
consequently not go into her house.  This I think is enough for the first
time.

12.  And how could you write with such thin paper?   (I forgot to say this in
my former.)  Cannot you get thicker?  Why, that's a common caution that
writing-masters give their scholars; you must have heard it a hundred times.
'Tis this:

     "If paper be thin,
      Ink will slip in;
      But, if it be thick,
      You may write with a stick."[5]

I had a letter to-day from poor Mrs. Long,[6] giving me an account of her
present life, obscure in a remote country town, and how easy she is under it.
Poor creature!  'tis just such an alteration in life, as if Presto should be
banished from MD, and condemned to converse with Mrs. Raymond.  I dined to-day
with Ford, Sir Richard Levinge,[7] etc., at a place where they board, hard by.
I was lazy, and not very well, sitting so long with company yesterday.  I have
been very busy writing this evening at home, and had a fire:  I am spending my
second half-bushel of coals; and now am in bed, and 'tis late.

13.  I dined to-day in the City, and then went to christen Will Frankland's[8]
child; and Lady Falconbridge[9] was one of the godmothers:  this is a daughter
of Oliver Cromwell, and extremely like him by his pictures that I have seen.
I stayed till almost eleven, and am now come home and gone to bed.  My
business in the City was, to thank Stratford for a kindness he has done me,
which now I will tell you.  I found Bank Stock was fallen thirty-four in the
hundred, and was mighty desirous to buy it; but I was a little too late for
the cheapest time, being hindered by business here; for I was so wise to guess
to a day when it would fall.  My project was this:  I had three hundred pounds
in Ireland; and so I writ to Mr. Stratford in the City, to desire he would buy
me three hundred pounds in Bank Stock, and that he should keep the papers, and
that I would be bound to pay him for them; and, if it should rise or fall, I
would take my chance, and pay him interest in the meantime.  I showed my
letter to one or two people who understand those things; and they said money
was so hard to be got here, that no man would do it for me.  However,
Stratford, who is the most generous man alive, has done it:  but it costs one
hundred pounds and a half, that is, ten shillings; so that three hundred
pounds cost me three hundred pounds and thirty shillings.  This was done about
a week ago, and I can have five pounds for my bargain already.  Before it
fell, it was one hundred and thirty pounds; and we are sure it will be the
same again.  I told you I writ to your mother, to desire that Lady Giffard
would do the same with what she owes you; but she tells your mother she has no
money.  I would to God all you had in the world was there.  Whenever you lend
money, take this rule, to have two people bound, who have both visible
fortunes; for they will hardly die together; and, when one dies, you fall upon
the other, and make him add another security:  and if Rathburn (now I have his
name) pays you in your money, let me know, and I will direct Parvisol
accordingly:  however, he shall wait on you and know.  So, ladies, enough of
business for one night.  Paaaaast twelvvve o'clock.  I must only add, that,
after a long fit of rainy weather, it has been fair two or three days, and is
this day grown cold and frosty; so that you must give poor little Presto leave
to have a fire in his chamber morning and evening too; and he will do as much
for you.

14.  What, has your Chancellor[10] lost his senses, like Will Crowe?[11]  I
forgot to tell Dingley that I was yesterday at Ludgate, bespeaking the
spectacles at the great shop there, and shall have them in a day or two.  This
has been an insipid day.  I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, and came gravely home,
after just visiting the Coffee-house.  Sir Richard Cox,[12] they say, is sure
of going over Lord Chancellor, who is as arrant a puppy as ever ate bread:
but the Duke of Ormond has a natural affection to puppies; which is a thousand
pities, being none himself.  I have been amusing myself at home till now, and
in bed bid you good-night.

15.  I have been visiting this morning, but nobody was at home, Secretary St.
John, Sir Thomas Hanmer,[13] Sir Chancellor Cox-comb, etc.  I attended the
Duke of Ormond with about fifty other Irish gentlemen at Skinners' Hall, where
the Londonderry Society laid out three hundred pounds to treat us and his
Grace with a dinner.  Three great tables with the dessert laid in mighty
figure.  Sir Richard Levinge and I got discreetly to the head of the second
table, to avoid the crowd at the first:  but it was so cold, and so confounded
a noise with the trumpets and hautboys, that I grew weary, and stole away
before the second course came on; so I can give you no account of it, which is
a thousand pities.  I called at Ludgate for Dingley's glasses, and shall have
them in a day or two; and I doubt it will cost me thirty shillings for a
microscope, but not without Stella's permission; for I remember she is a
virtuoso.  Shall I buy it or no?  'Tis not the great bulky ones, nor the
common little ones, to impale a louse (saving your presence) upon a needle's
point; but of a more exact sort, and clearer to the sight, with all its
equipage in a little trunk that you may carry in your pocket.  Tell me,
sirrah, shall I buy it or not for you?   I came home straight, etc.

16.  I dined to-day in the city with Mr. Manley,[14] who invited Mr. Addison
and me, and some other friends, to his lodging, and entertained us very
handsomely.  I returned with Mr. Addison, and loitered till nine in the
Coffee-house, where I am hardly known, by going so seldom.  I am here
soliciting for Trounce; you know him:  he was gunner in the former yacht, and
would fain be so in the present one if you remember him, a good, lusty, fresh-
coloured fellow.  Shall I stay till I get another letter from MD before I
close up this?  Mr. Addison and I meet a little seldomer than formerly,
although we are still at bottom as good friends as ever, but differ a little
about party.

17.  To-day I went to Lewis at the Secretary's office; where I saw and spoke
to Mr. Harley, who promised, in a few days, to finish the rest of my business.
I reproached him for putting me on the necessity of minding him of it, and
rallied him, etc., which he took very well.  I dined to-day with one Mr. Gore,
elder brother to a young merchant of my acquaintance; and Stratford and my
other friend merchants dined with us, where I stayed late, drinking claret and
burgundy; and am just got to bed, and will say no more, but that it now begins
to be time to have a letter from my own little MD; for the last I had above a
fortnight ago, and the date was old too.

18.  To-day I dined with Lewis and Prior at an eating-house, but with Lewis's
wine.  Lewis went away, and Prior and I sat on, where we complimented one
another for an hour or two upon our mutual wit and poetry.  Coming home at
seven, a gentleman unknown stopped me in the Pall Mall, and asked my advice;
said he had been to see the Queen (who was just come to town, and the people
in waiting would not let him see her; that he had two hundred thousand men
ready to serve her in the war; that he knew the Queen perfectly well, and had
an apartment at Court, and if she heard he was there, she would send for him
immediately; that she owed him two hundred thousand pounds, etc., and he
desired my opinion, whether he should go try again whether he could see her;
or because, perhaps, she was weary after her journey, whether he had not
better stay till to-morrow.  I had a mind to get rid of my companion, and
begged him of all love to go and wait on her immediately; for that, to my
knowledge, the Queen would admit him; that this was an affair of great
importance, and required despatch:  and I instructed him to let me know the
success of his business, and come to the Smyrna Coffee-house, where I would
wait for him till midnight; and so ended this adventure.  I would have fain
given the man half a crown; but was afraid to offer it him, lest he should be
offended; for, beside his money, he said he had a thousand pounds a year.  I
came home not early; and so, madams both, goodnight, etc.

19.  I dined to-day with poor Lord Mountjoy, who is ill of the gout; and this
evening I christened our coffee-man Elliot's[15] child, where the rogue had a
most noble supper, and Steele and I sat among some scurvy company over a bowl
of punch; so that I am come home late, young women, and can't stay to write to
little rogues.

2O.  I loitered at home, and dined with Sir Andrew Fountaine at his lodging,
and then came home:  a silly day.

21.  I was visiting all this morning, and then went to the Secretary's office,
and found Mr. Harley, with whom I dined; and Secretary St. John, etc., and
Harley promised in a very few days to finish what remains of my business.
Prior was of the company, and we all dine at the Secretary's to-morrow.  I saw
Stella's mother this morning:  she came early, and we talked an hour.  I wish
you would propose to Lady Giffard to take the three hundred pounds out of her
hands, and give her common interest for life, and security that you will pay
her:  the Bishop of Clogher, or any friend, would be security for you, if you
gave them counter-security; and it may be argued that it will pass better to
be in your hands than hers, in case of mortality, etc.  Your mother says, if
you write, she will second it; and you may write to your mother, and then it
will come from her.  She tells me Lady Giffard has a mind to see me, by her
discourse; but I told her what to say, with a vengeance.  She told Lady
Giffard she was going to see me:  she looks extremely well.  I am writing[16]
in my bed like a tiger; and so good-night, etc.

22.  I dined with Secretary St. John; and Lord Dartmouth, who is t'other
Secretary, dined with us, and Lord Orrery[17] and Prior, etc.  Harley called,
but could not dine with us, and would have had me away while I was at dinner;
but I did not like the company he was to have.  We stayed till eight, and I
called at the Coffee-house, and looked where the letters lie; but no letter
directed for Mr. Presto:  at last I saw a letter to Mr. Addison, and it looked
like a rogue's hand; so I made the fellow give it me, and opened it before
him, and saw three letters all for myself:  so, truly, I put them in my
pocket, and came home to my lodging.  Well, and so you shall hear:  well, and
so I found one of them in Dingley's hand, and t'other in Stella's, and the
third in Domville's.[18]  Well, so you shall hear; so, said I to myself, What
now, two letters from MD together?   But I thought there was something in the
wind; so I opened one, and I opened t'other; and so you shall hear, one was
from Walls.  Well, but t'other was from our own dear MD; yes it was.  O faith,
have you received my seventh, young women, already?   Then I must send this
to-morrow, else there will be old[19] doings at our house, faith.--Well, I
won't answer your letter in this:  no, faith, catch me at that, and I never
saw the like.  Well; but as to Walls, tell him (with service to him and wife,
etc.) that I have no imagination of Mr. Pratt's[20] losing his place:  and
while Pratt continues, Clements is in no danger; and I have already engaged
Lord Hyde[21] he speaks of, for Pratt and twenty others; but, if such a thing
should happen, I will do what I can.  I have above ten businesses of other
people's now on my hands, and, I believe, shall miscarry in half.  It is your
sixth I now have received.  I writ last post to the Bishop of Clogher again.
Shall I send this to-morrow?  Well, I will, to oblige MD.  Which would you
rather, a short letter every week, or a long one every fortnight?   A long
one; well, it shall be done, and so good-night.  Well, but is this a long one?
No, I warrant you:  too long for naughty girls.

23.  I only ask, have you got both the ten pounds, or only the first; I hope
you mean both.  Pray be good housewives; and I beg you to walk when you can,
for health.  Have you the horse in town? and do you ever ride him? how often?
Confess.  Ahhh, sirrah, have I caught you?  Can you contrive to let Mrs.
Fenton[22] know, that the request she has made me in her letter I will use
what credit I have to bring about, although I hear it is very difficult, and I
doubt I shall not succeed?  Cox is not to be your Chancellor:  all joined
against him.  I have been supping with Lord Peterborow at his house, with
Prior, Lewis, and Dr. Freind.  'Tis the ramblingest lying rogue on earth.  Dr.
Raymond is come to town:  'tis late, and so I bid you good-night.

24.  I tell you, pretty management!  Ned Southwell told me the other day he
had a letter from the bishops of Ireland, with an address to the Duke of
Ormond, to intercede with the Queen to take off the First-Fruits.  I dined
with him to-day, and saw it, with another letter to him from the Bishop of
Kildare,[23] to call upon me for the papers, etc.; and I had last post one
from the Archbishop of Dublin, telling me the reason of this proceeding; that,
upon hearing the Duke of Ormond was declared Lord Lieutenant, they met; and
the bishops were for this project, and talked coldly of my being solicitor, as
one that was favoured by t'other party, etc., but desired that I would still
solicit.[24]  Now the wisdom of this is admirable; for I had given the
Archbishop an account of my reception from Mr. Harley, and how he had spoken
to the Queen, and promised it should be done; but Mr. Harley ordered me to
tell no person alive.  Some time after, he gave me leave to let the Primate
and Archbishop know that the Queen had remitted the First-Fruits; and that in
a short time they should have an account of it in form from Lord Dartmouth,
Secretary of State.  So while their letter was on the road to the Duke of
Ormond and Southwell, mine was going to them with an account of the thing
being done.  I writ a very warm answer[25] to the Archbishop immediately; and
showed my resentments, as I ought, against the bishops; only, in good manners,
excepting himself.  I wonder what they will say when they hear the thing is
done.  I was yesterday forced to tell Southwell so, that the Queen had done
it, etc.; for he said, my Lord Duke would think of it some months hence, when
he was going for Ireland; and he had it three years in doing formerly, without
any success.  I give you free leave to say, on occasion, that it is done; and
that Mr. Harley prevailed on the Queen to do it, etc., as you please.  As I
hope to live, I despise the credit of it, out of an excess of pride; and
desire you will not give me the least merit when you talk of it; but I would
vex the bishops, and have it spread that Mr. Harley had done it:  pray do so.
Your mother sent me last night a parcel of wax candles, and a bandbox full of
small plumcakes.  I thought it had been something for you; and, without
opening them, sent answer by the maid that brought them, that I would take
care to send the things, etc.; but I will write her thanks.  Is this a long
letter, sirrahs?   Now, are you satisfied?   I have had no fit since the
first:  I drink brandy every morning, and take pills every night.  Never fear,
I an't vexed at this puppy business of the bishops, although I was a little at
first.  I will tell you my reward:  Mr. Harley will think he has done me a
favour; the Duke of Ormond, perhaps, that I have put a neglect on him; and the
bishops in Ireland, that I have done nothing at all.  So goes the world.  But
I have got above all this, and, perhaps, I have better reason for it than they
know:  and so you shall hear no more of First-Fruits, dukes, Harleys,
archbishops, and Southwells.

I have slipped off Raymond upon some of his countrymen, to show him the town,
etc., and I lend him Patrick.  He desires to sit with me in the evenings; upon
which I have given Patrick positive orders that I am not within at evenings.



LETTER 10.

LONDON, Nov. 25, 1710.

I will tell you something that's plaguy silly:  I had forgot to say on the 23d
in my last, where I dined; and because I had done it constantly, I thought it
was a great omission, and was going to interline it; but at last the silliness
of it made me cry, Pshah, and I let it alone.  I was to-day to see the
Parliament meet; but only saw a great crowd; and Ford and I went to see the
tombs at Westminster, and sauntered so long I was forced to go to an eating-
house for my dinner.  Bromley[1] is chosen Speaker, nemine contradicente:  Do
you understand those two words?   And Pompey, Colonel Hill's[2] black, designs
to stand Speaker for the footmen.[3]  I am engaged to use my interest for him,
and have spoken to Patrick to get him some votes.  We are now all impatient
for the Queen's speech, what she will say about removing the Ministry, etc.  I
have got a cold, and I don't know how; but got it I have, and am hoarse:  I
don't know whether it will grow better or worse.  What's that to you?   I
won't answer your letter to-night.  I'll keep you a little longer in suspense:
I can't send it.  Your mother's cakes are very good, and one of them serves me
for a breakfast, and so I'll go sleep like a good boy.

26.  I have got a cruel cold, and stayed within all this day in my nightgown,
and dined on sixpennyworth of victuals, and read and writ, and was denied to
everybody.  Dr. Raymond[4] called often, and I was denied; and at last, when I
was weary, I let him come up, and asked him, without consequence, how Patrick
denied me, and whether he had the art of it?  So by this means he shall be
used to have me denied to him; otherwise he would be a plaguy trouble and
hindrance to me:  he has sat with me two hours, and drank a pint of ale cost
me fivepence, and smoked his pipe, and it is now past eleven that he is just
gone.  Well, my eighth is with you now, young women; and your seventh to me is
somewhere in a post-boy's bag; and so go to your gang of deans, and Stoytes,
and Walls, and lose your money; go, sauceboxes:  and so good-night, and be
happy, dear rogues.  Oh, but your box was sent to Dr. Hawkshaw by Sterne, and
you will have it with Hawkshaw, and spectacles, etc., etc.

27.  To-day Mr. Harley met me in the Court of Requests,[5] and whispered me to
dine with him.  At dinner I told him what those bishops had done, and the
difficulty I was under.  He bid me never trouble myself; he would tell the
Duke of Ormond the business was done, and that he need not concern himself
about it.  So now I am easy, and they may hang themselves for a parcel of
insolent, ungrateful rascals.  I suppose I told you in my last, how they sent
an address to the Duke of Ormond, and a letter to Southwell, to call on me for
the papers, after the thing was over; but they had not received my letter,
though the Archbishop might, by what I writ to him, have expected it would be
done.  Well, there is an end of that; and in a little time the Queen will send
them notice, etc.  And so the methods will be settled; and then I shall think
of returning, although the baseness of those bishops makes me love Ireland
less than I did.

28.  Lord Halifax sent to invite me to dinner; where I stayed till six, and
crossed him in all his Whig talk, and made him often come over to me.  I know
he makes court to the new men, although he affects to talk like a Whig.  I had
a letter to-day from the Bishop of Clogher; but I writ to him lately, that I
would obey his commands to the Duke of Ormond.  He says I bid him read the
London "Shaver," and that you both swore it was "Shaver," and not "Shower."[6]
You all lie, and you are puppies, and can't read Presto's hand.  The Bishop is
out entirely in his conjectures of my share in the Tatlers.--I have other
things to mind, and of much greater importance;[7] else I have little to do to
be acquainted with a new Ministry, who consider me a little more than Irish
bishops do.

29.  Now for your saucy, good dear letter:  let me see, what does it say? come
then.  I dined to-day with Ford, and went home early; he debauched[8] me to
his chamber again with a bottle of wine till twelve:  so good-night.  I cannot
write an answer now, you rogues.

30.  To-day I have been visiting, which I had long neglected; and I dined with
Mrs. Barton alone; and sauntered at the Coffee-house till past eight, and have
been busy till eleven, and now I'll answer your letter, saucebox.  Well, let
me see now again.  My wax candle's almost out, but however I'll begin.  Well
then, do not be so tedious, Mr. Presto; what can you say to MD's letter?  Make
haste, have done with your preambles--Why, I say I am glad you are so often
abroad; your mother thinks it is want of exercise hurts you, and so do I.
(She called here to-night, but I was not within, that's by the bye.)  Sure you
do not deceive me, Stella, when you say you are in better health than you were
these three weeks; for Dr.  Raymond told me yesterday, that Smyth of the Blind
Quay had been telling Mr. Leigh that he left you extremely ill; and in short,
spoke so, that he almost put poor Leigh into tears, and would have made me run
distracted; though your letter is dated the 11th instant, and I saw Smyth in
the city above a fortnight ago, as I passed by in a coach.  Pray, pray, don't
write, Stella, until you are mighty, mighty, mighty, mighty well in your eyes,
and are sure it won't do you the least hurt.  Or come, I'll tell you what;
you, Mistress Stella, shall write your share at five or six sittings, one
sitting a day; and then comes Dingley all together, and then Stella a little
crumb towards the end, to let us see she remembers Presto; and then conclude
with something handsome and genteel, as your most humblecumdumble, or, etc.  O
Lord!  does Patrick write word of my not coming till spring?  Insolent man! he
know my secrets?  No; as my Lord Mayor said, No; if I thought my shirt knew,
etc.  Faith, I will come as soon as it is any way proper for me to come; but,
to say the truth, I am at present a little involved with the present Ministry
in some certain things (which I tell you as a secret); and soon as ever I can
clear my hands, I will stay no longer; for I hope the First-Fruit business
will be soon over in all its forms.  But, to say the truth, the present
Ministry have a difficult task, and want me, etc.  Perhaps they may be just as
grateful as others:  but, according to the best judgment I have, they are
pursuing the true interest of the public; and therefore I am glad to
contribute what is in my power.  For God's sake, not a word of this to any
alive.--Your Chancellor?[9]  Why, madam, I can tell you he has been dead this
fortnight.  Faith, I could hardly forbear our little language about a nasty
dead Chancellor, as you may see by the blot.[10]  Ploughing?   A pox plough
them; they'll plough me to nothing.  But have you got your money, both the ten
pounds?  How durst he pay you the second so soon?   Pray be good huswifes.
Ay, well, and Joe, why, I had a letter lately from Joe, desiring I would take
some care of their poor town,[11] who, he says, will lose their liberties.  To
which I desired Dr. Raymond would return answer, that the town had behaved
themselves so ill to me, so little regarded the advice I gave them, and
disagreed so much among themselves, that I was resolved never to have more to
do with them; but that whatever personal kindness I could do to Joe, should be
done.  Pray, when you happen to see Joe, tell him this, lest Raymond should
have blundered or forgotten--Poor Mrs. Wesley!--Why these poligyes[12] for
being abroad?  Why should you be at home at all, until Stella is quite well?--
So, here is Mistress Stella again, with her two eggs, etc.  My "Shower"
admired with you; why, the Bishop of Clogher says, he has seen something of
mine of the same sort, better than the "Shower."  I suppose he means "The
Morning";[13] but it is not half so good.  I want your judgment of things, and
not your country's.  How does MD like it? and do they taste it ALL? etc.  I am
glad Dean Bolton[14] has paid the twenty pounds.  Why should not I chide the
Bishop of Clogher for writing to the Archbishop of Cashel,[15] without sending
the letter first to me?   It does not signify a ----; for he has no credit at
Court.  Stuff--they are all puppies.  I will break your head in good earnest,
young woman, for your nasty jest about Mrs. Barton.[16]  Unlucky sluttikin,
what a word is there!   Faith, I was thinking yesterday, when I was with her,
whether she could break them or no, and it quite spoilt my imagination.  "Mrs.
Walls, does Stella win as she pretends?"  "No indeed, Doctor; she loses
always, and will play so VENTERSOMELY, how can she win?"  See here now; an't
you an impudent lying slut?  Do, open Domville's letter; what does it signify,
if you have a mind?  Yes, faith, you write smartly with your eyes shut; all
was well but the _n_.  See how I can do it; MADAM STELLA, YOUR HUMBLE
SERVANT.[17]  O, but one may look whether one goes crooked or no, and so write
on.  I will tell you what you may do; you may write with your eyes half shut,
just as when one is going to sleep:  I have done so for two or three lines
now; it is but just seeing enough to go straight.--Now, Madam Dingley, I think
I bid you tell Mr. Walls that, in case there be occasion, I will serve his
friend as far as I can; but I hope there will be none.  Yet I believe you will
have a new Parliament; but I care not whether you have or no a better.  You
are mistaken in all your conjectures about the Tatlers.  I have given him one
or two hints, and you have heard me talk about the Shilling.[18]  Faith, these
answering letters are very long ones:  you have taken up almost the room of a
week in journals; and I will tell you what, I saw fellows wearing crosses to-
day,[19] and I wondered what was the matter; but just this minute I recollect
it is little Presto's birthday; and I was resolved these three days to
remember it when it came, but could not.  Pray, drink my health to-day at
dinner; do, you rogues.  Do you like "Sid Hamet's Rod"?   Do you understand it
all?  Well, now at last I have done with your letter, and so I will lay me
down to sleep, and about, fair maids; and I hope merry maids all.

Dec. 1.  Morning.  I wish Smyth were hanged.  I was dreaming the most
melancholy things in the world of poor Stella, and was grieving and crying all
night.--Pshah, it is foolish:  I will rise and divert myself; so good-morrow;
and God of His infinite mercy keep and protect you!  The Bishop of Clogher's
letter is dated Nov. 21.  He says you thought of going with him to Clogher.  I
am heartily glad of it, and wish you would ride there, and Dingley go in a
coach.  I have had no fit since my first, although sometimes my head is not
quite in good order.--At night.  I was this morning to visit Mr. Pratt, who is
come over with poor, sick Lord Shelburne:  they made me dine with them; and
there I stayed, like a booby, till eight, looking over them at ombre, and then
came home.  Lord Shelburne's giddiness is turned into a colic, and he looks
miserably.

2.  Steele, the rogue, has done the imprudentest thing in the world:  he said
something in a Tatler,[20] that we ought to use the word Great Britain, and
not England, in common conversation, as, "The finest lady in Great Britain,"
etc.  Upon this, Rowe, Prior, and I sent him a letter, turning this into
ridicule.  He has to-day printed the letter,[21] and signed it J.S., M.P., and
N.R., the first letters of all our names.  Congreve told me to-day, he smoked
it immediately.  Congreve and I, and Sir Charles Wager, dined to-day at
Delaval's, the Portugal Envoy; and I stayed there till eight, and came home,
and am now writing to you before I do business, because that dog Patrick is
not at home, and the fire is not made, and I am not in my gear.  Pox take
him!--I was looking by chance at the top of this side, and find I make plaguy
mistakes in words; so that you must fence against that as well as bad writing.
Faith, I can't nor won't read what I have written.  (Pox of this puppy!) Well,
I'll leave you till I am got to bed, and then I will say a word or two.--Well,
'tis now almost twelve, and I have been busy ever since, by a fire too (I have
my coals by half a bushel at a time, I'll assure you), and now I am got to
bed.  Well, and what have you to say to Presto now he is abed?  Come now, let
us hear your speeches.  No, 'tis a lie; I an't sleepy yet.  Let us sit up a
little longer, and talk.  Well, where have you been to-day, that you are but
just this minute come home in a coach?  What have you lost?  Pay the coachman,
Stella.  No, faith, not I, he'll grumble.--What new acquaintance have you got?
come, let us hear.  I have made Delaval promise to send me some Brazil tobacco
from Portugal for you, Madam Dingley.  I hope you will have your chocolate and
spectacles before this comes to you.

3.  Pshaw, I must be writing to these dear saucy brats every night, whether I
will or no, let me have what business I will, or come home ever so late, or be
ever so sleepy; but an old saying, and a true one,

     "Be you lords, or be you earls,
      You must write to naughty girls."

I was to-day at Court, and saw Raymond among the Beefeaters, staying to see
the Queen:  so I put him in a better station, made two or three dozen of bows,
and went to church, and then to Court again, to pick up a dinner, as I did
with Sir John Stanley; and then we went to visit Lord Mountjoy, and just now
left him; and 'tis near eleven at night, young women; and methinks this letter
comes pretty near to the bottom, and 'tis but eight days since the date, and
don't think I'll write on the other side, I thank you for nothing.  Faith, if
I would use you to letters on sheets as broad as this room, you would always
expect them from me.  O, faith, I know you well enough; but an old saying,
etc.,

     "Two sides in a sheet,
      And one in a street."

I think that's but a silly old saying; and so I'll go to sleep, and do you so
too.

4.  I dined to-day with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, and then came home, and studied till
eleven.  No adventure at all to-day.

5.  So I went to the Court of Requests (we have had the Devil and all of rain
by the bye) to pick up a dinner; and Henley made me go dine with him and one
Colonel Bragg[22] at a tavern; cost me money, faith.  Congreve was to be
there, but came not.  I came with Henley to the Coffee-house, where Lord
Salisbury[23] seemed mighty desirous to talk with me; and, while he was
wriggling himself into my favour, that dog Henley asked me aloud, whether I
would go to see Lord Somers as I had promised (which was a lie); and all to
vex poor Lord Salisbury, who is a high Tory.  He played two or three other
such tricks; and I was forced to leave my lord, and I came home at seven, and
have been writing ever since, and will now go to bed.  The other day I saw
Jack Temple[24] in the Court of Requests:  it was the first time of seeing
him; so we talked two or three careless words, and parted.  Is it true that
your Recorder and Mayor, and fanatic aldermen, a month or two ago, at a solemn
feast, drank Mr. Harley's, Lord Rochester's,[25] and other Tory healths?  Let
me know; it was confidently said here.--The scoundrels!  It shan't do, Tom.

6.  When is this letter to go, I wonder?  harkee, young women, tell me that.
Saturday next for certain, and not before:  then it will be just a fortnight;
time enough for naughty girls, and long enough for two letters, faith.
Congreve and Delaval have at last prevailed on Sir Godfrey Kneller to entreat
me to let him draw my picture for nothing; but I know not yet when I shall
sit.[26]--It is such monstrous rainy weather, that there is no doing with it.
Secretary St. John sent to me this morning, that my dining with him to-day was
put off till to-morrow; so I peaceably sat with my neighbour Ford, dined with
him, and came home at six, and am now in bed as usual; and now it is time to
have another letter from MD, yet I would not have it till this goes; for that
would look like two letters for one.  Is it not whimsical that the Dean has
never once written to me?  And I find the Archbishop very silent to that
letter I sent him with an account that the business was done.  I believe he
knows not what to write or say; and I have since written twice to him, both
times with a vengeance.[27]  Well, go to bed, sirrahs, and so will I.  But
have you lost to-day?  Three shillings!  O fie, O fie!

7.  No, I won't send this letter to-day, nor till Saturday, faith; and I am so
afraid of one from MD between this and that; if it comes, I will just say I
received a letter, and that is all.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St.
John, where were Lord Anglesea,[28] Sir Thomas Hanmer, Prior, Freind, etc.,
and then made a debauch after nine at Prior's house, and have eaten cold pie,
and I hate the thoughts of it, and I am full, and I don't like it, and I will
go to bed, and it is late, and so good-night.

8.  To-day I dined with Mr. Harley and Prior; but Mr. St. John did not come,
though he promised:  he chid me for not seeing him oftener.  Here is a damned,
libellous pamphlet come out against Lord Wharton, giving the character first,
and then telling some of his actions:  the character is very well, but the
facts indifferent.[29]  It has been sent by dozens to several gentlemen's
lodgings, and I had one or two of them; but nobody knows the author or
printer.  We are terribly afraid of the plague; they say it is at
Newcastle.[30]  I begged Mr. Harley for the love of God to take some care
about it, or we are all ruined.  There have been orders for all ships from the
Baltic to pass their quarantine before they land; but they neglect it.  You
remember I have been afraid these two years.

9.  O, faith, you are a saucy rogue.  I have had your sixth letter just now,
before this is gone; but I will not answer a word of it, only that I never was
giddy since my first fit; but I have had a cold just a fortnight, and cough
with it still morning and evening; but it will go off.  It is, however, such
abominable weather that no creature can walk.  They say here three of your
Commissioners will be turned out, Ogle, South, and St. Quintin;[31] and that
Dick Stewart[32] and Ludlow will be two of the new ones.  I am a little
soliciting for another:  it is poor Lord Abercorn,[33] but that is a secret; I
mean, that I befriend him is a secret; but I believe it is too late, by his
own fault and ill fortune.  I dined with him to-day.  I am heartily sorry you
do not go to Clogher, faith, I am; and so God Almighty protect poor, dear,
dear, dear, dearest MD.  Farewell till to-night.  I'll begin my eleventh to-
night; so I am always writing to little MD.



LETTER 11.

LONDON, Dec. 9, 1710.

So, young women, I have just sent my tenth to the post-office, and, as I told
you, have received your seventh (faith, I am afraid I mistook, and said your
sixth, and then we shall be all in confusion this month.)  Well, I told you I
dined with Lord Abercorn to-day; and that is enough till by and bye; for I
must go write idle things, and twittle twattle.[1]  What's here to do with
your little MD's?  and so I put this by for a while.  'Tis now late, and I can
only say MD is a dear, saucy rogue, and what then?  Presto loves them the
better.

10.  This son of a b---- Patrick is out of the way, and I can do nothing; am
forced to borrow coals:  'tis now six o'clock, and I am come home after a pure
walk in the park; delicate weather, begun only to-day.  A terrible storm last
night:  we hear one of your packet-boats is cast away, and young Beau Swift[2]
in it, and General Sankey:[3]  I know not the truth; you will before me.
Raymond talks of leaving the town in a few days, and going in a month to
Ireland, for fear his wife should be too far gone, and forced to be brought to
bed here.  I think he is in the right; but perhaps this packet-boat will
fright him.  He has no relish for London; and I do not wonder at it.  He has
got some Templars from Ireland that show him the town.  I do not let him see
me above twice a week, and that only while I am dressing in the morning.--So,
now the puppy's come in, and I have got my own ink, but a new pen; and so now
you are rogues and sauceboxes till I go to bed; for I must go study, sirrahs.
Now I think of it, tell the Bishop of Clogher, he shall not cheat me of one
inch of my bell metal.  You know it is nothing but to save the town money; and
Enniskillen can afford it better than Laracor:  he shall have but one thousand
five hundred weight.  I have been reading, etc., as usual, and am now going to
bed; and I find this day's article is long enough:  so get you gone till to-
morrow, and then.  I dined with Sir Matthew Dudley.

11.  I am come home again as yesterday, and the puppy had again locked up my
ink, notwithstanding all I said to him yesterday; but he came home a little
after me, so all is well:  they are lighting my fire, and I'll go study.  The
fair weather is gone again, and it has rained all day.  I do not like this
open weather, though some say it is healthy.  They say it is a false report
about the plague at Newcastle.[4]  I have no news to-day:  I dined with Mrs.
Vanhomrigh, to desire them to buy me a scarf; and Lady Abercorn[5] is to buy
me another, to see who does best:  mine is all in rags.  I saw the Duke of
Richmond[6] yesterday at Court again, but would not speak to him:  I believe
we are fallen out.  I am now in bed; and it has rained all this evening, like
wildfire:  have you so much rain in your town?  Raymond was in a fright, as I
expected, upon the news of this shipwreck; but I persuaded him, and he leaves
this town in a week.  I got him acquainted with Sir Robert Raymond,[7] the
Solicitor-General, who owns him to be of his family; and I believe it may do
him a kindness, by being recommended to your new Lord Chancellor.--I had a
letter from Mrs. Long, that has quite turned my stomach against her:  no less
than two nasty jests in it, with dashes to suppose them.  She is corrupted in
that country town[8] with vile conversation.--I will not answer your letter
till I have leisure:  so let this go on as it will, what care I? what cares
saucy Presto?

12.  I was to-day at the Secretary's office with Lewis, and in came Lord
Rivers;[9] who took Lewis out and whispered him; and then came up to me to
desire my acquaintance, etc., so we bowed and complimented a while, and parted
and I dined with Phil. Savage[10] and his Irish Club, at their boarding-place;
and, passing an evening scurvily enough, did not come home till eight.  Mr.
Addison and I hardly meet once a fortnight; his Parliament and my different
friendships keep us asunder.  Sir Matthew Dudley turned away his butler
yesterday morning; and at night the poor fellow died suddenly in the streets:
was not it an odd event?  But what care you?  But then I knew the butler.--
Why, it seems your packet-boat is not lost:  psha, how silly that is, when I
had already gone through the forms, and said it was a sad thing, and that I
was sorry for it!  But when must I answer this letter of our MD's?  Here it
is, it lies between this paper on t'other side of the leaf:  one of these odd-
come-shortly's I'll consider, and so good-night.

13.  Morning.  I am to go trapesing with Lady Kerry[11] and Mrs. Pratt[12] to
see sights all this day:  they engaged me yesterday morning at tea.  You hear
the havoc making in the army:  Meredith, Maccartney, and Colonel Honeywood[13]
are obliged to sell their commands at half-value, and leave the army, for
drinking destruction to the present Ministry, and dressing up a hat on a
stick, and calling it Harley; then drinking a glass with one hand, and
discharging a pistol with the other at the maukin,[14] wishing it were Harley
himself; and a hundred other such pretty tricks, as inflaming their soldiers,
and foreign Ministers, against the late changes at Court.  Cadogan[15] has had
a little paring:  his mother[16] told me yesterday he had lost the place of
Envoy; but I hope they will go no further with him, for he was not at those
mutinous meetings.--Well, these saucy jades take up so much of my time with
writing to them in a morning; but, faith, I am glad to see you whenever I can:
a little snap and away; and so hold your tongue, for I must rise:  not a word,
for your life.  How nowww?  So, very well; stay till I come home, and then,
perhaps, you may hear further from me.  And where will you go to-day, for I
can't be with you for these ladies?  It is a rainy, ugly day.  I'd have you
send for Walls, and go to the Dean's; but don't play small games when you
lose.  You'll be ruined by Manilio, Basto, the queen, and two small trumps, in
red.[17]  I confess 'tis a good hand against the player:  but then there are
Spadilio, Punto, the king, strong trumps, against you, which, with one trump
more, are three tricks ten ace:  for, suppose you play your Manilio--Oh,
silly, how I prate, and can't get away from this MD in a morning!  Go, get you
gone, dear naughty girls, and let me rise.  There, Patrick locked up my ink
again the third time last night:  the rogue gets the better of me; but I will
rise in spite of you, sirrahs.--At night.  Lady Kerry, Mrs. Pratt, Mrs.
Cadogan,[18] and I, in one coach; Lady Kerry's son[19] and his governor, and
two gentlemen, in another; maids, and misses and little master (Lord
Shelburne's[20] children, in a third, all hackneys, set out at ten o'clock
this morning from Lord Shelburne's house in Piccadilly to the Tower, and saw
all the sights, lions,[21] etc.; then to Bedlam;[22] then dined at the chop-
house behind the Exchange; then to Gresham College[23] (but the keeper was not
at home); and concluded the night at the Puppet-show,[24] whence we came home
safe at eight, and I left them.  The ladies were all in mobs[25] (how do you
call it?), undrest; and it was the rainiest day that ever dripped; and I am
weary; and it is now past eleven.

14.  Stay, I'll answer some of your letter this morning in bed:  let me see;
come and appear, little letter.  Here I am, says he:  and what say you to Mrs.
MD this morning fresh and fasting?  Who dares think MD negligent?  I allow
them a fortnight; and they give it me.  I could fill a letter in a week; but
it is longer every day; and so I keep it a fortnight, and then 'tis cheaper by
one half.  I have never been giddy, dear Stella, since that morning:  I have
taken a whole box of pills, and kecked[26] at them every night, and drank a
pint of brandy at mornings.--Oh then, you kept Presto's little birthday:[27]
would to God I had been with you!  I forgot it, as I told you before.
REdiculous, madam?  I suppose you mean rIdiculous:  let me have no more of
that; 'tis the author of the Atalantis's[28] spelling.  I have mended it in
your letter.  And can Stella read this writing without hurting her dear eyes?
O, faith, I am afraid not.  Have a care of those eyes, pray, pray, pretty
Stella.--'Tis well enough what you observe, that, if I writ better, perhaps
you would not read so well, being used to this manner; 'tis an alphabet you
are used to:  you know such a pot-hook makes a letter; and you know what
letter, and so and so.--I'll swear he told me so, and that they were long
letters too; but I told him it was a gasconnade of yours, etc.  I am talking
of the Bishop of Clogher, how he forgot.  Turn over.[29]  I had not room on
t'other side to say that, so I did it on this:  I fancy that's a good Irish
blunder.  Ah, why do not you go down to Clogher, nautinautinautideargirls; I
dare not say nauti without dear:  O, faith, you govern me.  But, seriously,
I'm sorry you don't go, as far as I can judge at this distance.  No, we would
get you another horse; I will make Parvisol get you one.  I always doubted
that horse of yours:  prythee sell him, and let it be a present to me.  My
heart aches when I think you ride him.  Order Parvisol to sell him, and that
you are to return me the money:  I shall never be easy until he is out of your
hands.  Faith, I have dreamt five or six times of horses stumbling since I had
your letter.  If he can't sell him, let him run this winter.  Faith, if I was
near you, I would whip your ---- to some tune, for your grave, saucy answer
about the Dean and Johnsonibus; I would, young women.  And did the Dean preach
for me?[30]  Very well.  Why, would they have me stand here and preach to
them?  No, the Tatler of the Shilling[31] was not mine, more than the hint,
and two or three general heads for it.  I have much more important business on
my hands; and, besides, the Ministry hate to think that I should help him, and
have made reproaches on it; and I frankly told them I would do it no more.
This is a secret though, Madam Stella.  You win eight shillings? you win eight
fiddlesticks.  Faith, you say nothing of what you lose, young women.--I hope
Manley is in no great danger; for Ned Southwell is his friend, and so is Sir
Thomas Frankland; and his brother John Manley stands up heartily for him.  On
t'other side, all the gentlemen of Ireland here are furiously against him.
Now, Mistress Dingley, an't you an impudent slut, to expect a letter next
packet from Presto, when you confess yourself that you had so lately two
letters in four days?  Unreasonable baggage!  No, little Dingley, I am always
in bed by twelve; I mean my candle is out by twelve, and I take great care of
myself.  Pray let everybody know, upon occasion, that Mr. Harley got the
First-Fruits from the Queen for the clergy of Ireland, and that nothing
remains but the forms, etc.  So you say the Dean and you dined at Stoyte's,
and Mrs. Stoyte was in raptures that I remembered her.  I must do it but
seldom, or it will take off her rapture. But what now, you saucy sluts? all
this written in a morning, and I must rise and go abroad.  Pray stay till
night:  do not think I will squander mornings upon you, pray, good madam.
Faith, if I go on longer in this trick of writing in the morning, I shall be
afraid of leaving it off, and think you expect it, and be in awe.  Good-
morrow, sirrahs, I will rise.--At night.  I went to-day to the Court of
Requests (I will not answer the rest of your letter yet, that by the way, in
hopes to dine with Mr. Harley:  but Lord Dupplin,[32] his son-in-law, told me
he did not dine at home; so I was at a loss, until I met with Mr. Secretary
St. John, and went home and dined with him, where he told me of a good
bite.[33]  Lord Rivers told me two days ago, that he was resolved to come
Sunday fortnight next to hear me preach before the Queen.  I assured him the
day was not yet fixed, and I knew nothing of it.  To-day the Secretary told me
that his father, Sir Harry St. John,[34] and Lord Rivers were to be at St.
James's Church, to hear me preach there; and were assured I was to preach:  so
there will be another bite; for I know nothing of the matter, but that Mr.
Harley and St. John are resolved I must preach before the Queen; and the
Secretary of State has told me he will give me three weeks' warning; but I
desired to be excused, which he will not.  St. John, "You shall not be
excused":  however, I hope they will forget it; for if it should happen, all
the puppies hereabouts will throng to hear me, and expect something wonderful,
and be plaguily baulked; for I shall preach plain honest stuff.  I stayed with
St. John till eight, and then came home; and Patrick desired leave to go
abroad, and by and by comes up the girl to tell me, a gentleman was below in a
coach, who had a bill to pay me; so I let him come up, and who should it be
but Mr. Addison and Sam Dopping, to haul me out to supper, where I stayed till
twelve.  If Patrick had been at home, I should have 'scaped this; for I have
taught him to deny me almost as well as Mr. Harley's porter.--Where did I
leave off in MD's letter? let me see.  So, now I have it.  You are pleased to
say, Madam Dingley, that those who go for England can never tell when to come
back.  Do you mean this as a reflection upon Presto, madam?  Sauceboxes, I
will come back as soon as I can, as hope saved,[35] and I hope with some
advantage, unless all Ministries be alike, as perhaps they may.  I hope
Hawkshaw is in Dublin before now, and that you have your things, and like your
spectacles:  if you do not, you shall have better.  I hope Dingley's tobacco
did not spoil Stella's chocolate, and that all is safe:  pray let me know.
Mr. Addison and I are different as black and white, and I believe our
friendship will go off, by this damned business of party:  he cannot bear
seeing me fall in so with this Ministry:  but I love him still as well as
ever, though we seldom meet.--Hussy, Stella, you jest about poor Congreve's
eyes;[36] you do so, hussy; but I'll bang your bones, faith.--Yes, Steele was
a little while in prison, or at least in a spunging-house, some time before I
came, but not since.[37]--Pox on your convocations, and your Lamberts;[38]
they write with a vengeance!  I suppose you think it a piece of affectation in
me to wish your Irish folks would not like my "Shower,"; but you are mistaken.
I should be glad to have the general applause there as I have here (though I
say it); but I have only that of one or two, and therefore I would have none
at all, but let you all be in the wrong.  I don't know, this is not what I
would say; but I am so tosticated with supper and stuff, that I can't express
myself.--What you say of "Sid Hamet" is well enough; that an enemy should like
it, and a friend not; and that telling the author would make both change their
opinions.  Why did you not tell Griffyth[39] that you fancied there was
something in it of my manner; but first spur up his commendation to the
height, as we served my poor uncle about the sconce that I mended?  Well, I
desired you to give what I intended for an answer to Mrs. Fenton,[40] to save
her postage, and myself trouble; and I hope I have done it, if you han't.

15.  Lord, what a long day's writing was yesterday's answer to your letter,
sirrahs!  I dined to-day with Lewis and Ford, whom I have brought acquainted.
Lewis told me a pure thing.  I had been hankering with Mr. Harley to save
Steele his other employment, and have a little mercy on him; and I had been
saying the same thing to Lewis, who is Mr. Harley's chief favourite.  Lewis
tells Mr. Harley how kindly I should take it, if he would be reconciled to
Steele, etc.  Mr. Harley, on my account, falls in with it, and appoints Steele
a time to let him attend him, which Steele accepts with great submission, but
never comes, nor sends any excuse.  Whether it was blundering, sullenness,
insolence, or rancour of party, I cannot tell; but I shall trouble myself no
more about him.  I believe Addison hindered him out of mere spite, being
grated[41] to the soul to think he should ever want my help to save his
friend; yet now he is soliciting me to make another of his friends Queen's
Secretary at Geneva; and I'll do it if I can; it is poor Pastoral Philips.[42]

16.  O, why did you leave my picture behind you at t'other lodgings?  Forgot
it?  Well; but pray remember it now, and don't roll it up, d'ye hear; but hang
it carefully in some part of your room, where chairs and candles and mop-
sticks won't spoil it, sirrahs.  No, truly, I will not be godfather to Goody
Walls this bout, and I hope she will have no more.  There will be no quiet nor
cards for this child.  I hope it will die the day after the christening.  Mr.
Harley gave me a paper, with an account of the sentence you speak of against
the lads that defaced the statue,[43] and that Ingoldsby[44] reprieved that
part of it of standing before the statue.  I hope it was never executed.  We
have got your Broderick out;[45] Doyne[46] is to succeed him, and Cox[47]
Doyne.  And so there's an end of your letter; 'tis all answered; and now I
must go on upon my own stock.  Go on, did I say?  Why, I have written enough;
but this is too soon to send it yet, young women; faith, I dare not use you to
it, you'll always expect it; what remains shall be only short journals of a
day, and so I'll rise for this morning.--At night.  I dined with my opposite
neighbour, Darteneuf; and I was soliciting this day to present the Bishop of
Clogher Vice-Chancellor;[48] but it won't do; they are all set against him,
and the Duke of Ormond, they say, has resolved to dispose of it somewhere
else.  Well; little saucy rogues, do not stay out too late to-night, because
it is Saturday night, and young women should come home soon then.

17.  I went to Court to seek a dinner:  but the Queen was not at church, she
has got a touch of the gout; so the Court was thin, and I went to the Coffee-
house; and Sir Thomas Frankland and his eldest son and I went and dined with
his son William.[49]  I talked a great deal to Sir Thomas about Manley; and
find he is his good friend, and so has Ned Southwell been, and I hope he will
be safe, though all the Irish folks here are his mortal enemies.  There was a
devilish bite to-day.  They had it, I know not how, that I was to preach this
morning at St. James's Church; an abundance went, among the rest Lord Radnor,
who never is abroad till three in the afternoon.  I walked all the way home
from Hatton Garden at six, by moonlight, a delicate night.  Raymond called at
nine, but I was denied; and now I am in bed between eleven and twelve, just
going to sleep, and dream of my own dear roguish impudent pretty MD.

18.  You will now have short days' works, just a few lines to tell you where I
am, and what I am doing; only I will keep room for the last day to tell you
news, if there be any worth sending.  I have been sometimes like to do it at
the top of my letter, until I remark it would be old before it reached you.  I
was hunting to dine with Mr. Harley to-day, but could not find him; and so I
dined with honest Dr. Cockburn, and came home at six, and was taken out to
next door by Dopping and Ford, to drink bad claret and oranges; and we let
Raymond come to us, who talks of leaving the town to-morrow, but I believe
will stay a day or two longer.  It is now late, and I will say no more, but
end this line with bidding my own dear saucy MD goodnight, etc.

19.  I am come down proud stomach in one instance, for I went to-day to see
the Duke of Buckingham,[50] but came too late:  then I visited Mrs.
Barton,[51] and thought to have dined with some of the Ministry; but it
rained, and Mrs. Vanhomrigh was nigh, and I took the opportunity of paying her
for a scarf she bought me, and dined there; at four I went to congratulate
with Lord Shelburne, for the death of poor Lady Shelburne dowager;[52] he was
at his country house, and returned while I was there, and had not heard of it,
and he took it very well.  I am now come home before six, and find a packet
from the Bishop of Clogher, with one enclosed to the Duke of Ormond, which is
ten days earlier dated than another I had from Parvisol; however, 'tis no
matter, for the Duke has already disposed of the Vice-Chancellorship to the
Archbishop of Tuam,[53] and I could not help it, for it is a thing wholly you
know in the Duke's power; and I find the Bishop has enemies about the Duke.  I
write this while Patrick is folding up my scarf, and doing up the fire (for I
keep a fire, it costs me twelvepence a week); and so be quiet till I am gone
to bed, and then sit down by me a little, and we will talk a few words more.
Well; now MD is at my bedside; and now what shall we say?  How does Mrs.
Stoyte?  What had the Dean for supper?  How much did Mrs. Walls win?  Poor
Lady Shelburne:  well, go get you to bed, sirrahs.

20.  Morning.  I was up this morning early, and shaved by candlelight, and
write this by the fireside.  Poor Raymond just came in and took his leave of
me; he is summoned by high order from his wife, but pretends he has had enough
of London.  I was a little melancholy to part with him; he goes to Bristol,
where they are to be with his merchant brother, and now thinks of staying till
May; so she must be brought to bed in England.  He was so easy and manageable,
that I almost repent I suffered him to see me so seldom.  But he is gone, and
will save Patrick some lies in a week:  Patrick is grown admirable at it, and
will make his fortune.  How now, sirrah, must I write in a morning to your
impudence?

     Stay till night,
     And then I'll write,
     In black and white,
     By candlelight,
     Of wax so bright,
     It helps the sight--
     A bite, a bite!

Marry come up, Mistress Boldface.--At night.  Dr. Raymond came back, and goes
to-morrow.  I did not come home till eleven, and found him here to take leave
of me.  I went to the Court of Requests, thinking to find Mr. Harley and dine
with him, and refused Henley, and everybody, and at last knew not where to go,
and met Jemmy Leigh by chance, and he was just in the same way, so I dined at
his lodgings on a beef-steak, and drank your health; then left him and went to
the tavern with Ben Tooke and Portlack, the Duke of Ormond's secretary,
drinking nasty white wine till eleven.  I am sick, and ashamed of it, etc.

21.  I met that beast Ferris, Lord Berkeley's[54] steward formerly; I walked
with him a turn in the Park, and that scoundrel dog is as happy as an emperor,
has married a wife with a considerable estate in land and houses about this
town, and lives at his ease at Hammersmith.  See your confounded sect![55]
Well; I had the same luck to-day with Mr. Harley; 'twas a lovely day, and went
by water into the City, and dined with Stratford at a merchant's house, and
walked home with as great a dunce as Ferris, I mean honest Colonel
Caulfeild,[56] and came home by eight, and now am in bed, and going to sleep
for a wager, and will send this letter on Saturday, and so; but first I will
wish you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year, and pray God we may never
keep them asunder again.

22.  Morning.  I am going now to Mr. Harley's levee on purpose to vex him; I
will say I had no other way of seeing him, etc.  Patrick says it is a dark
morning, and that the Duke of Argyle[57] is to be knighted to-day; the booby
means installed at Windsor.  But I must rise, for this is a shaving-day, and
Patrick says there is a good fire; I wish MD were by it, or I by MD's.--At
night.  I forgot to tell you, Madam Dingley, that I paid nine shillings for
your glass and spectacles, of which three were for the Bishop's case:  I am
sorry I did not buy you such another case; but if you like it, I will bring
one over with me; pray tell me:  the glass to read was four shillings, the
spectacles two.  And have you had your chocolate?  Leigh says he sent the
petticoat by one Mr. Spencer.  Pray have you no further commissions for me?  I
paid the glass-man but last night, and he would have made me a present of the
microscope worth thirty shillings, and would have sent it home along with me;
I thought the deuce was in the man:  he said I could do him more service than
that was worth, etc.  I refused his present, but promised him all service I
could do him; and so now I am obliged in honour to recommend him to
everybody.--At night.  I went to Mr. Harley's levee; he came and asked me what
I had to do there, and bid me come and dine with him on a family dinner; which
I did, and it was the first time I ever saw his lady[58] and daughter;[59] at
five my Lord Keeper[60] came in:  I told Mr. Harley, he had formerly presented
me to Sir Simon Harcourt, but now must to my Lord Keeper; so he laughed, etc.

23.  Morning.  This letter goes to-night without fail; I hope there is none
from you yet at the Coffee-house; I will send and see by and by, and let you
know, and so and so.  Patrick goes to see for a letter:  what will you lay, is
there one from MD or no?  No, I say; done for sixpence.  Why has the Dean
never once written to me?  I won sixpence; I won sixpence; there is not one
letter to Presto.  Good-morrow, dear sirrahs:  Stratford and I dine to-day
with Lord Mountjoy.  God Almighty preserve and bless you; farewell, etc.

I have been dining at Lord Mountjoy's; and am come to study; our news from
Spain this post takes off some of our fears.  The Parliament is prorogued to-
day, or adjourned rather till after the holidays.  Bank Stock is 105, so I may
get 12 shillings for my bargain already.  Patrick, the puppy, is abroad, and
how shall I send this letter?  Good-night, little dears both, and be happy;
and remember your poor Presto, that wants you sadly, as hope saved.  Let me go
study, naughty girls, and don't keep me at the bottom of the paper.  O, faith,
if you knew what lies on my hands constantly, you would wonder to see how I
could write such long letters; but we'll talk of that some other time.  Good-
night again, and God bless dear MD with His best blessings, yes, yes, and
Dingley and Stella and me too, etc.

Ask the Bishop of Clogher about the pun I sent him of Lord Stawel's
brother;[61] it will be a pure bite.  This letter has 199 lines in it, beside
all postscripts; I had a curiosity to reckon.

There is a long letter for you.

It is longer than a sermon, faith.

I had another letter from Mrs. Fenton, who says you were with her; I hope you
did not go on purpose.  I will answer her letter soon; it is about some money
in Lady Giffard's hands.

They say you have had eight packets due to you; so pray, madams, do not blame
Presto, but the wind.

My humble service to Mrs. Walls and Mrs. Stoyte; I missed the former a good
while.



LETTER 12.

LONDON, Dec. 23, 1710.

I have sent my 11th to-night as usual, and begin the dozenth, and I told you I
dined with Stratford at Lord Mountjoy's, and I will tell you no more at
present, guess for why; because I am going to mind things, and mighty affairs,
not your nasty First-Fruits--I let them alone till Mr. Harley gets the Queen's
letter--but other things of greater moment, that you shall know one day, when
the ducks have eaten up all the dirt.  So sit still a while just by me, while
I am studying, and don't say a word, I charge you, and when I am going to bed,
I will take you along, and talk with you a little while, so there, sit there.-
-Come then, let us see what we have to say to these saucy brats, that will not
let us go sleep at past eleven.  Why, I am a little impatient to know how you
do; but that I take it for a standing maxim, that when you are silent, all is
pretty well, because that is the way I will deal with you; and if there was
anything you ought to know now, I would write by the first post, although I
had written but the day before.  Remember this, young women; and God Almighty
preserve you both, and make us happy together; and tell me how accompts stand
between us, that you may be paid long before it is due, not to want.  I will
return no more money while I stay, so that you need not be in pain to be paid;
but let me know at least a month before you can want.  Observe this, d'ye
hear, little dear sirrahs, and love Presto, as Presto loves MD, etc.

24.  You will have a merrier Christmas Eve than we here.  I went up to Court
before church; and in one of the rooms, there being but little company, a
fellow in a red coat without a sword came up to me, and, after words of
course, asked me how the ladies did?  I asked, "What ladies?"  He said, "Mrs.
Dingley and Mrs. Johnson."  "Very well," said I, "when I heard from them last:
and pray when came you from thence, sir?"  He said, "I never was in Ireland";
and just at that word Lord Winchelsea[1] comes up to me, and the man went off:
as I went out I saw him again, and recollected him, it was Vedeau[2] with a
pox:  I then went and made my apologies, that my head was full of something I
had to say to Lord Winchelsea, etc., and I asked after his wife, and so all
was well; and he inquired after my lodging, because he had some favour to
desire of me in Ireland, to recommend somebody to somebody, I know not what it
is.  When I came from church, I went up to Court again, where Sir Edmond
Bacon[3] told me the bad news from Spain,[4] which you will hear before this
reaches you; as we have it now, we are undone there, and it was odd to see the
whole countenances of the Court changed so in two hours.  Lady Mountjoy[5]
carried me home to dinner, where I stayed not long after, and came home early,
and now am got into bed, for you must always write to your MD's in bed, that
is a maxim.

     Mr. White and Mr. Red,
     Write to MD when abed;
     Mr. Black and Mr. Brown,
     Write to MD when you're down;
     Mr. Oak and Mr. Willow,
     Write to MD on your pillow.--

What is this? faith, I smell fire; what can it be? this house has a thousand
stinks in it.  I think to leave it on Thursday, and lodge over the way.
Faith, I must rise, and look at my chimney, for the smell grows stronger,
stay--I have been up, and in my room, and found all safe, only a mouse within
the fender to warm himself, which I could not catch.  I smelt nothing there,
but now in my bed-chamber I smell it again; I believe I have singed the
woollen curtain, and that is all, though I cannot smoke it.  Presto is plaguy
silly to-night, an't he?  Yes, and so he be.  Ay, but if I should wake and see
fire.  Well; I will venture; so good-night, etc.

25.  Pray, young women, if I write so much as this every day, how will this
paper hold a fortnight's work, and answer one of yours into the bargain?  You
never think of this, but let me go on like a simpleton.  I wish you a merry
Christmas, and many, many a one with poor Presto at some pretty place.  I was
at church to-day by eight, and received the Sacrament, and came home by ten;
then went to Court at two:  it was a Collar-day, that is, when the Knights of
the Garter wear their collars; but the Queen stayed so late at Sacrament, that
I came back, and dined with my neighbour Ford, because all people dine at home
on this day.  This is likewise a Collar-day all over England in every house,
at least where there is BRAWN:  that's very well.--I tell you a good pun; a
fellow hard by pretends to cure agues, and has set out a sign, and spells it
EGOES; a gentleman and I observing it, he said, "How does that fellow pretend
to cure AGUES?"  I said I did not know; but I was sure it was not by a SPELL.
That is admirable.  And so you asked the Bishop about that pun of Lord
Stawel's brother.  Bite!  Have I caught you, young women?  Must you pretend to
ask after roguish puns, and Latin ones too?  Oh but you smoked me, and did not
ask the Bishop.  Oh but you are a fool, and you did.  I met Vedeau again at
Court to-day, and I observed he had a sword on; I fancy he was broke, and has
got a commission, but I never asked him.  Vedeau I think his name is, yet
Parvisol's man is Vedel, that is true.  Bank Stock will fall like stock-fish
by this bad news, and two days ago I could have got twelve pounds by my
bargain; but I do not intend to sell, and in time it will rise.  It is odd
that my Lord Peterborow foretold this loss two months ago, one night at Mr.
Harley's, when I was there; he bid us count upon it, that Stanhope would lose
Spain before Christmas; that he would venture his head upon it, and gave us
reasons; and though Mr. Harley argued the contrary, he still held to his
opinion.  I was telling my Lord Angelsea this at Court this morning; and a
gentleman by said he had heard my Lord Peterborow affirm the same thing.  I
have heard wise folks say, "An ill tongue may do much."  And 'tis an odd
saying,

     "Once I guessed right,
      And I got credit by't;
      Thrice I guessed wrong,
      And I kept my credit on."

No, it is you are sorry, not I.

26.  By the Lord Harry, I shall be undone here with Christmas boxes.  The
rogues of the Coffee-house have raised their tax, everyone giving a crown; and
I gave mine for shame, besides a great many half-crowns to great men's
porters, etc.  I went to-day by water into the city, and dined with no less a
man than the City Printer.[6]  There is an intimacy between us, built upon
reasons that you shall know when I see you; but the rain caught me within
twelvepenny length of home.  I called at Mr. Harley's, who was not within,
dropped my half-crown with his porter, drove to the Coffee-house, where the
rain kept me till nine.  I had letters to-day from the Archbishop of Dublin
and Mr. Bernage;[7] the latter sends me a melancholy account of Lady
Shelburne's[8] death, and his own disappointments, and would gladly be a
captain; if I can help him, I will.

27.  Morning.  I bespoke a lodging over the way for tomorrow, and the dog let
it yesterday to another; I gave him no earnest, so it seems he could do it;
Patrick would have had me give him earnest to bind him; but I would not.  So I
must go saunter to-day for a lodging somewhere else.  Did you ever see so open
a winter in England?  We have not had two frosty days; but it pays it off in
rain:  we have not had three fair days these six weeks.  O, faith, I dreamt
mightily of MD last night; but so confused, I cannot tell a word.  I have made
Ford acquainted with Lewis; and to-day we dined together:  in the evening I
called at one or two neighbours, hoping to spend a Christmas evening; but none
were at home, they were all gone to be merry with others.  I have often
observed this, that in merry times everybody is abroad; where the deuce are
they?  So I went to the Coffee-house, and talked with Mr. Addison an hour, who
at last remembered to give me two letters, which I cannot answer to-night, nor
to-morrow neither, I can assure you, young women, count upon that.  I have
other things to do than to answer naughty girls, an old saying and true,

     Letters from MD's
     Must not be answered in ten days:

it is but bad rhyme, etc.

28.  To-day I had a message from Sir Thomas Hanmer, to dine with him; the
famous Dr. Smalridge[9] was of the company, and we sat till six; and I came
home to my new lodgings in St. Albans Street,[10] where I pay the same rent
(eight shillings a week) for an apartment two pair of stairs; but I have the
use of the parlour to receive persons of quality, and I am got into my new
bed, etc.

29.  Sir Andrew Fountaine has been very ill this week; and sent to me early
this morning to have prayers, which you know is the last thing.  I found the
doctors and all in despair about him.  I read prayers to him, found he had
settled all things; and, when I came out, the nurse asked me whether I thought
it possible he could live; for the doctors thought not.  I said, I believed he
would live; for I found the seeds of life in him, which I observe seldom fail
(and I found them in poor, dearest Stella, when she was ill many years ago);
and to-night I was with him again, and he was mightily recovered, and I hope
he will do well, and the doctor approved my reasons; but, if he should die, I
should come off scurvily.  The Secretary of State (Mr. St. John) sent to me to
dine with him; Mr. Harley and Lord Peterborow dined there too; and at night
came Lord Rivers.  Lord Peterborow goes to Vienna in a day or two:  he has
promised to make me write to him.  Mr. Harley went away at six; but we stayed
till seven.  I took the Secretary aside, and complained to him of Mr. Harley,
that he had got the Queen to grant the First-Fruits, promised to bring me to
her, and get her letter to the bishops of Ireland; but the last part he had
not done in six weeks, and I was in danger to lose reputation, etc.  He took
the matter right, desired me to be with him on Sunday morning, and promises me
to finish the affair in four days; so I shall know in a little time what I
have to trust to.--It is nine o'clock, and I must go study, you little rogues;
and so good-night, etc.

30.  Morning.  The weather grows cold, you sauceboxes.  Sir Andrew Fountaine,
they bring me word, is better.  I will go rise, for my hands are starving
while I write in bed.  Night.  Now Sir Andrew Fountaine is recovering, he
desires to be at ease; for I called in the morning to read prayers, but he had
given orders not to be disturbed.  I have lost a legacy by his living; for he
told me he had left me a picture and some books, etc.  I called to see my
quondam neighbour Ford (do you know what quondam is, though?), and he engaged
me to dine with him; for he always dines at home on Opera-days.  I came home
at six, writ to the Archbishop, then studied till past eleven, and stole to
bed, to write to MD these few lines, to let you know I am in good health at
the present writing hereof, and hope in God MD is so too.  I wonder I never
write politics to you:  I could make you the profoundest politician in all the
lane.--Well, but when shall we answer this letter, No. 8 of MD's?  Not till
next year, faith.  O Lord--bo--but that will be a Monday next.  Cod's-so, is
it? and so it is:  never saw the like.--I made a pun t'other day to Ben
Portlack[11] about a pair of drawers.  Poh, said he, that's mine a--- all
over.  Pray, pray, Dingley, let me go sleep; pray, pray, Stella, let me go
slumber; and put out my wax-candle.

31.  Morning.  It is now seven, and I have got a fire, but am writing abed in
my bed-chamber.  'Tis not shaving-day, so I shall be ready early to go before
church to Mr. St. John; and to-morrow I will answer our MD's letter.

     Would you answer MD's letter,
     On New Year's Day you'll do it better;
     For, when the year with MD 'gins,
     It without MD never lins.

(These proverbs have always old words in them; lins is leave off.)

     But, if on New Year you write nones,
     MD then will bang your bones.

But Patrick says I must rise.--Night.  I was early this morning with Secretary
St. John, and gave him a memorial to get the Queen's letter for the First-
Fruits, who has promised to do it in a very few days.  He told me he had been
with the Duke of Marlborough, who was lamenting his former wrong steps in
joining with the Whigs, and said he was worn out with age, fatigues, and
misfortunes.  I swear it pitied me; and I really think they will not do well
in too much mortifying that man, although indeed it is his own fault.  He is
covetous as hell, and ambitious as the Prince of it:  he would fain have been
General for life, and has broken all endeavours for peace, to keep his
greatness and get money.  He told the Queen he was neither covetous nor
ambitious.  She said if she could have conveniently turned about, she would
have laughed, and could hardly forbear it in his face.  He fell in with all
the abominable measures of the late Ministry, because they gratified him for
their own designs.  Yet he has been a successful General, and I hope he will
continue his command.  O Lord, smoke the politics to MD!  Well; but, if you
like them, I will scatter a little now and then, and mine are all fresh from
the chief hands.  Well, I dined with Mr. Harley, and came away at six:  there
was much company, and I was not merry at all.  Mr. Harley made me read a paper
of verses of Prior's.  I read them plain, without any fine manner; and Prior
swore, I should never read any of his again; but he would be revenged, and
read some of mine as bad.  I excused myself, and said I was famous for reading
verses the worst in the world; and that everybody snatched them from me when I
offered to begin.  So we laughed.--Sir Andrew Fountaine still continues ill.
He is plagued with some sort of bile.

Jan. 1.  Morning.  I wish my dearest, pretty Dingley and Stella a happy New
Year, and health, and mirth, and good stomachs, and Fr's company.  Faith, I
did not know how to write Fr.  I wondered what was the matter; but now I
remember I always write Pdfr.  Patrick wishes me a happy New Year, and desires
I would rise, for it is a good fire, and faith 'tis cold.  I was so politic
last night with MD, never saw the like.  Get the Examiners, and read them; the
last nine or ten are full of the reasons for the late change, and of the
abuses of the last Ministry; and the great men assure me they are all true.
They are written by their encouragement and direction.  I must rise and go see
Sir Andrew Fountaine; but perhaps to-night I may answer MD's letter:  so good-
morrow, my mistresses all, good-morrow.

     I wish you both a merry New Year,
     Roast beef, minced pies, and good strong beer,
     And me a share of your good cheer,
     That I was there, or you were here;
     And you're a little saucy dear.

Good-morrow again, dear sirrahs; one cannot rise for your play.--At night.  I
went this morning to visit Lady Kerry and Lord Shelburne; and they made me
dine with them.  Sir Andrew Fountaine is better.  And now let us come and see
what this saucy, dear letter of MD says.  Come out, letter, come out from
between the sheets; here it is underneath, and it will not come out.  Come out
again, I say:  so there.  Here it is.  What says Presto to me, pray? says it.
Come, and let me answer for you to your ladies.  Hold up your head then, like
a good letter.  There.  Pray, how have you got up with Presto, Madam Stella?
You write your eighth when you receive mine:  now I write my twelfth when I
receive your eighth.  Do not you allow for what are upon the road, simpleton?
What say you to that?  And so you kept Presto's little birthday, I warrant:
would to God I had been at the health rather than here, where I have no manner
of pleasure, nothing but eternal business upon my hands.  I shall grow wise in
time; but no more of that:  only I say Amen with my heart and vitals, that we
may never be asunder again ten days together while poor Presto lives. --------
------------------------------------------------ I can't be merry so near any
splenetic talk; so I made that long line, and now all's well again.  Yes, you
are a pretending slut, indeed, with your fourth and fifth in the margin, and
your journal, and everything.  Wind--we saw no wind here, nothing at all
extraordinary at any time.  We had it once when you had it not.  But an old
saying and a true:

     "I hate all wind,
      Before and behind,
      From cheeks with eyes,
      Or from blind.----"

Your chimney fall down!  God preserve you.  I suppose you only mean a brick or
two:  but that's a d--ned lie of your chimney being carried to the next house
with the wind.  Don't put such things upon us; those matters will not pass
here:  keep a little to possibilities.  My Lord Hertford[12] would have been
ashamed of such a stretch.  You should take care of what company you converse
with:  when one gets that faculty, 'tis hard to break one's self of it.  Jemmy
Leigh talks of going over; but quando?  I do not know when he will go.  Oh,
now you have had my ninth, now you are come up with me; marry come up with
you, indeed.  I know all that business of Lady S----.[13]  Will nobody cut
that D--y's throat?  Five hundred pounds do you call poor pay for living three
months the life of a king?  They say she died with grief, partly, being forced
to appear as a witness in court about some squabble among their servants.--The
Bishop of Clogher showed you a pamphlet.[14]  Well, but you must not give your
mind to believe those things; people will say anything.  The Character is here
reckoned admirable, but most of the facts are trifles.  It was first printed
privately here; and then some bold cur ventured to do it publicly, and sold
two thousand in two days:  who the author is must remain uncertain.  Do you
pretend to know, impudence?  How durst you think so?  Pox on your Parliaments:
the Archbishop has told me of it; but we do not vouchsafe to know anything of
it here.  No, no, no more of your giddiness yet; thank you, Stella, for asking
after it; thank you; God Almighty bless you for your kindness to poor Presto.
You write to Lady Giffard and your mother upon what I advise when it is too
late.  But yet I fancy this bad news will bring down stocks so low, that one
might buy to great advantage.  I design to venture going to see your mother
some day when Lady Giffard is abroad.  Well, keep your Rathburn[15] and stuff.
I thought he was to pay in your money upon his houses to be flung down about
the what do you call it.--Well, Madam Dingley, I sent your enclosed to
Bristol, but have not heard from Raymond since he went.  Come, come, young
women, I keep a good fire; it costs me twelvepence a week, and I fear
something more; vex me, and I will have one in my bed-chamber too.  No, did
not I tell you but just now, we have no high winds here?  Have you forgot
already?--Now you're at it again, silly Stella; why does your mother say my
candles are scandalous?  They are good sixes in the pound, and she said I was
extravagant enough to burn them by daylight.  I never burn fewer at a time
than one.  What would people have?  The D---- burst Hawkshaw.  He told me he
had not the box; and the next day Sterne told me he had sent it a fortnight
ago.  Patrick could not find him t'other day, but he shall to-morrow.  Dear
life and heart, do you tease me? does Stella tease Presto?  That palsy-water
was in the box; it was too big for a packet, and I was afraid of its breaking.
Leigh was not in town then; or I would not have trusted it to Sterne, whom yet
I have befriended enough to do me more kindness than that.  I'll never rest
till you have it, or till it is in a way for you to have it.  Poor dear rogue,
naughty to think it teases me; how could I ever forgive myself for neglecting
anything that related to your health?  Sure I were a Devil if I did. ---------
--------------------------------------------- See how far I am forced to stand
from Stella, because I am afraid she thinks poor Presto has not been careful
about her little things; I am sure I bought them immediately according to
order, and packed them up with my own hands, and sent them to Sterne, and was
six times with him about sending them away.  I am glad you are pleased with
your glasses.  I have got another velvet cap; a new one Lord Herbert[16]
bought and presented me one morning I was at breakfast with him, where he was
as merry and easy as ever I saw him, yet had received a challenge half an hour
before, and half an hour after fought a duel.  It was about ten days ago.  You
are mistaken in your guesses about Tatlers:  I did neither write that on Noses
nor Religion,[17] nor do I send him of late any hints at all.--Indeed, Stella,
when I read your letter, I was not uneasy at all; but when I came to answer
the particulars, and found that you had not received your box, it grated me to
the heart, because I thought, through your little words, that you imagined I
had not taken the care I ought.  But there has been some blunder in this
matter, which I will know to-morrow, and write to Sterne, for fear he should
not be within.--And pray, pray, Presto, pray now do.--No, Raymond was not
above four times with me while he stayed, and then only while I was dressing.
Mrs. Fenton has written me another letter about some money of hers in Lady
Giffard's hands, that is entrusted to me by my mother, not to come to her
husband.  I send my letters constantly every fortnight, and, if you will have
them oftener, you may, but then they will be the shorter.  Pray, let Parvisol
sell the horse.  I think I spoke to you of it in a former letter:  I am glad
you are rid of him, and was in pain while I thought you rode him; but, if he
would buy you another, or anybody else, and that you could be often able to
ride, why do not you do it?

2.  I went this morning early to the Secretary of State, Mr. St. John; and he
told me from Mr. Harley that the warrant was now drawn, in order for a patent
for the First-Fruits:  it must pass through several offices, and take up some
time, because in things the Queen gives they are always considerate; but that,
he assures me, 'tis granted and done, and past all dispute, and desires I will
not be in any pain at all.  I will write again to the Archbishop to-morrow,
and tell him this, and I desire you will say it on occasion.  From the
Secretary I went to Mr. Sterne, who said he would write to you to-night; and
that the box must be at Chester; and that some friend of his goes very soon,
and will carry it over.  I dined with Mr. Secretary St. John, and at six went
to Darteneufs house to drink punch with him, and Mr. Addison, and little
Harrison,[18] a young poet, whose fortune I am making.  Steele was to have
been there, but came not, nor never did twice, since I knew him, to any
appointment.  I stayed till past eleven, and am now in bed.  Steele's last
Tatler came out to-day.  You will see it before this comes to you, and how he
takes leave of the world.  He never told so much as Mr. Addison of it, who was
surprised as much as I; but, to say the truth, it was time, for he grew cruel
dull and dry.  To my knowledge he had several good hints to go upon; but he
was so lazy and weary of the work that he would not improve them.  I think I
will send this after[19] to-morrow:  shall I before 'tis full, Dingley?

3.  Lord Peterborow yesterday called me into a barber's shop, and there we
talked deep politics:  he desired me to dine with him to-day at the Globe in
the Strand; he said he would show me so clearly how to get Spain, that I could
not possibly doubt it.  I went to-day accordingly, and saw him among half a
dozen lawyers and attorneys and hang-dogs, signing of deeds and stuff before
his journey; for he goes to-morrow to Vienna.  I sat among that scurvy company
till after four, but heard nothing of Spain; only I find, by what he told me
before, that he fears he shall do no good in his present journey.[20]  We are
to be mighty constant correspondents.  So I took my leave of him, and called
at Sir Andrew Fountaine's, who mends much.  I came home, an't please you, at
six, and have been studying till now past eleven.

4.  Morning.  Morrow, little dears.  O, faith, I have been dreaming; I was to
be put in prison.  I do not know why, and I was so afraid of a black dungeon;
and then all I had been inquiring yesterday of Sir Andrew Fountaine's sickness
I thought was of poor Stella.  The worst of dreams is, that one wakes just in
the humour they leave one.  Shall I send this to-day?  With all my heart:  it
is two days within the fortnight; but may be MD are in haste to have a round
dozen:  and then how are you come up to me with your eighth, young women?  But
you indeed ought to write twice slower than I, because there are two of you; I
own that.  Well then, I will seal up this letter by my morning candle, and
carry it into the city with me, where I go to dine, and put it into the post-
office with my own fair hands.  So, let me see whether I have any news to tell
MD.  They say they will very soon make some inquiries into the corruptions of
the late Ministry; and they must do it, to justify their turning them out.
Atterbury,[21] we think, is to be Dean of Christ Church in Oxford; but the
College would rather have Smalridge--What's all this to you?  What care you
for Atterburys and Smalridges?  No, you care for nothing but Presto, faith.
So I will rise, and bid you farewell; yet I am loth to do so, because there is
a great bit of paper yet to talk upon; but Dingley will have it so:  "Yes,"
says she, "make your journals shorter, and send them oftener;" and so I will.
And I have cheated you another way too; for this is clipped paper, and holds
at least six lines less than the former ones.  I will tell you a good thing I
said to my Lord Carteret.[22]  "So," says he, "my Lord came up to me, and
asked me," etc.  "No," said I, "my Lord never did, nor ever can come up to
you."  We all pun here sometimes.  Lord Carteret set down Prior t'other day in
his chariot; and Prior thanked him for his CHARITY; that was fit for
Dilly.[23]  I do not remember I heard one good one from the Ministry; which is
really a shame.  Henley is gone to the country for Christmas.  The puppy comes
here without his wife,[24] and keeps no house, and would have me dine with him
at eating-houses; but I have only done it once, and will do it no more.  He
had not seen me for some time in the Coffee-house, and asking after me,
desired Lord Herbert to tell me I was a beast for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec.  Did you ever read the Scripture?[25]  It is only changing the
word priest to beast.--I think I am bewitched, to write so much in a morning
to you, little MD.  Let me go, will you? and I'll come again to-night in a
fine clean sheet of paper; but I can nor will stay no longer now; no, I won't,
for all your wheedling:  no, no, look off, do not smile at me, and say, "Pray,
pray, Presto, write a little more."  Ah! you are a wheedling slut, you be so.
Nay, but prithee turn about, and let me go, do; 'tis a good girl, and do.  O,
faith, my morning candle is just out, and I must go now in spite of my teeth;
for my bed-chamber is dark with curtains, and I am at the wrong side.  So
farewell, etc. etc.

I am in the dark almost:  I must have another candle, when I am up, to seal
this; but I will fold it up in the dark, and make what you can of this, for I
can only see this paper I am writing upon.  Service to Mrs. Walls and Mrs.
Stoyte.

God Almighty bless you, etc.  What I am doing I can't see; but I will fold it
up, and not look on it again.



LETTER 13.

LONDON, Jan. 4, 1710-11.

I was going into the City (where I dined and put my 12th, with my own fair
hands, into the post-office as I came back, which was not till nine this
night.  I dined with people that you never heard of, nor is it worth your
while to know; an authoress and a printer.[1]  I walked home for exercise, and
at eleven got to bed; and, all the while I was undressing myself, there was I
speaking monkey things in air, just as if MD had been by, and did not
recollect myself till I got into bed.  I writ last night to the Archbishop,
and told him the warrant was drawn for the First-Fruits; and I told him Lord
Peterborow was set out for his journey to Vienna; but it seems the Lords have
addressed to have him stay, to be examined about Spanish affairs, upon this
defeat there, and to know where the fault lay, etc.  So I writ to the
Archbishop a lie; but I think it was not a sin.

5.  Mr. Secretary St. John sent for me this morning so early, that I was
forced to go without shaving, which put me quite out of method.  I called at
Mr. Ford's, and desired him to lend me a shaving; and so made a shift to get
into order again.  Lord! here is an impertinence:  Sir Andrew Fountaine's
mother and sister[2] are come above a hundred miles, from Worcester, to see
him before he died.  They got here but yesterday; and he must have been past
hopes, or past fears, before they could reach him.  I fell a scolding when I
heard they were coming; and the people about him wondered at me, and said what
a mighty content it would be on both sides to die when they were with him!  I
knew the mother; she is the greatest Overdo[3] upon earth; and the sister,
they say, is worse; the poor man will relapse again among them.  Here was the
scoundrel brother always crying in the outer room till Sir Andrew was in
danger; and the dog was to have all his estate if he died; and it is an
ignorant, worthless, scoundrel-rake:  and the nurses were comforting him, and
desiring he would not take on so.  I dined to-day the first time with Ophy
Butler[4] and his wife; and you supped with the Dean, and lost two-and-twenty
pence at cards.  And so Mrs. Walls is brought to bed of a girl, who died two
days after it was christened; and, betwixt you and me, she is not very sorry:
she loves her ease and diversions too well to be troubled with children.  I
will go to bed.

6.  Morning.  I went last night to put some coals on my fire after Patrick was
gone to bed; and there I saw in a closet a poor linnet he has bought to bring
over to Dingley:  it cost him sixpence, and is as tame as a dormouse.  I
believe he does not know he is a bird:  where you put him, there he stands,
and seems to have neither hope nor fear; I suppose in a week he will die of
the spleen.  Patrick advised with me before he bought him.  I laid fairly
before him the greatness of the sum, and the rashness of the attempt; showed
how impossible it was to carry him safe over the salt sea:  but he would not
take my counsel; and he will repent it.  'Tis very cold this morning in bed;
and I hear there is a good fire in the room without (what do you call it?),
the dining-room.  I hope it will be good weather, and so let me rise, sirrahs,
do so.--At night.  I was this morning to visit the Dean,[5] or Mr. Prolocutor,
I think you call him, don't you?  Why should not I go to the Dean's as well as
you?  A little, black man, of pretty near fifty?  Ay, the same.  A good,
pleasant man?  Ay, the same.  Cunning enough?  Yes.  One that understands his
own interests?  As well as anybody.  How comes it MD and I don't meet there
sometimes?  A very good face, and abundance of wit?  Do you know his lady?  O
Lord! whom do you mean?[6]  I mean Dr. Atterbury, Dean of Carlisle and
Prolocutor.  Pshaw, Presto, you are a fool:  I thought you had meant our Dean
of St. Patrick's.--Silly, silly, silly, you are silly, both are silly, every
kind of thing is silly.  As I walked into the city I was stopped with clusters
of boys and wenches buzzing about the cake-shops like flies.[7]  There had the
fools let out their shops two yards forward into the streets, all spread with
great cakes frothed with sugar, and stuck with streamers of tinsel.  And then
I went to Bateman's the bookseller, and laid out eight-and-forty shillings for
books.  I bought three little volumes of Lucian in French for our Stella, and
so and so.  Then I went to Garraway's[8] to meet Stratford and dine with him;
but it was an idle day with the merchants, and he was gone to our end of the
town:  so I dined with Sir Thomas Frankland at the Post Office, and we drank
your Manley's health.  It was in a newspaper that he was turned out; but
Secretary St. John told me it was false:  only that newswriter is a plaguy
Tory.  I have not seen one bit of Christmas merriment.

7.  Morning.  Your new Lord Chancellor[9] sets out to-morrow for Ireland:  I
never saw him.  He carries over one Trapp[10] a parson as his chaplain, a sort
of pretender to wit, a second-rate pamphleteer for the cause, whom they pay by
sending him to Ireland.  I never saw Trapp neither.  I met Tighe[11] and your
Smyth of Lovet's yesterday by the Exchange.  Tighe and I took no notice of
each other; but I stopped Smyth, and told him of the box that lies for you at
Chester, because he says he goes very soon to Ireland, I think this week:  and
I will send this morning to Sterne, to take measures with Smyth; so good-
morrow, sirrahs, and let me rise, pray.  I took up this paper when I came in
at evening, I mean this minute, and then said I, "No, no, indeed, MD, you must
stay"; and then was laying it aside, but could not for my heart, though I am
very busy, till I just ask you how you do since morning; by and by we shall
talk more, so let me leave you:  softly down, little paper, till then; so
there--now to business; there, I say, get you gone; no, I will not push you
neither, but hand you on one side--So--Now I am got into bed, I'll talk with
you.  Mr.  Secretary St. John sent for me this morning in all haste; but I
would not lose my shaving, for fear of missing church.  I went to Court, which
is of late always very full; and young Manley and I dined at Sir Matthew
Dudley's.--I must talk politics.  I protest I am afraid we shall all be
embroiled with parties.  The Whigs, now they are fallen, are the most
malicious toads in the world.  We have had now a second misfortune, the loss
of several Virginia ships.  I fear people will begin to think that nothing
thrives under this Ministry:  and if the Ministry can once be rendered odious
to the people, the Parliament may be chosen Whig or Tory as the Queen pleases.
Then I think our friends press a little too hard on the Duke of Marlborough.
The country members[12] are violent to have past faults inquired into, and
they have reason; but I do not observe the Ministry to be very fond of it.  In
my opinion we have nothing to save us but a Peace; and I am sure we cannot
have such a one as we hoped; and then the Whigs will bawl what they would have
done had they continued in power.  I tell the Ministry this as much as I dare;
and shall venture to say a little more to them, especially about the Duke of
Marlborough, who, as the Whigs give out, will lay down his command; and I
question whether ever any wise State laid aside a general who had been
successful nine years together, whom the enemy so much dread, and his own
soldiers cannot but believe must always conquer; and you know that in war
opinion is nine parts in ten.  The Ministry hear me always with appearance of
regard, and much kindness; but I doubt they let personal quarrels mingle too
much with their proceedings.  Meantime, they seem to value all this as
nothing, and are as easy and merry as if they had nothing in their hearts or
upon their shoulders; like physicians, who endeavour to cure, but feel no
grief, whatever the patient suffers.--Pshaw, what is all this?   Do you know
one thing, that I find I can write politics to you much easier than to anybody
alive?  But I swear my head is full; and I wish I were at Laracor, with dear,
charming MD, etc.

8.  Morning.  Methinks, young women, I have made a great progress in four
days, at the bottom of this side already, and no letter yet come from MD (that
word interlined is morning).  I find I have been writing State affairs to MD.
How do they relish it?  Why, anything that comes from Presto is welcome;
though really, to confess the truth, if they had their choice, not to disguise
the matter, they had rather, etc.  Now, Presto, I must tell you, you grow
silly, says Stella.  That is but one body's opinion, madam.  I promised to be
with Mr. Secretary St. John this morning; but I am lazy, and will not go,
because I had a letter from him yesterday, to desire I would dine there to-
day.  I shall be chid; but what care I?--Here has been Mrs. South with me,
just come from Sir Andrew Fountaine, and going to market.  He is still in a
fever, and may live or die.  His mother and sister are now come up, and in the
house; so there is a lurry.[13]  I gave Mrs. South half a pistole for a New
Year's gift.  So good-morrow, dears both, till anon.--At night.  Lord! I have
been with Mr. Secretary from dinner till eight; and, though I drank wine and
water, I am so hot!  Lady Stanley[14] came to visit Mrs. St. John,[15] and
sent up for me to make up a quarrel with Mrs. St. John, whom I never yet saw;
and do you think that devil of a Secretary would let me go, but kept me by
main force, though I told him I was in love with his lady, and it was a shame
to keep back a lover, etc.?  But all would not do; so at last I was forced to
break away, but never went up, it was then too late; and here I am, and have a
great deal to do to-night, though it be nine o'clock; but one must say
something to these naughty MD's, else there will be no quiet.

9.  To-day Ford and I set apart to go into the City to buy books; but we only
had a scurvy dinner at an alehouse; and he made me go to the tavern and drink
Florence, four and sixpence a flask; damned wine! so I spent my money, which I
seldom do, and passed an insipid day, and saw nobody, and it is now ten
o'clock, and I have nothing to say, but that 'tis a fortnight to-morrow since
I had a letter from MD; but if I have it time enough to answer here, 'tis well
enough, otherwise woe betide you, faith.  I will go to the toyman's, here just
in Pall Mall, and he sells great hugeous battoons;[16] yes, faith, and so he
does.  Does not he, Dingley?  Yes, faith.  Don't lose your money this
Christmas.

10.  I must go this morning to Mr. Secretary St. John.  I promised yesterday,
but failed, so can't write any more till night to poor, dear MD.--At night.
O, faith, Dingley.  I had company in the morning, and could not go where I
designed; and I had a basket from Raymond at Bristol, with six bottles of wine
and a pound of chocolate, and some tobacco to snuff; and he writ under, the
carriage was paid; but he lied, or I am cheated, or there is a mistake; and he
has written to me so confusedly about some things, that Lucifer could not
understand him.  This wine is to be drunk with Harley's brother[17] and Sir
Robert Raymond, Solicitor-General, in order to recommend the Doctor to your
new Lord Chancellor, who left this place on Monday; and Raymond says he is
hasting to Chester, to go with him.--I suppose he leaves his wife behind; for
when he left London he had no thoughts of stirring till summer.  So I suppose
he will be with you before this.  Ford came and desired I would dine with him,
because it was Opera-day; which I did, and sent excuses to Lord Shelburne, who
had invited me.

11.  I am setting up a new Tatler, little Harrison,[18] whom I have mentioned
to you.  Others have put him on it, and I encourage him; and he was with me
this morning and evening, showing me his first, which comes out on Saturday.
I doubt he will not succeed, for I do not much approve his manner; but the
scheme is Mr. Secretary St. John's and mine, and would have done well enough
in good hands.  I recommended him to a printer,[19] whom I sent for, and
settled the matter between them this evening.  Harrison has just left me, and
I am tired with correcting his trash.

12.  I was this morning upon some business with Mr. Secretary St. John, and he
made me promise to dine with him; which otherwise I would have done with Mr.
Harley, whom I have not been with these ten days.  I cannot but think they
have mighty difficulties upon them; yet I always find them as easy and
disengaged as schoolboys on a holiday.  Harley has the procuring of five or
six millions on his shoulders, and the Whigs will not lend a groat;[20] which
is the only reason of the fall of stocks:  for they are like Quakers and
fanatics, that will only deal among themselves, while all others deal
indifferently with them.  Lady Marlborough offers, if they will let her keep
her employments, never to come into the Queen's presence.  The Whigs say the
Duke of Marlborough will serve no more; but I hope and think otherwise.  I
would to Heaven I were this minute with MD at Dublin; for I am weary of
politics, that give me such melancholy prospects.

13.  O, faith, I had an ugly giddy fit last night in my chamber, and I have
got a new box of pills to take, and hope I shall have no more this good while.
I would not tell you before, because it would vex you, little rogues; but now
it is over.  I dined to-day with Lord Shelburne; and to-day little Harrison's
new Tatler came out:  there is not much in it, but I hope he will mend.  You
must understand that, upon Steele's leaving off, there were two or three scrub
Tatlers[21] came out, and one of them holds on still, and to-day it advertised
against Harrison's; and so there must be disputes which are genuine, like the
strops for razors.[22]  I am afraid the little toad has not the true vein for
it.  I will tell you a copy of verses.  When Mr. St. John was turned out from
being Secretary at War, three years ago, he retired to the country:  there he
was talking of something he would have written over his summer-house, and a
gentleman gave him these verses--

     From business and the noisy world retired,
     Nor vexed by love, nor by ambition fired;
     Gently I wait the call of Charon's boat,
     Still drinking like a fish, and ------- like a stoat.

He swore to me he could hardly bear the jest; for he pretended to retire like
a philosopher, though he was but twenty-eight years old:  and I believe the
thing was true:  for he had been a thorough rake.  I think the three grave
lines do introduce the last well enough.  Od so, but I will go sleep; I sleep
early now.

14.  O, faith, young women, I want a letter from MD; 'tis now nineteen days
since I had the last:  and where have I room to answer it, pray?  I hope I
shall send this away without any answer at all; for I'll hasten it, and away
it goes on Tuesday, by which time this side will be full.  I will send it two
days sooner on purpose out of spite; and the very next day after, you must
know, your letter will come, and then 'tis too late, and I will so laugh,
never saw the like!  'Tis spring with us already.  I ate asparagus t'other
day.  Did you ever see such a frostless winter?  Sir Andrew Fountaine lies
still extremely ill; it costs him ten guineas a day to doctors, surgeons, and
apothecaries, and has done so these three weeks.  I dined to-day with Mr.
Ford; he sometimes chooses to dine at home, and I am content to dine with him;
and at night I called at the Coffee-house, where I had not been in a week, and
talked coldly a while with Mr. Addison.  All our friendship and dearness are
off:  we are civil acquaintance, talk words of course, of when we shall meet,
and that is all.  I have not been at any house with him these six weeks:
t'other day we were to have dined together at the Comptroller's;[23] but I
sent my excuses, being engaged to the Secretary of State.  Is not it odd?
But I think he has used me ill; and I have used him too well, at least his
friend Steele.

15.  It has cost me three guineas to-day for a periwig.[24]  I am undone!  It
was made by a Leicester lad, who married Mr. Worrall's daughter, where my
mother lodged;[25] so I thought it would be cheap, and especially since he
lives in the city.  Well, London lickpenny:[26]  I find it true.  I have given
Harrison hints for another Tatler to-morrow.  The jackanapes wants a right
taste:  I doubt he won't do.  I dined with my friend Lewis of the Secretary's
office, and am got home early, because I have much business to do; but before
I begin, I must needs say something to MD, faith--No, faith, I lie, it is but
nineteen days to-day since my last from MD.  I have got Mr. Harley to promise
that whatever changes are made in the Council, the Bishop of Clogher shall not
be removed, and he has got a memorial accordingly.  I will let the Bishop know
so much in a post or two.  This is a secret; but I know he has enemies, and
they shall not be gratified, if they designed any such thing, which perhaps
they might; for some changes there will be made.  So drink up your claret, and
be quiet, and do not lose your money.

16.  Morning.  Faith, I will send this letter to-day to shame you, if I han't
one from MD before night, that's certain.  Won't you grumble for want of the
third side, pray now?  Yes, I warrant you; yes, yes, you shall have the third,
you shall so, when you can catch it, some other time; when you be writing
girls.--O, faith, I think I won't stay till night, but seal up this just now,
and carry it in my pocket, and whip it into the post-office as I come home at
evening.  I am going out early this morning.--Patrick's bills for coals and
candles, etc., come sometimes to three shillings a week; I keep very good
fires, though the weather be warm.  Ireland will never be happy till you get
small coal[27] likewise; nothing so easy, so convenient, so cheap, so pretty,
for lighting a fire.  My service to Mrs. Stoyte and Walls; has she a boy or a
girl?  A girl, hum; and died in a week, humm; and was poor Stella forced to
stand for godmother?--Let me know how accompts stand, that you may have your
money betimes.  There's four months for my lodging, that must be thought on
too:  and so go dine with Manley, and lose your money, do, extravagant
sluttikin, but don't fret.--It will be just three weeks when I have the next
letter, that's to-morrow.  Farewell, dearest beloved MD; and love poor, poor
Presto, who has not had one happy day since he left you, as hope saved.--It is
the last sally I will ever make, but I hope it will turn to some account.  I
have done more for these,[28] and I think they are more honest than the last;
however, I will not be disappointed.  I would make MD and me easy; and I never
desired more.--Farewell, etc.  etc.



LETTER 14.

LONDON, Jan. 16, 171O-11.

O faith, young women, I have sent my letter N.13 without one crumb of an
answer to any of MD's, there's for you now; and yet Presto ben't angry, faith,
not a bit, only he will begin to be in pain next Irish post, except he sees
MD's little handwriting in the glass-frame at the bar of St. James's Coffee-
house, where Presto would never go but for that purpose.  Presto is at home,
God help him, every night from six till bed-time, and has as little enjoyment
or pleasure in life at present as anybody in the world, although in full
favour with all the Ministry.  As hope saved, nothing gives Presto any sort of
dream of happiness but a letter now and then from his own dearest MD.  I love
the expectation of it; and when it does not come, I comfort myself that I have
it yet to be happy with.  Yes, faith, and when I write to MD, I am happy too;
it is just as if methinks you were here, and I prating to you, and telling you
where I have been:  "Well," says you, "Presto, come, where have you been to-
day? come, let's hear now."  And so then I answer:  "Ford and I were visiting
Mr. Lewis and Mr. Prior; and Prior has given me a fine Plautus; and then Ford
would have had me dine at his lodgings, and so I would not; and so I dined
with him at an eating-house, which I have not done five times since I came
here; and so I came home, after visiting Sir Andrew Fountaine's mother and
sister, and Sir Andrew Fountaine is mending, though slowly."

17.  I was making, this morning, some general visits, and at twelve I called
at the Coffee-house for a letter from MD; so the man said he had given it to
Patrick.  Then I went to the Court of Requests and Treasury, to find Mr.
Harley, and, after some time spent in mutual reproaches, I promised to dine
with him.  I stayed there till seven, then called at Sterne's and Leigh's to
talk about your box, and to have it sent by Smyth.  Sterne says he has been
making inquiries, and will set things right as soon as possible.  I suppose it
lies at Chester, at least I hope so, and only wants a lift over to you.  Here
has little Harrison been to complain that the printer I recommended to him for
his Tatler is a coxcomb; and yet to see how things will happen; for this very
printer is my cousin, his name is Dryden Leach;[1] did you never hear of
Dryden Leach, he that prints the Postman?  He acted Oroonoko;[2] he's in love
with Miss Cross.[3]--Well, so I came home to read my letter from Stella, but
the dog Patrick was abroad; at last he came, and I got my letter.  I found
another hand had superscribed it; when I opened it, I found it written all in
French, and subscribed Bernage:[4]  faith, I was ready to fling it at
Patrick's head.  Bernage tells me he had been to desire your recommendation to
me, to make him a captain; and your cautious answer, that he had as much power
with me as you, was a notable one; if you were here, I would present you to
the Ministry as a person of ability.  Bernage should let me know where to
write to him; this is the second letter I have had without any direction;
however, I beg I may not have a third, but that you will ask him, and send me
how I shall direct to him.  In the meantime, tell him that if regiments are to
be raised here, as he says, I will speak to George Granville,[5] Secretary at
War, to make him a captain; and use what other interest I conveniently can.  I
think that is enough, and so tell him, and do not trouble me with his letters,
when I expect them from MD; do you hear, young women? write to Presto.

18.  I was this morning with Mr. Secretary St. John, and we were to dine at
Mr. Harley's alone, about some business of importance; but there were two or
three gentlemen there.  Mr. Secretary and I went together from his office to
Mr. Harley's, and thought to have been very wise; but the deuce a bit, the
company stayed, and more came, and Harley went away at seven, and the
Secretary and I stayed with the rest of the company till eleven; I would then
have had him come away; but he was in for't; and though he swore he would come
away at that flask, there I left him.  I wonder at the civility of these
people; when he saw I would drink no more, he would always pass the bottle by
me, and yet I could not keep the toad from drinking himself, nor he would not
let me go neither, nor Masham,[6] who was with us.  When I got home, I found a
parcel directed to me; and opening it, I found a pamphlet written entirely
against myself, not by name, but against something I writ:[7] it is pretty
civil, and affects to be so, and I think I will take no notice of it; 'tis
against something written very lately; and indeed I know not what to say, nor
do I care.  And so you are a saucy rogue for losing your money to-day at
Stoyte's; to let that bungler beat you, fie, Stella, an't you ashamed?  Well,
I forgive you this once, never do so again; no, noooo.  Kiss and be friends,
sirrah.--Come, let me go sleep, I go earlier to bed than formerly; and have
not been out so late these two months; but the Secretary was in a drinking
humour.  So good-night, myownlittledearsaucyinsolentrogues.

19.  Then you read that long word in the last line; no,[8] faith, han't you.
Well, when will this letter come from our MD? to-morrow or next day without
fail; yes, faith, and so it is coming.  This was an insipid snowy day, no
walking day, and I dined gravely with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, and came home, and am
now got to bed a little after ten; I remember old Culpepper's maxim:

     "Would you have a settled head,
      You must early go to bed:
      I tell you, and I tell't again,
      You must be in bed at ten."

2O.  And so I went to-day with my new wig, o hoao, to visit Lady Worsley,[9]
whom I had not seen before, although she was near a month in town.  Then I
walked in the Park to find Mr. Ford, whom I had promised to meet; and coming
down the Mall, who should come towards me but Patrick, and gives me five
letters out of his pocket.  I read the superscription of the first, "Pshoh,"
said I; of the second, "Pshoh" again; of the third, "Pshah, pshah, pshah"; of
the fourth, "A gad, a gad, a gad, I'm in a rage"; of the fifth and last, "O
hoooa; ay marry this is something, this is our MD"; so truly we opened it, I
think immediately, and it began the most impudently in the world, thus:  "Dear
Presto, We are even thus far."  "Now we are even," quoth Stephen, when he gave
his wife six blows for one.  I received your ninth four days after I had sent
my thirteenth.  But I'll reckon with you anon about that, young women.  Why
did not you recant at the end of your letter, when you got my eleventh, tell
me that, huzzies base? were we even then, were we, sirrah?  But I won't answer
your letter now, I'll keep it for another time.  We had a great deal of snow
to-day, and 'tis terrible cold.  I dined with Ford, because it was his Opera-
day and snowed, so I did not care to stir farther.  I will send tomorrow to
Smyth.

21.  Morning.  It has snowed terribly all night, and is vengeance cold.  I am
not yet up, but cannot write long; my hands will freeze.  "Is there a good
fire, Patrick?"  "Yes, sir."  "Then I will rise; come, take away the candle."
You must know I write on the dark side of my bed-chamber, and am forced to
have a candle till I rise, for the bed stands between me and the window, and I
keep the curtains shut this cold weather.  So pray let me rise; and Patrick,
here, take away the candle.--At night.  We are now here in high frost and
snow, the largest fire can hardly keep us warm.  It is very ugly walking; a
baker's boy broke his thigh yesterday.  I walk slow, make short steps, and
never tread on my heel.  'Tis a good proverb the Devonshire people have:

     "Walk fast in snow,
      In frost walk slow;
      And still as you go,
      Tread on your toe.
   When frost and snow are both together,
   Sit by the fire, and spare shoe-leather."

I dined to-day with Dr. Cockburn,[10] but will not do so again in haste, he
has generally such a parcel of Scots with him.

22.  Morning.  Starving, starving, uth, uth, uth, uth, uth.--Don't you
remember I used to come into your chamber, and turn Stella out of her chair,
and rake up the fire in a cold morning, and cry Uth, uth, uth? etc.  O, faith,
I must rise, my hand is so cold I can write no more.  So good-morrow,
sirrahs.--At night.  I went this morning to Lady Giffard's house, and saw your
mother, and made her give me a pint bottle of palsy-water,[11] which I brought
home in my pocket; and sealed and tied up in a paper, and sent it to Mr.
Smyth, who goes to-morrow for Ireland, and sent a letter to him to desire his
care of it, and that he would inquire at Chester about the box.  He was not
within:  so the bottle and letter were left for him at his lodgings, with
strict orders to give them to him; and I will send Patrick in a day or two, to
know whether it was given, etc.  Dr. Stratford[12] and I dined to-day with Mr.
Stratford[13] in the City, by appointment; but I chose to walk there, for
exercise in the frost.  But the weather had given a little, as you women call
it, so it was something slobbery.  I did not get home till nine.

     And now I'm in bed,
     To break your head.

23.  Morning.  They tell me it freezes again, but it is not so cold as
yesterday:  so now I will answer a bit of your letter.--At night.  O, faith, I
was just going to answer some of our MD's letter this morning, when a printer
came in about some business, and stayed an hour; so I rose, and then came in
Ben Tooke, and then I shaved and scribbled; and it was such a terrible day, I
could not stir out till one, and then I called at Mrs. Barton's, and we went
to Lady Worsley's, where we were to dine by appointment.  The Earl of
Berkeley[14] is going to be married to Lady Louisa Lennox, the Duke of
Richmond's daughter.  I writ this night to Dean Sterne, and bid him tell you
all about the bottle of palsy-water by Smyth; and to-morrow morning I will say
something to your letter.

24.  Morning.  Come now to your letter.  As for your being even with me, I
have spoken to that already.  So now, my dearly beloved, let us proceed to the
next.  You are always grumbling that you han't letters fast enough; "surely we
shall have your tenth;" and yet, before you end your letter, you own you have
my eleventh.--And why did not MD go into the country with the Bishop of
Clogher? faith, such a journey would have done you good; Stella should have
rode, and Dingley gone in the coach.  The Bishop of Kilmore[15] I know nothing
of; he is old, and may die; he lives in some obscure corner, for I never heard
of him.  As for my old friends, if you mean the Whigs, I never see them, as
you may find by my journals, except Lord Halifax, and him very seldom; Lord
Somers never since the first visit, for he has been a false, deceitful
rascal.[16]  My new friends are very kind, and I have promises enough, but I
do not count upon them, and besides my pretences are very young to them.
However, we will see what may be done; and if nothing at all, I shall not be
disappointed; although perhaps poor MD may, and then I shall be sorrier for
their sakes than my own.--Talk of a merry Christmas (why do you write it so
then, young women? sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander), I have wished
you all that two or three letters ago.  Good lack; and your news, that Mr. St.
John is going to Holland; he has no such thoughts, to quit the great station
he is in; nor, if he had, could I be spared to go with him.  So, faith,
politic Madam Stella, you come with your two eggs a penny, etc.  Well, Madam
Dingley, and so Mrs. Stoyte invites you, and so you stay at Donnybrook, and so
you could not write.  You are plaguy exact in your journals, from Dec. 25 to
Jan. 4.  Well, Smyth and the palsy-water I have handled already, and he does
not lodge (or rather did not, for, poor man, now he is gone) at Mr. Jesse's,
and all that stuff; but we found his lodging, and I went to Stella's mother on
my own head, for I never remembered it was in the letter to desire another
bottle; but I was so fretted, so tosticated, and so impatient that Stella
should have her water (I mean decently, do not be rogues), and so vexed with
Sterne's carelessness.--Pray God, Stella's illness may not return!  If they
come seldom, they begin to be weary; I judge by myself; for when I seldom
visit, I grow weary of my acquaintance.--Leave a good deal of my tenth
unanswered!  Impudent slut, when did you ever answer my tenth, or ninth, or
any other number? or who desires you to answer, provided you write?  I defy
the D---- to answer my letters:  sometimes there may be one or two things I
should be glad you would answer; but I forget them, and you never think of
them.  I shall never love answering letters again, if you talk of answering.
Answering, quotha! pretty answerers truly.--As for the pamphlet you speak of,
and call it scandalous, and that one Mr. Presto is said to write it, hear my
answer.  Fie, child, you must not mind what every idle body tells you--I
believe you lie, and that the dogs were not crying it when you said so; come,
tell truth.  I am sorry you go to St. Mary's[17] so soon, you will be as poor
as rats; that place will drain you with a vengeance:  besides, I would have
you think of being in the country in summer.  Indeed, Stella, pippins produced
plentifully; Parvisol could not send from Laracor:  there were about half a
score, I would be glad to know whether they were good for anything.--Mrs.
Walls at Donnybrook with you; why is not she brought to bed?  Well, well,
well, Dingley, pray be satisfied; you talk as if you were angry about the
Bishop's not offering you conveniences for the journey; and so he should.--
What sort of Christmas?  Why, I have had no Christmas at all; and has it
really been Christmas of late?  I never once thought of it.  My service to
Mrs. Stoyte, and Catherine; and let Catherine get the coffee ready against I
come, and not have so much care on her countenance; for all will go well.--Mr.
Bernage, Mr. Bernage, Mr. Fiddlenage, I have had three letters from him now
successively; he sends no directions, and how the D---- shall I write to him?
I would have burnt his last, if I had not seen Stella's hand at the bottom:
his request is all nonsense.  How can I assist him in buying? and if he be
ordered to go to Spain, go he must, or else sell, and I believe one can hardly
sell in such a juncture.  If he had stayed, and new regiments raised, I would
have used my endeavour to have had him removed; although I have no credit that
way, or very little:  but, if the regiment goes, he ought to go too; he has
had great indulgence, and opportunities of saving; and I have urged him to it
a hundred times.  What can I do? whenever it lies in my power to do him a good
office, I will do it.  Pray draw up this into a handsome speech, and represent
it to him from me, and that I would write, if I knew where to direct to him;
and so I have told you, and desired you would tell him, fifty times.  Yes,
Madam Stella, I think I can read your long concluding word, but you can't read
mine after bidding you good-night.  And yet methinks, I mend extremely in my
writing; but when Stella's eyes are well, I hope to write as bad as ever.--So
now I have answered your letter, and mine is an answer; for I lay yours before
me, and I look and write, and write and look, and look and write again.--So
good-morrow, madams both, and I will go rise, for I must rise; for I take
pills at night, and so I must rise early, I don't know why.

25.  Morning.  I did not tell you how I passed my time yesterday, nor bid you
good-night, and there was good reason.  I went in the morning to Secretary St.
John about some business; he had got a great Whig with him; a creature of the
Duke of Marlborough, who is a go-between to make peace between the Duke and
the Ministry:  so he came out of his closet, and, after a few words, desired I
would dine with him at three; but Mr. Lewis stayed till six before he came;
and there we sat talking, and the time slipped so, that at last, when I was
positive to go, it was past two o'clock; so I came home, and went straight to
bed.  He would never let me look at his watch, and I could not imagine it
above twelve when we went away.  So I bid you good-night for last night, and
now I bid you good-morrow, and I am still in bed, though it be near ten, but I
must rise.

26, 27, 28, 29, 3O.  I have been so lazy and negligent these last four days
that I could not write to MD.  My head is not in order, and yet is not
absolutely ill, but giddyish, and makes me listless; I walk every day, and
take drops of Dr. Cockburn, and I have just done a box of pills; and to-day
Lady Kerry sent me some of her bitter drink, which I design to take twice a
day, and hope I shall grow better.  I wish I were with MD; I long for spring
and good weather, and then I will come over.  My riding in Ireland keeps me
well.  I am very temperate, and eat of the easiest meats as I am directed, and
hope the malignity will go off; but one fit shakes me a long time.  I dined
to-day with Lord Mountjoy, yesterday at Mr. Stone's, in the City, on Sunday at
Vanhomrigh's, Saturday with Ford, and Friday I think at Vanhomrigh's; and that
is all the journal I can send MD, for I was so lazy while I was well, that I
could not write.  I thought to have sent this to-night, but 'tis ten, and I'll
go to bed, and write on t'other side to Parvisol to-morrow, and send it on
Thursday; and so good-night, my dears; and love Presto, and be healthy, and
Presto will be so too, etc.

Cut off these notes handsomely, d'ye hear, sirrahs, and give Mrs. Brent hers,
and keep yours till you see Parvisol, and then make up the letter to him, and
send it him by the first opportunity; and so God Almighty bless you both, here
and ever, and poor Presto.

What, I warrant you thought at first that these last lines were another
letter.

Dingley, Pray pay Stella six fishes, and place them to the account of your
humble servant, Presto.

Stella, Pray pay Dingley six fishes, and place them to the account of your
humble servant, Presto.

There are bills of exchange for you.



LETTER 15.

LONDON, Jan. 31, 1710-11.

I am to send you my fourteenth to-morrow; but my head, having some little
disorders, confounds all my journals.  I was early this morning with Mr.
Secretary St. John about some business, so I could not scribble my morning
lines to MD.  They are here intending to tax all little printed penny papers a
halfpenny every half-sheet, which will utterly ruin Grub Street, and I am
endeavouring to prevent it.[1]  Besides, I was forwarding an impeachment
against a certain great person; that was two of my businesses with the
Secretary, were they not worthy ones?  It was Ford's birthday, and I refused
the Secretary, and dined with Ford.  We are here in as smart a frost for the
time as I have seen; delicate walking weather, and the Canal and Rosamond's
Pond[2] full of the rabble sliding and with skates, if you know what those
are.  Patrick's bird's water freezes in the gallipot, and my hands in bed.

Feb. 1.  I was this morning with poor Lady Kerry, who is much worse in her
head than I.  She sends me bottles of her bitter; and we are so fond of one
another, because our ailments are the same; don't you know that, Madam Stella?
Han't I seen you conning ailments with Joe's wife,[3] and some others, sirrah?
I walked into the City to dine, because of the walk, for we must take care of
Presto's health, you know, because of poor little MD.  But I walked plaguy
carefully, for fear of sliding against my will; but I am very busy.

2.  This morning Mr. Ford came to me to walk into the City, where he had
business, and then to buy books at Bateman's; and I laid out one pound five
shillings for a Strabo and Aristophanes, and I have now got books enough to
make me another shelf, and I will have more, or it shall cost me a fall; and
so as we came back, we drank a flask of right French wine at Ben Tooke's
chamber; and when I got home, Mrs. Vanhomrigh sent me word her eldest
daughter[4] was taken suddenly very ill, and desired I would come and see her.
I went, and found it was a silly trick of Mrs. Armstrong,[5] Lady Lucy's
sister, who, with Moll Stanhope, was visiting there:  however, I rattled off
the daughter.

3.  To-day I went and dined at Lady Lucy's, where you know I have not been
this long time.  They are plaguy Whigs, especially the sister Armstrong, the
most insupportable of all women, pretending to wit, without any taste.  She
was running down the last Examiner,[6] the prettiest I had read, with a
character of the present Ministry.--I left them at five, and came home.  But I
forgot to tell you, that this morning my cousin Dryden Leach, the printer,
came to me with a heavy complaint, that Harrison the new Tatler had turned him
off, and taken the last Tatler's printers again.  He vowed revenge; I answered
gravely, and so he left me, and I have ordered Patrick to deny me to him from
henceforth:  and at night comes a letter from Harrison, telling me the same
thing, and excused his doing it without my notice, because he would bear all
the blame; and in his Tatler of this day[7] he tells you the story, how he has
taken his old officers, and there is a most humble letter from Morphew and
Lillie to beg his pardon, etc.[8]  And lastly, this morning Ford sent me two
letters from the Coffee-house (where I hardly ever go), one from the
Archbishop of Dublin, and t'other from--Who do you think t'other was from?--
I'll tell you, because you are friends; why, then it was, faith, it was from
my own dear little MD, N.10.  Oh, but will not answer it now, no, noooooh,
I'll keep it between the two sheets; here it is, just under; oh, I lifted up
the sheet and saw it there:  lie still, you shan't be answered yet, little
letter; for I must go to bed, and take care of my head.

4.  I avoid going to church yet, for fear of my head, though it has been much
better these last five or six days, since I have taken Lady Kerry's bitter.
Our frost holds like a dragon.  I went to Mr. Addison's, and dined with him at
his lodgings; I had not seen him these three weeks, we are grown common
acquaintance; yet what have not I done for his friend Steele?  Mr. Harley
reproached me the last time I saw him, that to please me he would be
reconciled to Steele, and had promised and appointed to see him, and that
Steele never came.  Harrison, whom Mr. Addison recommended to me, I have
introduced to the Secretary of State, who has promised me to take care of him;
and I have represented Addison himself so to the Ministry, that they think and
talk in his favour, though they hated him before.--Well, he is now in my debt,
and there's an end; and I never had the least obligation to him, and there's
another end.  This evening I had a message from Mr. Harley, desiring to know
whether I was alive, and that I would dine with him to-morrow.  They dine so
late, that since my head has been wrong I have avoided being with them.--
Patrick has been out of favour these ten days; I talk dry and cross to him,
and have called him "friend" three or four times.  But, sirrahs, get you gone.

5.  Morning.  I am going this morning to see Prior, who dines with me at Mr.
Harley's; so I can't stay fiddling and talking with dear little brats in a
morning, and 'tis still terribly cold.--I wish my cold hand was in the warmest
place about you, young women, I'd give ten guineas upon that account with all
my heart, faith; oh, it starves my thigh; so I'll rise and bid you good-
morrow, my ladies both, good-morrow.  Come, stand away, let me rise:  Patrick,
take away the candle.  Is there a good fire?--So--up-a-dazy.--At night.  Mr.
Harley did not sit down till six, and I stayed till eleven; henceforth I will
choose to visit him in the evenings, and dine with him no more if I can help
it.  It breaks all my measures, and hurts my health; my head is disorderly,
but not ill, and I hope it will mend.

6.  Here has been such a hurry with the Queen's Birthday, so much fine
clothes, and the Court so crowded that I did not go there.  All the frost is
gone.  It thawed on Sunday, and so continues, yet ice is still on the Canal (I
did not mean that of Laracor, but St. James's Park) and boys sliding on it.
Mr. Ford pressed me to dine with him in his chamber.--Did not I tell you
Patrick has got a bird, a linnet, to carry over to Dingley?  It was very tame
at first, and 'tis now the wildest I ever saw.  He keeps it in a closet, where
it makes a terrible litter; but I say nothing:  I am as tame as a clout.  When
must we answer our MD's letter?  One of these odd-come-shortlies.  This is a
week old, you see, and no farther yet.  Mr. Harley desired I would dine with
him again to-day; but I refused him, for I fell out with him yesterday,[9] and
will not see him again till he makes me amends:  and so I go to bed.

7.  I was this morning early with Mr. Lewis of the Secretary's office, and saw
a letter Mr. Harley had sent to him, desiring to be reconciled; but I was deaf
to all entreaties, and have desired Lewis to go to him, and let him know I
expect further satisfaction.  If we let these great Ministers pretend too
much, there will be no governing them.  He promises to make me easy, if I will
but come and see him; but I won't, and he shall do it by message, or I will
cast him off.  I'll tell you the cause of our quarrel when I see you, and
refer it to yourselves.  In that he did something, which he intended for a
favour; and I have taken it quite otherwise, disliking both the thing and the
manner, and it has heartily vexed me, and all I have said is truth, though it
looks like jest; and I absolutely refused to submit to his intended favour,
and expect further satisfaction.  Mr. Ford and I dined with Mr. Lewis.  We
have a monstrous deal of snow, and it has cost me two shillings to-day in
chair and coach, and walked till I was dirty besides.  I know not what it is
now to read or write after I am in bed.  The last thing I do up is to write
something to our MD, and then get into bed, and put out my candle, and so go
sleep as fast as ever I can.  But in the mornings I do write sometimes in bed,
as you know.

8.  Morning.  I HAVE DESIRED APRONIA TO BE ALWAYS CAREFUL, ESPECIALLY ABOUT
THE LEGS.  Pray, do you see any such great wit in that sentence?  I must
freely own that I do not.  But party carries everything nowadays, and what a
splutter have I heard about the wit of that saying, repeated with admiration
above a hundred times in half an hour!  Pray read it over again this moment,
and consider it.  I think the word is ADVISED, and not DESIRED.  I should not
have remembered it if I had not heard it so often.  Why--ay--You must know I
dreamed it just now, and waked with it in my mouth.  Are you bit, or are you
not, sirrahs?  I met Mr. Harley in the Court of Requests, and he asked me how
long I had learnt the trick of writing to myself?  He had seen your letter
through the glass case at the Coffee-house, and would swear it was my hand;
and Mr. Ford, who took and sent it me, was of the same mind.  I remember
others have formerly said so too.  I think I was little MD's writing-
master.[10]--But come, what is here to do, writing to young women in a
morning?  I have other fish to fry; so good-morrow, my ladies all, good-
morrow.  Perhaps I'll answer your letter to-night, perhaps I won't; that's as
saucy little Presto takes the humour.--At night.  I walked in the Park to-day
in spite of the weather, as I do always when it does not actually rain.  Do
you know what it has gone and done?  We had a thaw for three days, then a
monstrous dirt and snow, and now it freezes, like a pot-lid, upon our snow.  I
dined with Lady Betty Germaine, the first time since I came for England; and
there did I sit, like a booby, till eight, looking over her and another lady
at piquet, when I had other business enough to do.  It was the coldest day I
felt this year.

9.  Morning.  After I had been abed an hour last night, I was forced to rise
and call to the landlady and maid to have the fire removed in a chimney below
stairs, which made my bed-chamber smoke, though I had no fire in it.  I have
been twice served so.  I never lay so miserable an hour in my life.  Is it not
plaguy vexatious?--It has snowed all night, and rains this morning.--Come,
where's MD's letter?  Come, Mrs. Letter, make your appearance.  Here am I,
says she, answer me to my face.--O, faith, I am sorry you had my twelfth so
soon; I doubt you will stay longer for the rest.  I'm so 'fraid you have got
my fourteenth while I am writing this; and I would always have one letter from
Presto reading, one travelling, and one writing.  As for the box, I now
believe it lost.  It is directed for Mr. Curry, at his house in Capel Street,
etc.  I had a letter yesterday from Dr. Raymond in Chester, who says he sent
his man everywhere, and cannot find it; and  God knows whether Mr. Smyth will
have better success.  Sterne spoke to him, and I writ to him with the bottle
of palsy-water; that bottle, I hope, will not miscarry:  I long to hear you
have it.  O, faith, you have too good an opinion of Presto's care.  I am
negligent enough of everything but MD, and I should not have trusted Sterne.--
But it shall not go so:  I will have one more tug for it.--As to what you say
of Goodman Peasly and Isaac,[11] I answer as I did before.  Fie, child, you
must not give yourself the way to believe any such thing:  and afterwards,
only for curiosity, you may tell me how these things are approved, and how you
like them; and whether they instruct you in the present course of affairs, and
whether they are printed in your town, or only sent from hence.--Sir Andrew
Fountaine is recovered; so take your sorrow again, but don't keep it, fling it
to the dogs.  And does little MD walk indeed?--I'm glad of it at heart.--Yes,
we have done with the plague here:  it was very saucy in you to pretend to
have it before your betters.  Your intelligence that the story is false about
the officers forced to sell,[12] is admirable.  You may see them all three
here every day, no more in the army than you.  Twelve shillings for mending
the strong box; that is, for putting a farthing's worth of iron on a hinge,
and gilding it; give him six shillings, and I'll pay it, and never employ him
or his again.--No indeed, I put off preaching as much as I can.  I am upon
another foot:  nobody doubts here whether I can preach, and you are fools.--
The account you give of that weekly paper[13] agrees with us here.  Mr. Prior
was like to be insulted in the street for being supposed the author of it; but
one of the last papers cleared him.  Nobody knows who it is, but those few in
the secret, I suppose the Ministry and the printer.--Poor Stella's eyes!  God
bless them, and send them better.  Pray spare them, and write not above two
lines a day in broad daylight.  How does Stella look, Madam Dingley?  Pretty
well, a handsome young woman still.  Will she pass in a crowd?  Will she make
a figure in a country church?--Stay a little, fair ladies.  I this minute sent
Patrick to Sterne:  he brings back word that your box is very safe with one
Mr. Earl's sister in Chester, and that Colonel Edgworth's widow[14] goes for
Ireland on Monday next, and will receive the box at Chester, and deliver it
you safe:  so there are some hopes now.--Well, let us go on to your letter.--
The warrant is passed for the First-Fruits.  The Queen does not send a letter;
but a patent will be drawn here, and that will take up time.  Mr. Harley of
late has said nothing of presenting me to the Queen:  I was overseen[15] when
I mentioned it to you.  He has such a weight of affairs on him, that he cannot
mind all; but he talked of it three or four times to me, long before I dropped
it to you.  What, is not Mrs. Walls' business over yet?  I had hopes she was
up and well, and the child dead before this time.--You did right, at last, to
send me your accompts; but I did not stay for them, I thank you.  I hope you
have your bill sent in my last, and there will be eight pounds' interest soon
due from Hawkshaw:  pray look at his bond.  I hope you are good managers; and
that, when I say so, Stella won't think I intend she should grudge herself
wine.  But going to those expensive lodgings requires some fund.  I wish you
had stayed till I came over, for some reasons.  That Frenchwoman[16] will be
grumbling again in a little time:  and if you are invited anywhere to the
country, it will vex you to pay in absence; and the country may be necessary
for poor Stella's health:  but do as you like, and do not blame Presto.--Oh,
but you are telling your reasons.--Well, I have read them; do as you please.--
Yes, Raymond says he must stay longer than he thought, because he cannot
settle his affairs.  M---- is in the country at some friend's, comes to town
in spring, and then goes to settle in Herefordshire.  Her husband is a surly,
ill-natured brute, and cares not she should see anybody.  O Lord, see how I
blundered, and left two lines short; it was that ugly score in the paper[17]
that made me mistake.--I believe you lie about the story of the fire, only to
make it more odd.  Bernage must go to Spain; and I will see to recommend him
to the Duke of Argyle, his General, when I see the Duke next:  but the
officers tell me it would be dishonourable in the last degree for him to sell
now, and he would never be preferred in the army; so that, unless he designs
to leave it for good and all, he must go.  Tell him so, and that I would write
if I knew where to direct to him; which I have said fourscore times already.
I had rather anything almost than that you should strain yourselves to send a
letter when it is inconvenient; we have settled that matter already.  I'll
write when I can, and so shall MD; and upon occasions extraordinary I will
write, though it be a line; and when we have not letters soon, we agree that
all things are well; and so that's settled for ever, and so hold your tongue.-
-Well, you shall have your pins; but for candles' ends, I cannot promise,
because I burn them to the stumps; besides, I remember what Stella told
Dingley about them many years ago, and she may think the same thing of me.--
And Dingley shall have her hinged spectacles.--Poor dear Stella, how durst you
write those two lines by candlelight? bang your bones!  Faith, this letter
shall go to-morrow, I think, and that will be in ten days from the last, young
women; that's too soon of all conscience:  but answering yours has filled it
up so quick, and I do not design to use you to three pages in folio, no,
nooooh.  All this is one morning's work in bed;--and so good-morrow, little
sirrahs; that's for the rhyme.[18]  You want politics:  faith, I can't think
of any; but may be at night I may tell you a passage.  Come, sit off the bed,
and let me rise, will you?--At night.  I dined to-day with my neighbour
Vanhomrigh; it was such dismal weather I could not stir further.  I have had
some threatenings with my head, but no fits.  I still drink Dr.
Radcliffe's[19] bitter, and will continue it.

10.  I was this morning to see the Secretary of State, and have engaged him to
give a memorial from me to the Duke of Argyle in behalf of Bernage.  The Duke
is a man that distinguishes people of merit, and I will speak to him myself;
but the Secretary backing it will be very effectual, and I will take care to
have it done to purpose.  Pray tell Bernage so, and that I think nothing can
be luckier for him, and that I would have him go by all means.  I will order
it that the Duke shall send for him when they are in Spain; or, if he fails,
that he shall receive him kindly when he goes to wait on him.  Can I do more?
Is not this a great deal?--I now send away this letter, that you may not
stay.--I dined with Ford upon his Opera-day, and am now come home, and am
going to study; do not you presume to guess, sirrahs, impudent saucy dear
boxes.  Towards the end of a letter I could not say saucy boxes without
putting dear between.  An't that right now?  Farewell.  THIS should BE longer,
BUT that _I_ send IT to-night.[20]

O silly, silly loggerhead!

I send a letter this post to one Mr. Staunton, and I direct it to Mr. Acton's
in St. Michael's Lane.  He formerly lodged there, but he has not told me where
to direct.  Pray send to that Acton, whether[21] the letter is come there, and
whether he has sent it to Staunton.

If Bernage designs to sell his commission and stay at home, pray let him tell
me so, that my recommendation to the Duke of Argyle may not be in vain.



LETTER 16.

LONDON, Feb. 10, 1710-11.

I have just despatched my fifteenth to the post; I tell you how things will
be, after I have got a letter from MD.  I am in furious haste to finish mine,
for fear of having two of MD's to answer in one of Presto's, which would be
such a disgrace, never saw the like; but, before you write to me, I write at
my leisure, like a gentleman, a little every day, just to let you know how
matters go, and so and so; and I hope before this comes to you, you'll have
got your box and chocolate, and Presto will take more care another time.

11.  Morning.  I must rise and go see my Lord Keeper,[1] which will cost me
two shillings in coach-hire.  Don't you call them two thirteens?[2]--At night.
It has rained all day, and there was no walking.  I read prayers to Sir Andrew
Fountaine in the forenoon, and I dined with three Irishmen, at one Mr.
Cope's[3] lodgings; the other two were one Morris an archdeacon,[4] and Mr.
Ford.  When I came home this evening, I expected that little jackanapes
Harrison would have come to get help about his Tatler for Tuesday:  I have
fixed two evenings in the week which I allow him to come.  The toad never
came, and I expecting him fell a reading, and left off other business.--Come,
what are you doing?  How do you pass your time this ugly weather?  Gaming and
drinking, I suppose:  fine diversions for young ladies, truly!  I wish you had
some of our Seville oranges, and we some of your wine.  We have the finest
oranges for twopence apiece, and the basest wine for six shillings a bottle.
They tell me wine grows cheap with you.  I am resolved to have half a hogshead
when I get to Ireland, if it be good and cheap, as it used to be; and I will
treat MD at my table in an evening, oh hoa, and laugh at great Ministers of
State.

12.  The days are grown fine and long, ----- be thanked.  O, faith, you forget
all our little sayings, and I am angry.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St.
John:  I went to the Court of Requests at noon, and sent Mr. Harley into the
House to call the Secretary, to let him know I would not dine with him if he
dined late.  By good luck the Duke of Argyle was at the lobby of the House
too, and I kept him in talk till the Secretary came out; then told them I was
glad to meet them together, and that I had a request to the Duke, which the
Secretary must second, and his Grace must grant.  The Duke said he was sure it
was something insignificant, and wished it was ten times greater.  At the
Secretary's house I writ a memorial, and gave it to the Secretary to give the
Duke, and shall see that he does it.  It is, that his Grace will please to
take Mr. Bernage into his protection; and if he finds Bernage answers my
character, to give him all encouragement.  Colonel Masham[5] and Colonel
Hill[6] (Mrs. Masham's[7] brother tell me my request is reasonable, and they
will second it heartily to the Duke too:  so I reckon Bernage is on a very
good foot when he goes to Spain.  Pray tell him this, though perhaps I will
write to him before he goes; yet where shall I direct? for I suppose he has
left Connolly's.[8]

13.  I have left off Lady Kerry's bitter, and got another box of pills.  I
have no fits of giddiness, but only some little disorders towards it; and I
walk as much as I can.  Lady Kerry is just as I am, only a great deal worse:
I dined to-day at Lord Shelburne's, where she is, and we con ailments, which
makes us very fond of each other.  I have taken Mr. Harley into favour again,
and called to see him, but he was not within; I will use to visit him after
dinner, for he dines too late for my head:  then I went to visit poor
Congreve, who is just getting out of a severe fit of the gout; and I sat with
him till near nine o'clock.  He gave me a Tatler[9] he had written out, as
blind as he is, for little Harrison.  It is about a scoundrel that was grown
rich, and went and bought a coat of arms at the Herald's, and a set of
ancestors at Fleet Ditch; 'tis well enough, and shall be printed in two or
three days, and if you read those kind of things, this will divert you.  It is
now between ten and eleven, and I am going to bed.

14.  This was Mrs. Vanhomrigh's daughter's[10] birthday, and Mr. Ford and I
were invited to dinner to keep it, and we spent the evening there, drinking
punch.  That was our way of beginning Lent; and in the morning Lord Shelburne,
Lady Kerry, Mrs. Pratt, and I, went to Hyde Park, instead of going to church;
for, till my head is a little settled, I think it better not to go; it would
be so silly and troublesome to go out sick.  Dr. Duke[11] died suddenly two or
three nights ago; he was one of the wits when we were children, but turned
parson, and left it, and never writ farther than a prologue or recommendatory
copy of verses.  He had a fine living given him by the Bishop of
Winchester[12] about three months ago; he got his living suddenly, and he got
his dying so too.

15.  I walked purely to-day about the Park, the rain being just over, of which
we have had a great deal, mixed with little short frosts.  I went to the Court
of Requests, thinking, if Mr. Harley dined early, to go with him.  But meeting
Leigh and Sterne, they invited me to dine with them, and away we went.  When
we got into his room, one H----, a worthless Irish fellow, was there, ready to
dine with us; so I stepped out, and whispered them, that I would not dine with
that fellow:  they made excuses, and begged me to stay; but away I went to Mr.
Harley's, and he did not dine at home; and at last I dined at Sir John
Germaine's,[13] and found Lady Betty but just recovered of a miscarriage.  I
am writing an inscription for Lord Berkeley's[14] tomb; you know the young
rake his son, the new Earl, is married to the Duke of Richmond's daughter,[15]
at the Duke's country house, and are now coming to town.  She will be fluxed
in two months, and they'll be parted in a year.  You ladies are brave, bold,
venturesome folks; and the chit is but seventeen, and is ill-natured,
covetous, vicious, and proud in extremes.  And so get you gone to Stoyte to-
morrow.

16.  Faith, this letter goes on but slow; 'tis a week old, and the first side
not written.  I went to-day into the City for a walk, but the person I
designed to dine with was not at home; so I came back, and called at
Congreve's, and dined with him and Estcourt,[16] and laughed till six; then
went to Mr. Harley's, who was not gone to dinner; there I stayed till nine,
and we made up our quarrel, and he has invited me to dinner to-morrow, which
is the day of the week (Saturday) that Lord Keeper and Secretary St. John dine
with him privately, and at last they have consented to let me among them on
that day.  Atterbury and Prior went to bury poor Dr. Duke.  Congreve's nasty
white wine has given me the heart-burn.

17.  I took some good walks in the Park to-day, and then went to Mr. Harley.
Lord Rivers was got there before me, and I chid him for presuming to come on a
day when only Lord Keeper and the Secretary and I were to be there; but he
regarded me not; so we all dined together, and sat down at four; and the
Secretary has invited me to dine with him to-morrow.  I told them I had no
hopes they could ever keep in, but that I saw they loved one another so well,
as indeed they seem to do.  They call me nothing but Jonathan; and I said I
believed they would leave me Jonathan as they found me; and that I never knew
a Ministry do anything for those whom they make companions of their pleasures;
and I believe you will find it so; but I care not.  I am upon a project of
getting five hundred pounds,[17] without being obliged to anybody; but that is
a secret, till I see my dearest MD; and so hold your tongue, and do not talk,
sirrahs, for I am now about it.

18.  My head has no fits, but a little disordered before dinner; yet I walk
stoutly, and take pills, and hope to mend.  Secretary St. John would needs
have me dine with him to-day; and there I found three persons I never saw, two
I had no acquaintance with, and one I did not care for:  so I left them early
and came home, it being no day to walk, but scurvy rain and wind.  The
Secretary tells me he has put a cheat on me; for Lord Peterborow sent him
twelve dozen flasks of burgundy, on condition that I should have my share; but
he never was quiet till they were all gone, so I reckon he owes me thirty-six
pounds.  Lord Peterborow is now got to Vienna, and I must write to him to-
morrow.  I begin now to be towards looking for a letter from some certain
ladies of Presto's acquaintance, that live at St. Mary's,[18] and are called
in a certain language, our little MD.  No, stay, I don't expect one these six
days, that will be just three weeks; an't I a reasonable creature?  We are
plagued here with an October Club, that is, a set of above a hundred
Parliament men of the country, who drink October beer at home, and meet every
evening at a tavern near the Parliament to consult affairs, and drive things
on to extremes against the Whigs, to call the old Ministry to account, and get
off five or six heads.[19]  The Ministry seem not to regard them; yet one of
them in confidence told me that there must be something thought on, to settle
things better.  I'll tell you one great State secret:  the Queen, sensible how
much she was governed by the late Ministry, runs a little into t'other
extreme, and is jealous in that point, even of those who got her out of the
others' hands.  The Ministry is for gentler measures, and the other Tories for
more violent.  Lord Rivers, talking to me the other day, cursed the paper
called the Examiner, for speaking civilly of the Duke of Marlborough; this I
happened to talk of to the Secretary, who blamed the warmth of that lord and
some others, and swore that if their advice were followed they would be blown
up in twenty-four hours.  And I have reason to think that they will endeavour
to prevail on the Queen to put her affairs more in the hands of a Ministry
than she does at present; and there are, I believe, two men thought on, one of
them you have often met the name of in my letters.  But so much for politics.

19.  This proved a terrible rainy day, which prevented my walk into the City,
and I was only able to run and dine with my neighbour Vanhomrigh, where Sir
Andrew Fountaine dined too, who has just began to sally out, and has shipped
his mother and sister, who were his nurses, back to the country.  This evening
was fair, and I walked a little in the Park, till Prior made me go with him to
the Smyrna Coffee-house, where I sat a while, and saw four or five Irish
persons, who are very handsome, genteel fellows; but I know not their names.
I came away at seven, and got home.  Two days ago I writ to Bernage, and told
him what I had done, and directed the letter to Mr. Curry's, to be left with
Dingley.  Brigadiers Hill and Masham, brother and husband to Mrs. Masham, the
Queen's favourite, Colonel Disney,[20] and I, have recommended Bernage to the
Duke of Argyle; and Secretary St. John has given the Duke my memorial; and,
besides, Hill tells me, that Bernage's colonel, Fielding,[21] designs to make
him his captain-lieutenant:  but I believe I said this to you before, and in
this letter; but I will not look.

20.  Morning.  It snows terribly again; and 'tis mistaken, for I now want a
little good weather.  I bid you good-morrow; and, if it clear up, get you gone
to poor Mrs. Walls, who has had a hard time of it, but is now pretty well
again.  I am sorry it is a girl:  the poor Archdeacon too, see how simply he
looked when they told him:  what did it cost Stella to be gossip?  I'll rise;
so, d'ye hear, let me see you at night; and do not stay late out, and catch
cold, sirrahs.--At night.  It grew good weather, and I got a good walk, and
dined with Ford upon his Opera-day; but, now all his wine is gone, I shall
dine with him no more.  I hope to send this letter before I hear from MD,
methinks there is--something great in doing so, only I can't express where it
lies; and, faith, this shall go by Saturday, as sure as you're a rogue.  Mrs.
Edgworth was to set out but last Monday; so you won't have your box so soon
perhaps as this letter; but Sterne told me since that it is safe at Chester,
and that she will take care of it.  I'd give a guinea you had it.

21.  Morning.  Faith, I hope it will be fair for me to walk into the City; for
I take all occasions of walking.--I should be plaguy busy at Laracor if I were
there now, cutting down willows, planting others, scouring my canal, and every
kind of thing.  If Raymond goes over this summer, you must submit, and make
them a visit, that we may have another eel and trout fishing; and that Stella
may ride by, and see Presto in his morning-gown in the garden, and so go up
with Joe to the Hill of Bree, and round by Scurlock's Town.  O Lord, how I
remember names! faith, it gives me short sighs; therefore no more of that, if
you love me.  Good-morrow, I will go rise like a gentleman; my pills say I
must.--At night.  Lady Kerry sent to desire me to engage some lords about an
affair she has in their house here:  I called to see her, but found she had
already engaged every lord I knew, and that there was no great difficulty in
the matter; and it rained like a dog; so I took coach, for want of better
exercise, and dined privately with a hang-dog in the City, and walked back in
the evening.  The days are now long enough to walk in the Park after dinner;
and so I do whenever it is fair.  This walking is a strange remedy:  Mr. Prior
walks, to make himself fat, and I to bring myself down; he has generally a
cough, which he only calls a cold; we often walk round the Park together.  So
I'll go sleep.

22.  It snowed all this morning prodigiously, and was some inches thick in
three or four hours.  I dined with Mr. Lewis of the Secretary's office at his
lodgings:  the chairmen that carried me squeezed a great fellow against a
wall, who wisely turned his back, and broke one of the side-glasses in a
thousand pieces.  I fell a scolding, pretended I was like to be cut to pieces,
and made them set down the chair in the Park, while they picked out the bits
of glasses; and, when I paid them, I quarrelled still; so they dared not
grumble, and I came off for my fare; but I was plaguily afraid they would have
said, "God bless your honour, won't you give us something for our glass?"
Lewis and I were forming a project how I might get three or four hundred
pounds,[22] which I suppose may come to nothing.  I hope Smyth has brought you
your palsy-drops.  How does Stella do?  I begin more and more to desire to
know.  The three weeks since I had your last is over within two days, and I
will allow three for accidents.

23.  The snow is gone every bit, except the remainder of some great balls made
by the boys.  Mr. Sterne was with me this morning about an affair he has
before the Treasury.  That drab Mrs. Edgworth is not yet set out, but will
infallibly next Monday:  and this is the third infallible Monday, and pox take
her!  So you will have this letter first; and this shall go to-morrow; and, if
I have one from MD in that time, I will not answer it till my next; only I
will say, "Madam, I received your letter, and so, and so."  I dined to-day
with my Mistress Butler,[23] who grows very disagreeable.

24.  Morning.  This letter certainly goes this evening, sure as you're alive,
young women, and then you will be so shamed that I have had none from you;
and, if I was to reckon like you, I would say, I were six letters before you,
for this is N.16, and I have had your N.10.  But I reckon you have received
but fourteen, and have sent eleven.  I think to go to-day a Minister-of-State-
hunting in the Court of Requests; for I have something to say to Mr. Harley.
And it is fine, cold, sunshiny weather; I wish dear MD would walk this morning
in your Stephen's Green; 'tis as good as our Park, but not so large.[24]
Faith, this summer we'll take a coach for sixpence[25] to the Green Well, the
two walks, and thence all the way to Stoyte's.[26]  My hearty service to Goody
Stoyte and Catherine; and I hope Mrs. Walls had a good time.  How inconstant I
am! I can't imagine I was ever in love with her.  Well, I'm going; what have
you to say?  I DO NOT CARE HOW I WRITE NOW.[27]  I don't design to write on
this side; these few lines are but so much more than your due; so I will write
LARGE or small as I please.  O, faith, my hands are starving in bed; I believe
it is a hard frost.  I must rise, and bid you good-bye, for I'll seal this
letter immediately, and carry it in my pocket, and put it into the post-office
with my own fair hands.  Farewell.

This letter is just a fortnight's journal to-day.  Yes, and so it is, I'm
sure, says you, with your two eggs a penny.

Lele, lele, lele.[28]

O Lord, I am saying lele, lele, to myself, in all our little keys:  and, now
you talk of keys, that dog Patrick broke the key-general of the chest of
drawers with six locks, and I have been so plagued to get a new one, besides
my good two shillings!



LETTER 17.

LONDON, Feb. 24, 1710-11.

Now, young women, I gave in my sixteenth this evening.  I dined with Ford (it
was his Opera-day) as usual; it is very convenient to me to do so, for coming
home early after a walk in the Park, which now the days will allow.  I called
on the Secretary at his office, and he had forgot to give the memorial about
Bernage to the Duke of Argyle; but, two days ago, I met the Duke, who desired
I would give it him myself, which should have more power with him than all the
Ministry together, as he protested solemnly, repeated it two or three times,
and bid me count upon it.  So that I verily believe Bernage will be in a very
good way to establish himself.  I think I can do no more for him at present,
and there's an end of that; and so get you gone to bed, for it is late.

25.  The three weeks are out yesterday since I had your last, and so now I
will be expecting every day a pretty dear letter from my own MD, and hope to
hear that Stella has been much better in her head and eyes:  my head continues
as it was, no fits, but a little disorder every day, which I can easily bear,
if it will not grow worse.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John, on
condition I might choose my company, which were Lord Rivers, Lord Carteret,
Sir Thomas Mansel,[1] and Mr. Lewis; I invited Masham, Hill, Sir John Stanley,
and George Granville, but they were engaged; and I did it in revenge of his
having such bad company when I dined with him before; so we laughed, etc.  And
I ventured to go to church to-day, which I have not done this month before.
Can you send me such a good account of Stella's health, pray now?  Yes, I
hope, and better too.  We dined (says you) at the Dean's, and played at cards
till twelve, and there came in Mr. French, and Dr. Travors, and Dr.
Whittingham, and Mr. (I forget his name, that I always tell Mrs. Walls of) the
banker's son, a pox on him.  And we were so merry; I vow they are pure good
company.  But I lost a crown; for you must know I had always hands tempting me
to go out, but never took in anything, and often two black aces without a
manilio; was not that hard, Presto?  Hold your tongue, etc.

26.  I was this morning with Mr. Secretary about some business, and he tells
me that Colonel Fielding is now going to make Bernage his captain-lieutenant,
that is, a captain by commission, and the perquisites of the company; but not
captain's pay, only the first step to it.  I suppose he will like it; and the
recommendation to the Duke of Argyle goes on.  And so trouble me no more about
your Bernage; the jackanapes understands what fair solicitors he has got, I
warrant you.  Sir Andrew Fountaine and I dined, by invitation, with Mrs.
Vanhomrigh.  You say they are of no consequence:  why, they keep as good
female company as I do male; I see all the drabs of quality at this end of the
town with them:  I saw two Lady Bettys[2] there this afternoon; the beauty of
one, the good-breeding and nature of t'other, and the wit of neither, would
have made a fine woman.  Rare walking in the Park now:  why don't you walk in
the Green of St. Stephen?  The walks there are finer gravelled than the Mall.
What beasts the Irish women are, never to walk!

27.  Darteneuf and I, and little Harrison the new Tatler, and Jervas the
painter, dined to-day with James,[3] I know not his other name, but it is one
of Darteneuf's dining-places, who is a true epicure.  James is clerk of the
kitchen to the Queen, and has a little snug house at St. James's; and we had
the Queen's wine, and such very fine victuals that I could not eat it.  Three
weeks and three days since my last letter from MD; rare doings! why, truly we
were so busy with poor Mrs. Walls, that indeed, Presto, we could not write, we
were afraid the poor woman would have died; and it pitied us to see the
Archdeacon, how concerned he was.  The Dean never came to see her but once;
but now she is up again, and we go and sit with her in the evenings.  The
child died the next day after it was born; and I believe, between friends, she
is not very sorry for it.--Indeed, Presto, you are plaguy silly tonight, and
han't guessed one word right; for she and the child are both well, and it is a
fine girl, likely to live; and the Dean was godfather, and Mrs. Catherine and
I were godmothers; I was going to say Stoyte, but I think I have heard they
don't put maids and married women together; though I know not why I think so,
nor I don't care; what care I? but I must prate, etc.

28.  I walked to-day into the City for my health, and there dined; which I
always do when the weather is fair, and business permits, that I may be under
a necessity of taking a good walk, which is the best thing I can do at present
for my health.  Some bookseller has raked up everything I writ, and published
it t'other day in one volume; but I know nothing of it, 'twas without my
knowledge or consent:  it makes a four-shilling book, and is called
Miscellanies in Prose and Verse.[4]  Tooke pretends he knows nothing of it;
but I doubt he is at the bottom.  One must have patience with these things;
the best of it is, I shall be plagued no more.  However, I will bring a couple
of them over with me for MD; perhaps you may desire to see them.  I hear they
sell mightily.

March 1.  Morning.  I have been calling to Patrick to look in his almanac for
the day of the month; I did not know but it might be leap-year.  The almanac
says 'tis the third after leap-year; and I always thought till now, that every
third year was leap-year.  I am glad they come so seldom; but I'm sure 'twas
otherwise when I was a young man; I see times are mightily changed since
then.--Write to me, sirrahs; be sure do by the time this side is done, and
I'll keep t'other side for the answer:  so I'll go write to the Bishop of
Clogher; good-morrow, sirrahs.--Night.  I dined to-day at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's,
being a rainy day; and Lady Betty Butler, knowing it, sent to let me know she
expected my company in the evening, where the Vans (so we call them) were to
be.  The Duchess[5] and they do not go over this summer with the Duke; so I go
to bed.

2.  This rainy weather undoes me in coaches and chairs.  I was traipsing to-
day with your Mr. Sterne, to go along with them to Moore,[6] and recommend his
business to the Treasury.  Sterne tells me his dependence is wholly on me; but
I have absolutely refused to recommend it to Mr. Harley, because I have
troubled him lately so much with other folks' affairs; and besides, to tell
the truth, Mr. Harley told me he did not like Sterne's business:  however, I
will serve him, because I suppose MD would have me.  But, in saying his
dependence lies wholly on me, he lies, and is a fool.  I dined with Lord
Abercorn, whose son Peasley[7] will be married at Easter to ten thousand
pounds.

3.  I forgot to tell you that yesterday morning I was at Mr. Harley's levee:
he swore I came in spite, to see him among a parcel of fools.  My business was
to desire I might let the Duke of Ormond know how the affair stood of the
First-Fruits.  He promised to let him know it, and engaged me to dine with him
to-day.  Every Saturday, Lord Keeper, Secretary St. John, and I dine with him,
and sometimes Lord Rivers; and they let in none else.  Patrick brought me some
letters into the Park; among which one was from Walls; and t'other, yes,
faith, t'other was from our little MD, N.11.  I read the rest in the Park, and
MD's in a chair as I went from St. James's to Mr. Harley; and glad enough I
was, faith, to read it, and see all right.  Oh, but I won't answer it these
three or four days at least, or may be sooner.  An't I silly? faith, your
letters would make a dog silly, if I had a dog to be silly, but it must be a
little dog.--I stayed with Mr. Harley till past nine, where we had much
discourse together after the rest were gone; and I gave him very truly my
opinion where he desired it.  He complained he was not very well, and has
engaged me to dine with him again on Monday.  So I came home afoot, like a
fine gentleman, to tell you all this.

4.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John; and after dinner he had a note
from Mr. Harley, that he was much out of order.[8]  Pray God preserve his
health! everything depends upon it.  The Parliament at present cannot go a
step without him, nor the Queen neither.  I long to be in Ireland; but the
Ministry beg me to stay:  however, when this Parliament lurry[9] is over, I
will endeavour to steal away; by which time I hope the First-Fruit business
will be done.  This kingdom is certainly ruined as much as was ever any
bankrupt merchant.  We must have peace, let it be a bad or a good one, though
nobody dares talk of it.  The nearer I look upon things, the worse I like
them.  I believe the confederacy will soon break to pieces, and our factions
at home increase.  The Ministry is upon a very narrow bottom, and stand like
an isthmus, between the Whigs on one side, and violent Tories on the other.
They are able seamen; but the tempest is too great, the ship too rotten, and
the crew all against them.  Lord Somers has been twice in the Queen's closet,
once very lately; and your Duchess of Somerset,[10] who now has the key, is a
most insinuating woman; and I believe they will endeavour to play the same
game that has been played against them.--I have told them of all this, which
they know already, but they cannot help it.  They have cautioned the Queen so
much against being governed, that she observes it too much.  I could talk till
to-morrow upon these things, but they make me melancholy.  I could not but
observe that lately, after much conversation with Mr. Harley, though he is the
most fearless man alive, and the least apt to despond, he confessed to me that
uttering his mind to me gave him ease.

5.  Mr. Harley continues out of order, yet his affairs force him abroad:  he
is subject to a sore throat, and was cupped last night:  I sent and called two
or three times.  I hear he is better this evening.  I dined to-day in the City
with Dr. Freind at a third body's house, where I was to pass for somebody
else; and there was a plaguy silly jest carried on, that made me sick of it.
Our weather grows fine, and I will walk like camomile.  And pray walk you to
your Dean's, or your Stoyte's, or your Manley's, or your Walls'.  But your new
lodgings make you so proud, you will walk less than ever.  Come, let me go to
bed, sirrahs.

6.  Mr. Harley's going out yesterday has put him a little backwards.  I called
twice, and sent, for I am in pain for him.  Ford caught me, and made me dine
with him on his Opera-day; so I brought Mr. Lewis with me, and sat with him
till six.  I have not seen Mr. Addison these three weeks; all our friendship
is over.  I go to no Coffee-house.  I presented a parson of the Bishop of
Clogher's, one Richardson,[11] to the Duke of Ormond to-day:  he is
translating prayers and sermons into Irish, and has a project about
instructing the Irish in the Protestant religion.

7.  Morning.  Faith, a little would make me, I could find in my heart, if it
were not for one thing, I have a good mind, if I had not something else to do,
I would answer your dear saucy letter.  O, Lord, I am going awry with writing
in bed.  O, faith, but I must answer it, or I shan't have room, for it must go
on Saturday; and don't think I will fill the third side, I an't come to that
yet, young women.  Well then, as for your Bernage, I have said enough:  I writ
to him last week.--Turn over that leaf.  Now, what says MD to the world to
come?  I tell you, Madam Stella, my head is a great deal better, and I hope
will keep so.  How came yours to be fifteen days coming, and you had my
fifteenth in seven?  Answer me that, rogues.  Your being with Goody Walls is
excuse enough:  I find I was mistaken in the sex, 'tis a boy.[12]  Yes, I
understand your cypher, and Stella guesses right, as she always does.  He[13]
gave me al bsadnuk lboinlpl dfaonr ufainf btoy dpionufnad,[14] which I sent
him again by Mr. Lewis, to whom I writ a very complaining letter that was
showed him; and so the matter ended.  He told me he had a quarrel with me; I
said I had another with him, and we returned to our friendship, and I should
think he loves me as well as a great Minister can love a man in so short a
time.  Did not I do right?  I am glad at heart you have got your palsy-
water;[15] pray God Almighty it may do my dearest little Stella good!  I
suppose Mrs. Edgworth set out last Monday se'ennight.  Yes, I do read the
Examiners, and they are written very finely, as you judge.  I do not think
they are too severe on the Duke;[16] they only tax him of avarice, and his
avarice has ruined us.  You may count upon all things in them to be true.  The
author has said it is not Prior, but perhaps it may be Atterbury.--Now, Madam
Dingley, says she, 'tis fine weather, says she; yes, says she, and we have got
to our new lodgings.  I compute you ought to save eight pounds by being in the
others five months; and you have no more done it than eight thousand.  I am
glad you are rid of that squinting, blinking Frenchman.  I will give you a
bill on Parvisol for five pounds for the half-year.  And must I go on at four
shillings a week, and neither eat nor drink for it?  Who the Devil said
Atterbury and your Dean were alike?  I never saw your Chancellor, nor his
chaplain.  The latter has a good deal of learning, and is a well-wisher to be
an author:  your Chancellor is an excellent man.  As for Patrick's bird, he
bought him for his tameness, and is grown the wildest I ever saw.  His wings
have been quilled thrice, and are now up again:  he will be able to fly after
us to Ireland, if he be willing.--Yes, Mrs. Stella, Dingley writes more like
Presto than you; for all you superscribed the letter, as who should say, Why
should not I write like our Presto as well as Dingley?  You with your awkward
SS;[17] cannot you write them thus, SS?  No, but always SSS.  Spiteful sluts,
to affront Presto's writing; as that when you shut your eyes you write most
like Presto.  I know the time when I did not write to you half so plain as I
do now; but I take pity on you both.  I am very much concerned for Mrs.
Walls's eyes.  Walls says nothing of it to me in his letter dated after yours.
You say, "If she recovers, she may lose her sight."  I hope she is in no
danger of her life.  Yes, Ford is as sober as I please:  I use him to walk
with me as an easy companion, always ready for what I please, when I am weary
of business and Ministers.  I don't go to a Coffee-house twice a month.  I am
very regular in going to sleep before eleven.--And so you say that Stella is a
pretty girl; and so she be, and methinks I see her just now as handsome as the
day is long.  Do you know what? when I am writing in our language, I make up
my mouth just as if I was speaking it.  I caught myself at it just now.  And I
suppose Dingley is so fair and so fresh as a lass in May, and has her health,
and no spleen.--In your account you sent do you reckon as usual from the 1st
of November[18] was twelvemonth?  Poor Stella, will not Dingley leave her a
little daylight to write to Presto?  Well, well, we'll have daylight shortly,
spite of her teeth; and zoo[19] must cly Lele and Hele, and Hele aden.  Must
loo mimitate Pdfr, pay?  Iss, and so la shall.  And so lele's fol ee rettle.
Dood-mollow.--At night.  Mrs. Barton sent this morning to invite me to dinner;
and there I dined, just in that genteel manner that MD used when they would
treat some better sort of body than usual.

8.  O dear MD, my heart is almost broken.  You will hear the thing before this
comes to you.  I writ a full account of it this night to the Archbishop of
Dublin; and the Dean may tell you the particulars from the Archbishop.  I was
in a sorry way to write, but thought it might be proper to send a true account
of the fact; for you will hear a thousand lying circumstances.  It is of Mr.
Harley's being stabbed this afternoon, at three o'clock, at a Committee of the
Council.  I was playing Lady Catharine Morris's[20] cards, where I dined, when
young Arundel[21] came in with the story.  I ran away immediately to the
Secretary, which was in my way:  no one was at home.  I met Mrs. St. John in
her chair; she had heard it imperfectly.  I took a chair to Mr. Harley, who
was asleep, and they hope in no danger; but he has been out of order, and was
so when he came abroad to-day, and it may put him in a fever:  I am in mortal
pain for him.  That desperate French villain, Marquis de Guiscard,[22] stabbed
Mr. Harley.  Guiscard was taken up by Mr. Secretary St. John's warrant for
high treason, and brought before the Lords to be examined; there he stabbed
Mr. Harley.  I have told all the particulars already to the Archbishop.  I
have now, at nine, sent again, and they tell me he is in a fair way.  Pray
pardon my distraction; I now think of all his kindness to me.--The poor
creature now lies stabbed in his bed by a desperate French Popish villain.
Good-night, and God preserve you both, and pity me; I want it.

9.  Morning; seven, in bed.  Patrick is just come from Mr. Harley's.  He slept
well till four; the surgeon sat[23] up with him:  he is asleep again:  he felt
a pain in his wound when he waked:  they apprehend him in no danger.  This
account the surgeon left with the porter, to tell people that send.  Pray God
preserve him.  I am rising, and going to Mr. Secretary St. John.  They say
Guiscard will die with the wounds Mr. St. John and the rest gave him.  I shall
tell you more at night.--Night.  Mr. Harley still continues on the mending
hand; but he rested ill last night, and felt pain.  I was early with the
Secretary this morning, and I dined with him, and he told me several
particularities of this accident, too long to relate now.  Mr. Harley is still
mending this evening, but not at all out of danger; and till then I can have
no peace.  Good-night, etc., and pity Presto.

10.  Mr. Harley was restless last night; but he has no fever, and the hopes of
his mending increase.  I had a letter from Mr. Walls, and one from Mr.
Bernage.  I will answer them here, not having time to write.  Mr.  Walls
writes about three things.  First, about a hundred pounds from Dr. Raymond, of
which I hear nothing, and it is now too late.  Secondly, about Mr.
Clements:[24]  I can do nothing in it, because I am not to mention Mr. Pratt;
and I cannot recommend without knowing Mr. Pratt's objections, whose relation
Clements is, and who brought him into the place.  The third is about my being
godfather to the child:[25]  that is in my power, and (since there is no
remedy) will submit.  I wish you could hinder it; but if it can't be helped,
pay what you think proper, and get the Provost to stand for me, and let his
Christian name be Harley, in honour of my friend, now lying stabbed and
doubtful of his life.  As for Bernage, he writes me word that his colonel has
offered to make him captain-lieutenant for a hundred pounds.  He was such a
fool to offer him money without writing to me till it was done, though I have
had a dozen letters from him; and then he desires I would say nothing of this,
for fear his colonel should be angry.  People are mad.  What can I do?  I
engaged Colonel Disney, who was one of his solicitors to the Secretary, and
then told him the story.  He assured me that Fielding (Bernage's colonel) said
he might have got that sum; but, on account of those great recommendations he
had, would give it him for nothing:  and I would have Bernage write him a
letter of thanks, as of a thing given him for nothing, upon recommendations,
etc.  Disney tells me he will again speak to Fielding, and clear up this
matter; then I will write to Bernage.  A pox on him for promising money till I
had it promised to me; and then making it such a ticklish point, that one
cannot expostulate with the colonel upon it:  but let him do as I say, and
there is an end.  I engaged the Secretary of State in it; and am sure it was
meant a kindness to me, and that no money should be given, and a hundred
pounds is too much in a Smithfield bargain,[26] as a major-general told me,
whose opinion I asked.  I am now hurried, and can say no more.  Farewell, etc.
etc.

How shall I superscribe to your new lodgings, pray, madams?  Tell me but that,
impudence and saucy-face.

Are not you sauceboxes to write "lele"[27] like Presto?  O poor Presto!

Mr. Harley is better to-night, that makes me so pert, you saucy Gog and Magog.



LETTER 18.

LONDON, March 10, 1710-11.

Pretty little MD must expect little from me till Mr. Harley is out of danger.
We hope he is so now; but I am subject to fear for my friends.  He has a head
full of the whole business of the nation, was out of order when the villain
stabbed him, and had a cruel contusion by the second blow.  But all goes on
well yet.  Mr. Ford and I dined with Mr. Lewis, and we hope the best.

11.  This morning Mr. Secretary and I met at Court, where he went to the
Queen, who is out of order, and aguish:  I doubt the worse for this accident
to Mr. Harley.  We went together to his house, and his wound looks well, and
he is not feverish at all, and I think it is foolish in me to be so much in
pain as I am.  I had the penknife in my hand, which is broken within a quarter
of an inch of the handle.  I have a mind to write and publish an account of
all the particularities of this fact:[1]  it will be very curious, and I would
do it when Mr. Harley is past danger.

12.  We have been in terrible pain to-day about Mr. Harley, who never slept
last night, and has been very feverish.  But this evening I called there; and
young Mr. Harley (his only son) tells me he is now much better, and was then
asleep.  They let nobody see him, and that is perfectly right.  The Parliament
cannot go on till he is well, and are forced to adjourn their money
businesses, which none but he can help them in.  Pray God preserve him.

13.  Mr. Harley is better to-day, slept well all night, and we are a little
out of our fears.  I send and call three or four times every day.  I went into
the City for a walk, and dined there with a private man; and coming home this
evening, broke my shin in the Strand over a tub of sand left just in the way.
I got home dirty enough, and went straight to bed, where I have been cooking
it with gold-beater's skin, and have been peevish enough with Patrick, who was
near an hour bringing a rag from next door.  It is my right shin, where never
any humour fell when t'other used to swell; so I apprehend it less:  however,
I shall not stir till 'tis well, which I reckon will be in a week.  I am very
careful in these sort of things; but I wish I had Mrs. J----'s water:[2] she
is out of town, and I must make a shift with alum.  I will dine with Mrs.
Vanhomrigh till I am well, who lives but five doors off; and that I may
venture.

14.  My journals are like to be very diverting, now I cannot stir abroad,
between accounts of Mr. Harley's mending, and of my broken shin.  I just
walked to my neighbour Vanhomrigh at two, and came away at six, when little
Harrison the Tatler came to me, and begged me to dictate a paper to him, which
I was forced in charity to do.  Mr. Harley still mends; and I hope in a day or
two to trouble you no more with him, nor with my shin.  Go to bed and sleep,
sirrahs, that you may rise to-morrow and walk to Donnybrook, and lose your
money with Stoyte and the Dean; do so, dear little rogues, and drink Presto's
health.  O pray, don't you drink Presto's health sometimes with your deans,
and your Stoytes, and your Walls, and your Manleys, and your everybodies, pray
now?  I drink MD's to myself a hundred thousand times.

15.  I was this morning at Mr. Secretary St. John's for all my shin; and he
has given me for young Harrison the Tatler the prettiest employment in Europe;
secretary to my Lord Raby,[3] who is to be Ambassador Extraordinary at the
Hague, where all the great affairs will be concerted; so we shall lose the
Tatlers in a fortnight.  I will send Harrison to-morrow morning to thank the
Secretary.  Poor Biddy Floyd[4] has got the smallpox.  I called this morning
to see Lady Betty Germaine, and when she told me so, I fairly took my leave.
I have the luck of it;[5] for about ten days ago I was to see Lord
Carteret;[6] and my lady was entertaining me with telling of a young lady, a
cousin, who was then ill in the house of the smallpox, and is since dead:  it
was near Lady Betty's, and I fancy Biddy took the fright by it.  I dined with
Mr. Secretary; and a physician came in just from Guiscard, who tells us he is
dying of his wounds, and can hardly live till to-morrow.  A poor wench that
Guiscard kept, sent him a bottle of sack; but the keeper would not let him
touch it, for fear it was poison.  He had two quarts of old clotted blood come
out of his side to-day, and is delirious.  I am sorry he is dying; for they
had found out a way to hang him.  He certainly had an intention to murder the
Queen.

16.  I have made but little progress in this letter for so many days, thanks
to Guiscard and Mr. Harley; and it would be endless to tell you all the
particulars of that odious fact.  I do not yet hear that Guiscard is dead, but
they say 'tis impossible he should recover.  I walked too much yesterday for a
man with a broken shin; to-day I rested, and went no farther than Mrs.
Vanhomrigh's, where I dined; and Lady Betty Butler coming in about six, I was
forced in good manners to sit with her till nine; then I came home, and Mr.
Ford came in to visit my shin, and sat with me till eleven:  so I have been
very idle and naughty.  It vexes me to the pluck[7] that I should lose walking
this delicious day.  Have you seen the Spectator[8] yet, a paper that comes
out every day?  'Tis written by Mr. Steele, who seems to have gathered new
life, and have a new fund of wit; it is in the same nature as his Tatlers, and
they have all of them had something pretty.  I believe Addison and he club.  I
never see them; and I plainly told Mr. Harley and Mr. St. John, ten days ago,
before my Lord Keeper and Lord Rivers, that I had been foolish enough to spend
my credit with them in favour of Addison and Steele; but that I would engage
and promise never to say one word in their behalf, having been used so ill for
what I had already done.--So, now I am got into the way of prating again,
there will be no quiet for me.

     When Presto begins to prate,
     Give him a rap upon the pate.

O Lord, how I blot! it is time to leave off, etc.

17.  Guiscard died this morning at two; and the coroner's inquest have found
that he was killed by bruises received from a messenger, so to clear the
Cabinet Councillors from whom he received his wounds.  I had a letter from
Raymond, who cannot hear of your box; but I hope you have it before this comes
to your hands.  I dined to-day with Mr. Lewis of the Secretary's office.  Mr.
Harley has abundance of extravasated blood comes from his breast out of his
wound, and will not be well so soon as we expected.  I had something to say,
but cannot call it to mind.  (What was it?)

18.  I was to-day at Court to look for the Duke of Argyle, and gave him the
memorial about Bernage.  The Duke goes with the first fair wind.  I could not
find him, but I have given the memorial to another to give him; and, however,
it shall be sent after him.  Bernage has made a blunder in offering money to
his colonel without my advice; however, he is made captain-lieutenant, only he
must recruit the company, which will cost him forty pounds, and that is
cheaper than an hundred.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John, and
stayed till seven, but would not drink his champagne and burgundy, for fear of
the gout.  My shin mends, but is not well.  I hope it will by the time I send
this letter, next Saturday.

19.  I went to-day into the City, but in a coach, and sossed[9] up my leg on
the seat; and as I came home, I went to see poor Charles Barnard's[10] books,
which are to be sold by auction, and I itch to lay out nine or ten pounds for
some fine editions of fine authors.  But 'tis too far, and I shall let it
slip, as I usually do all such opportunities.  I dined in a coffee-house with
Stratford upon chops and some of his wine.  Where did MD dine?  Why, poor MD
dined at home to-day, because of the Archbishop, and they could not go abroad,
and had a breast of mutton and a pint of wine.  I hope Mrs. Walls mends; and
pray give me an account what sort of godfather I made, and whether I behaved
myself handsomely.  The Duke of Argyle is gone; and whether he has my
memorial, I know not, till I see Dr. Arbuthnot,[11] to whom I gave it.  That
hard name belongs to a Scotch doctor, an acquaintance of the Duke's and me;
Stella can't pronounce it.  Oh that we were at Laracor this fine day! the
willows begin to peep, and the quicks to bud.  My dream is out:  I was a-
dreamed last night that I ate ripe cherries.--And now they begin to catch the
pikes, and will shortly the trouts (pox on these Ministers!)--and I would fain
know whether the floods were ever so high as to get over the holly bank or the
river walk; if so, then all my pikes are gone; but I hope not.  Why don't you
ask Parvisol these things, sirrahs?  And then my canal, and trouts, and
whether the bottom be fine and clear?  But harkee, ought not Parvisol to pay
in my last year's rents and arrears out of his hands?  I am thinking, if
either of you have heads to take his accounts, it should be paid in to you;
otherwise to Mr. Walls.  I will write an order on t'other side; and do as you
will.  Here's a world of business; but I must go sleep, I'm drowsy; and so
goodnight, etc.

20.  This sore shin ruins me in coach-hire; no less than two shillings to-day
going and coming from the City, where I dined with one you never heard of, and
passed an insipid day.  I writ this post to Bernage, with the account I told
you above.  I hope he will like it; 'tis his own fault, or it would have been
better.  I reckon your next letter will be full of Mr. Harley's stabbing.  He
still mends, but abundance of extravasated blood has come out of the wound:
he keeps his bed, and sees nobody.  The Speaker's eldest son[12] is just dead
of the smallpox, and the House is adjourned a week, to give him time to wipe
off his tears.  I think it very handsomely done; but I believe one reason is,
that they want Mr. Harley so much.  Biddy Floyd is like to do well:  and so go
to your Dean's, and roast his oranges, and lose your money, do so, you saucy
sluts.  Stella, you lost three shillings and fourpence t'other night at
Stoyte's, yes, you did, and Presto stood in a corner, and saw you all the
while, and then stole away.  I dream very often I am in Ireland, and that I
have left my clothes and things behind me, and have not taken leave of
anybody; and that the Ministry expect me tomorrow, and such nonsense.

21.  I would not for a guinea have a letter from you till this goes; and go it
shall on Saturday, faith.  I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, to save my shin, and
then went on some business to the Secretary, and he was not at home.

22.  Yesterday was a short day's journal:  but what care I? what cares saucy
Presto?  Darteneuf[13] invited me to dinner to-day.  Do not you know
Darteneuf?  That's the man that knows everything, and that everybody knows;
and that knows where a knot of rabble are going on a holiday, and when they
were there last:  and then I went to the Coffee-house.  My shin mends, but is
not quite healed:  I ought to keep it up, but I don't; I e'en let it go as it
comes.  Pox take Parvisol and his watch!  If I do not receive the ten-pound
bill I am to get towards it, I will neither receive watch nor chain; so let
Parvisol know.

23.  I this day appointed the Duke of Ormond to meet him at Ned Southwell's,
about an affair of printing Irish Prayer-Books, etc.,[14] but the Duke never
came.  There Southwell had letters that two packets are taken; so if MD writ
then, the letters are gone; for they are packets coming hither.  Mr. Harley is
not yet well, but his extravasated blood continues, and I doubt he will not be
quite well in a good while:  I find you have heard of the fact by Southwell's
letters from Ireland:  what do you think of it?  I dined with Sir John
Perceval,[15] and saw his lady sitting in the bed, in the forms of a lying-in
woman; and coming home my sore shin itched, and I forgot what it was, and
rubbed off the scab, and blood came; but I am now got into bed, and have put
on alum curd, and it is almost well.  Lord Rivers told me yesterday a piece of
bad news, as a secret, that the Pretender is going to be married to the Duke
of Savoy's daughter.[16]  'Tis very bad if it be true.  We were walking in the
Mall with some Scotch lords, and he could not tell it until they were gone,
and he bade me tell it to none but the Secretary of State and MD.  This goes
tomorrow, and I have no room but to bid my dearest little MD good-night.
24.  I will now seal up this letter, and send it; for I reckon to have none
from you ('tis morning now) between this and night; and I will put it in the
post with my own hands.  I am going out in great haste; so farewell, etc.



LETTER 19.

LONDON, March 24, 1710-11.

It was a little cross in Presto not to send to-day to the Coffee-house to see
whether there was a letter from MD before I sent away mine; but, faith, I did
it on purpose, because I would scorn to answer two letters of yours
successively.  This way of journal is the worst in the world for writing of
news, unless one does it the last day; and so I will observe henceforward, if
there be any politics or stuff worth sending.  My shin mends in spite of the
scratching last night.  I dined to-day at Ned Southwell's with the Bishop of
Ossory[1] and a parcel of Irish gentlemen.  Have you yet seen any of the
Spectators?  Just three weeks to-day since I had your last, N.11.  I am afraid
I have lost one by the packet that was taken; that will vex me, considering
the pains MD take to write, especially poor pretty Stella, and her weak eyes.
God bless them and the owner, and send them well, and little me together, I
hope ere long.  This illness of Mr. Harley puts everything backwards, and he
is still down, and like to be so, by that extravasated blood which comes from
his breast to the wound:  it was by the second blow Guiscard gave him after
the penknife was broken.  I am shocked at that villainy whenever I think of
it.  Biddy Floyd is past danger, but will lose all her beauty:  she had them
mighty thick, especially about her nose.

25.  Morning.  I wish you a merry New Year; this is the first day of the year,
you know, with us, and 'tis Lady-day.  I must rise and go to my Lord Keeper:
it is not shaving-day to-day, so I shall be early.  I am to dine with Mr.
Secretary St. John.  Good-morrow, my mistresses both, good-morrow.  Stella
will be peeping out of her room at Mrs. De Caudres'[2] down upon the folks as
they come from church; and there comes Mrs. Proby,[3] and that is my Lady
Southwell,[4] and there is Lady Betty Rochfort.[5]  I long to hear how you are
settled in your new lodgings.  I wish I were rid of my old ones, and that Mrs.
Brent could contrive to put up my books in boxes, and lodge them in some safe
place, and you keep my papers of importance.  But I must rise, I tell you.--At
night.  So I visited and dined as I told you, and what of that?  We have let
Guiscard be buried at last, after showing him pickled in a trough this
fortnight for twopence apiece:  and the fellow that showed would point to his
body, and, "See, gentlemen, this is the wound that was given him by his Grace
the Duke of Ormond; and this is the wound," etc., and then the show was over,
and another set of rabble came in.  'Tis hard our laws would not suffer us to
hang his body in chains, because he was not tried; and in the eye of our law
every man is innocent till then.--Mr. Harley is still very weak, and never out
of bed.

26.  This was a most delicious day; and my shin being past danger, I walked
like lightning above two hours in the Park.  We have generally one fair day,
and then a great deal of rain for three or four days together.  All things are
at a stop in Parliament for want of Mr. Harley; they cannot stir an inch
without him in their most material affairs:  and we fear, by the caprice of
Radcliffe, who will admit none but his own surgeon,[6] he has not been well
looked after.  I dined at an alehouse with Mr. Lewis, but had his wine.  Don't
you begin to see the flowers and blossoms of the field?  How busy should I be
now at Laracor!  No news of your box?  I hope you have it, and are this minute
drinking the chocolate, and that the smell of the Brazil tobacco has not
affected it.  I would be glad to know whether you like it, because I would
send you more by people that are now every day thinking of going to Ireland;
therefore pray tell me, and tell me soon: and I will have the strong box.

27.  A rainy, wretched, scurvy day from morning till night:  and my neighbour
Vanhomrigh invited me to dine with them and this evening I passed at Mr.
Prior's with Dr. Freind; and 'tis now past twelve, so I must go sleep.

28.  Morning.  O, faith, you're an impudent saucy couple of sluttikins for
presuming to write so soon, said I to myself this morning; who knows but there
may be a letter from MD at the Coffee-house?  Well, you must know, and so, I
just now sent Patrick, and he brought me three letters, but not one from MD,
no indeed, for I read all the superscriptions; and not one from MD.  One I
opened, it was from the Archbishop;[7] t'other I opened, it was from
Staunton;[8] the third I took, and looked at the hand.  Whose hand is this?
says I; yes, says I, whose hand is this?  Then there was wax between the
folds; then I began to suspect; then I peeped; faith, it was Walls's hand
after all:  then I opened it in a rage, and then it was little MD's hand,
dear, little, pretty, charming MD's sweet hand again.  O Lord, an't here a
clutter and a stir, and a bustle? never saw the like.  Faith, I believe yours
lay some days at the post-office, and that it came before my eighteenth went,
but that I did not expect it, and I hardly ever go there.  Well, and so you
think I'll answer this letter now; no, faith, and so I won't.  I'll make you
wait, young women; but I'll inquire immediately about poor Dingley's exchequer
trangum.[9]  What, is that Vedel again a soldier? was he broke?  I'll put it
in Ben Tooke's hand.  I hope Vedel could not sell it.--At night.  Vedel,
Vedel, poh, pox, I think it is Vedeau;[10] ay, Vedeau, now I have it; let me
see, do you name him in yours?  Yes, Mr. John Vedeau is the brother; but where
does this brother live?  I'll inquire.  This was a fast-day for the public; so
I dined late with Sir Matthew Dudley, whom I have not been with a great while.
He is one of those that must lose his employment whenever the great shake
comes; and I can't contribute to keep him in, though I have dropped words in
his favour to the Ministry; but he is too violent a Whig, and friend to the
Lord Treasurer,[11] to stay in.  'Tis odd to think how long they let those
people keep their places; but the reason is, they have not enough to satisfy
all expecters, and so they keep them all in hopes, that they may be good boys
in the meantime; and thus the old ones hold in still.  The Comptroller[12]
told me that there are eight people expect his staff.  I walked after dinner
to-day round the Park.  What, do I write politics to little young women?  Hold
your tongue, and go to your Dean's.

29.  Morning.  If this be a fine day, I will walk into the City, and see
Charles Barnard's library.  What care I for your letter, saucy N.12?  I will
say nothing to it yet:  faith, I believe this will be full before its time,
and then go it must.  I will always write once a fortnight; and if it goes
sooner by filling sooner, why, then there is so much clear gain.  Morrow,
morrow, rogues and lasses both, I can't lie scribbling here in bed for your
play; I must rise, and so morrow again.--At night.  Your friend Montgomery and
his sister are here, as I am told by Patrick.  I have seen him often, but take
no notice of him:  he is grown very ugly and pimpled.  They tell me he is a
gamester, and wins money.--How could I help it, pray?  Patrick snuffed the
candle too short, and the grease ran down upon the paper.[13]  It an't my
fault, 'tis Patrick's fault; pray now don't blame Presto.  I walked today in
the City, and dined at a private house, and went to see the auction of poor
Charles Barnard's books; they were in the middle of the physic books, so I
bought none; and they are so dear, I believe I shall buy none, and there is an
end; and go to Stoyte's, and I'll go sleep.

30.  Morning.  This is Good Friday, you must know; and I must rise and go to
Mr. Secretary about some business, and Mrs. Vanhomrigh desires me to breakfast
with her, because she is to intercede for Patrick, who is so often drunk and
quarrelsome in the house, that I was resolved to send him over; but he knows
all the places where I send, and is so used to my ways, that it would be
inconvenient to me; but when I come to Ireland, I will discharge him.[14]  Sir
Thomas Mansel,[15] one of the Lords of the Treasury, setting me down at my
door to-day, saw Patrick, and swore he was a Teague-lander.[16]  I am so used
to his face, I never observed it, but thought him a pretty fellow.  Sir Andrew
Fountaine and I supped this fast-day with Mrs. Vanhomrigh.  We were afraid Mr.
Harley's wound would turn to a fistula; but we think the danger is now past.
He rises every day, and walks about his room, and we hope he will be out in a
fortnight.  Prior showed me a handsome paper of verses he has writ on Mr.
Harley's accident:[17]  they are not out; I will send them to you, if he will
give me a copy.

31.  Morning.  What shall we do to make April fools this year, now it happens
on Sunday?  Patrick brings word that Mr. Harley still mends, and is up every
day.  I design to see him in a few days:  and he brings me word too that he
has found out Vedeau's brother's shop:  I shall call there in a day or two.
It seems the wife lodges next door to the brother.  I doubt the scoundrel was
broke, and got a commission, or perhaps is a volunteer gentleman, and expects
to get one by his valour.  Morrow, sirrahs, let me rise.--At night.  I dined
to-day with Sir Thomas Mansel.  We were walking in the Park, and Mr. Lewis
came to us.  Mansel asked where we dined.  We said, "Together."  He said, we
should dine with him, only his wife[18] desired him to bring nobody, because
she had only a leg of mutton.  I said I would dine with him to choose; but he
would send a servant to order a plate or two:  yet this man has ten thousand
pounds a year in land, and is a Lord of the Treasury, and is not covetous
neither, but runs out merely by slattering[19] and negligence.  The worst
dinner I ever saw at the Dean's was better:  but so it is with abundance of
people here.  I called at night at Mr. Harley's, who begins to walk in his
room with a stick, but is mighty weak.--See how much I have lost with that
ugly grease.[20]  'Tis your fault, pray; and I'll go to bed.

April 1.  The Duke of Buckingham's house fell down last night with an
earthquake, and is half swallowed up; won't you go and see it?--An April fool,
an April fool, oh ho, young women.  Well, don't be angry.  I will make you an
April fool no more till the next time; we had no sport here, because it is
Sunday, and Easter Sunday.  I dined with the Secretary, who seemed terribly
down and melancholy, which Mr. Prior and Lewis observed as well as I:  perhaps
something is gone wrong; perhaps there is nothing in it.  God bless my own
dearest MD, and all is well.

2.  We have such windy weather, 'tis troublesome walking, yet all the rabble
have got into our Park these Easter holidays.  I am plagued with one
Richardson, an Irish parson, and his project of printing Irish Bibles, etc.,
to make you Christians in that country:  I befriend him what I can, on account
of the Archbishop and Bishop of Clogher.--But what business have I to meddle,
etc.  Do not you remember that, sirrah Stella? what was that about, when you
thought I was meddling with something that was not my business?  O, faith, you
are an impudent slut, I remember your doings, I'll never forget you as long as
I live.  Lewis and I dined together at his lodgings.  But where's the answer
to this letter of MD's?  O, faith, Presto, you must think of that.  Time
enough, says saucy Presto.

3.  I was this morning to see Mrs. Barton:  I love her better than anybody
here, and see her seldomer.  Why, really now, so it often happens in the
world, that where one loves a body best--pshah, pshah, you are so silly with
your moral observations.  Well, but she told me a very good story.  An old
gentlewoman died here two months ago, and left in her will, to have eight men
and eight maids bearers, who should have two guineas apiece, ten guineas to
the parson for a sermon, and two guineas to the clerk.  But bearers, parson,
and clerk must be all true virgins; and not to be admitted till they took
their oaths of virginity:  so the poor woman still lies unburied, and so must
do till the general resurrection.--I called at Mr. Secretary's, to see what
the D---- ailed him on Sunday.  I made him a very proper speech; told him I
observed he was much out of temper; that I did not expect he would tell me the
cause, but would be glad to see he was in better; and one thing I warned him
of, never to appear cold to me, for I would not be treated like a schoolboy;
that I had felt too much of that in my life already (meaning from Sir William
Temple); that I expected every great Minister who honoured me with his
acquaintance, if he heard or saw anything to my disadvantage, would let me
know it in plain words, and not put me in pain to guess by the change or
coldness of his countenance or behaviour; for it was what I would hardly bear
from a crowned head, and I thought no subject's favour was worth it; and that
I designed to let my Lord Keeper[21] and Mr. Harley know the same thing, that
they might use me accordingly.  He took all right; said I had reason; vowed
nothing ailed him but sitting up whole nights at business, and one night at
drinking; would have had me dine with him and Mrs. Masham's brother, to make
up matters; but I would not.  I don't know, but I would not.  But indeed I was
engaged with my old friend Rollinson;[22] you never heard of him before.

4.  I sometimes look a line or two back, and see plaguy mistakes of the pen;
how do you get over them?  You are puzzled sometimes.  Why, I think what I
said to Mr. Secretary was right.  Don't you remember how I used to be in pain
when Sir William Temple would look cold and out of humour for three or four
days, and I used to suspect a hundred reasons?  I have plucked up my spirit
since then, faith; he spoilt a fine gentleman.  I dined with my neighbour
Vanhomrigh, and MD, poor MD, at home on a loin of mutton and half a pint of
wine, and the mutton was raw, poor Stella could not eat, poor dear rogue, and
Dingley was so vexed; but we will dine at Stoyte's to-morrow.  Mr. Harley
promised to see me in a day or two, so I called this evening; but his son and
others were abroad, and he asleep, so I came away, and found out Mrs. Vedeau.
She drew out a letter from Dingley, and said she would get a friend to receive
the money.  I told her I would employ Mr. Tooke in it henceforward.  Her
husband bought a lieutenancy of foot, and is gone to Portugal.  He sold his
share of the shop to his brother, and put out the money to maintain her, all
but what bought the commission.  She lodges within two doors of her brother.
She told me it made her very melancholy to change her manner of life thus, but
trade was dead, etc.  She says she will write to you soon.  I design to engage
Ben Tooke, and then receive the parchment from her.--I gave Mr. Dopping a copy
of Prior's verses on Mr. Harley; he sent them yesterday to Ireland, so go look
for them, for I won't be at the trouble to transcribe them here.  They will be
printed in a day or two.  Give my hearty service to Stoyte and Catherine:
upon my word I love them dearly, and desire you will tell them so:  pray
desire Goody Stoyte not to let Mrs. Walls and Mrs. Johnson cheat her of her
money at ombre, but assure her from me that she is a bungler.  Dine with her
to-day, and tell her so, and drink my health, and good voyage, and speedy
return, and so you're a rogue.

5.  Morning.  Now let us proceed to examine a saucy letter from one Madam MD.-
-God Almighty bless poor dear Stella, and send her a great many birthdays, all
happy, and healthy, and wealthy, and with me ever together, and never asunder
again, unless by chance.  When I find you are happy or merry there, it makes
me so here, and I can hardly imagine you absent when I am reading your letter,
or writing to you.  No, faith, you are just here upon this little paper, and
therefore I see and talk with you every evening constantly, and sometimes in
the morning, but not always in the morning, because that is not so modest to
young ladies.--What, you would fain palm a letter on me more than you sent:
and I, like a fool, must look over all yours, to see whether this was really
N.12, or more. [Patrick has this moment brought me letters from the Bishop of
Clogher and Parvisol; my heart was at my mouth for fear of one from MD; what a
disgrace would it be to have two of yours to answer together!  But, faith,
this shall go to-night, for fear; and then come when it will, I defy it.]  No,
you are not naughty at all, write when you are disposed.  And so the Dean told
you the story of Mr. Harley from the Archbishop; I warrant it never spoiled
your supper, or broke off your game.  Nor yet, have not you the box?  I wish
Mrs. Edgworth had the -----.  But you have it now, I suppose; and is the
chocolate good, or has the tobacco spoilt it?  Leigh stays till Sterne has
done his business, no longer; and when that will be, God knows:  I befriend
him as much as I can, but Harley's accident stops that as well as all things
else.  You guess, Madam Dingley, that I shall stay a round twelvemonth; as
hope saved, I would come over, if I could, this minute; but we will talk of
that by and by. Your affair of Vedeau I have told you of already; now to the
next, turn over the leaf.  Mrs. Dobbins lies, I have no more provision here or
in Ireland than I had.  I am pleased that Stella the conjurer approves what I
did with Mr. Harley;[23] but your generosity makes me mad; I know you repine
inwardly at Presto's absence; you think he has broken his word of coming in
three months, and that this is always his trick; and now Stella says she does
not see possibly how I can come away in haste, and that MD is satisfied, etc.
An't you a rogue to overpower me thus?  I did not expect to find such friends
as I have done.  They may indeed deceive me too.  But there are important
reasons[Pox on this grease, this candle tallow!] why they should not.[24]  I
have been used barbarously by the late Ministry; I am a little piqued in
honour to let people see I am not to be despised.  The assurances they give
me, without any scruple or provocation, are such as are usually believed in
the world; they may come to nothing, but the first opportunity that offers,
and is neglected, I shall depend no more, but come away.  I could say a
thousand things on this head, if I were with you.  I am thinking why Stella
should not go to the Bath, if she be told it will do her good.  I will make
Parvisol get up fifty pounds, and pay it you; and you may be good housewives,
and live cheap there some months, and return in autumn, or visit London, as
you please:  pray think of it.  I writ to Bernage, directed to Curry's; I wish
he had the letter.  I will send the bohea tea, if I can.  The Bishop of
Kilmore,[25] I don't keep such company; an old dying fool whom I never was
with in my life.  So I am no godfather;[26] all the better.  Pray, Stella,
explain those two words of yours to me, what you mean by VILLIAN and
DAINGER;[27] and you, Madam Dingley, what is CHRISTIANING?--Lay your letter
THIS WAY, THIS WAY, and the devil a bit of difference between this way and the
other way.  No; I will show you, lay them THIS WAY, THIS WAY, and not THAT
WAY, THAT WAY.[28]--You shall have your aprons; and I will put all your
commissions as they come, in a paper together, and do not think I will forget
MD's orders, because they are friends; I will be as careful as if they were
strangers.  I knew not what to do about this Clements.[29]  Walls will not let
me say anything as if Mr. Pratt was against him; and now the Bishop of Clogher
has written to me in his behalf.  This thing does not rightly fall in my way,
and that people never consider:  I always give my good offices where they are
proper, and that I am judge of; however, I will do what I can.  But, if he has
the name of a Whig, it will be hard, considering my Lord Anglesea and Hyde[30]
are very much otherwise, and you know they have the employment of Deputy
Treasurer.  If the frolic should take you of going to the Bath, I here send
you a note on Parvisol; if not, you may tear it, and there's an end.
Farewell.

If you have an imagination that the Bath will do you good, I say again, I
would have you go; if not, or it be inconvenient, burn this note.  Or, if you
would go, and not take so much money, take thirty pounds, and I will return
you twenty from hence.  Do as you please, sirrahs.  I suppose it will not be
too late for the first season; if it be, I would have you resolve however to
go the second season, if the doctors say it will do you good, and you fancy
so.



LETTER 20.

LONDON, April 5, 1711.

I put my nineteenth in the post-office just now myself, as I came out of the
City, where I dined.  This rain ruins me in coach-hire; I walked away
sixpennyworth, and came within a shilling length, and then took a coach,[1]
and got a lift back for nothing; and am now busy.

6.  Mr. Secretary desired I would see him this morning; said he had several
things to say to me, and said not one; and the Duke of Ormond sent to desire I
would meet him at Mr. Southwell's by ten this morning too, which I did,
thinking it was some particular matter.  All the Irish in town were there, to
consult upon preventing a Bill for laying a duty on Irish yarn; so we talked a
while, and then all went to the lobby of the House of Commons, to solicit our
friends, and the Duke came among the rest; and Lord Anglesea solicited
admirably, and I did wonders.  But, after all, the matter was put off till
Monday, and then we are to be at it again.  I dined with Lord Mountjoy, and
looked over him at chess, which put me in mind of Stella and Griffyth.[2]  I
came home, and that dog Patrick was not within; so I fretted, and fretted, and
what good did that do me?

     And so get you gone to your deans,
     You couple of queans.

I cannot find rhyme to Walls and Stoyte.--Yes, yes,

     You expect Mrs. Walls,
     Be dressed when she calls,
     To carry you to Stoyte,
     Or else HONI SOIT.

Henley told me that the Tories were insup-port-able people, because they are
for bringing in French claret, and will not SUP-PORT.  Mr. Harley will hardly
get abroad this week or ten days yet.  I reckon, when I send away this letter,
he will be just got into the House of Commons.  My last letter went in twelve
days, and so perhaps may this.  No it won't, for those letters that go under a
fortnight are answers to one of yours, otherwise you must take the days as
they happen, some dry, some wet, some barren, some fruitful, some merry, some
insipid; some, etc.--I will write you word exactly the first day I see young
gooseberries, and pray observe how much later you are.  We have not had five
fine days this five weeks, but rain or wind.  'Tis a late spring they say
here.--Go to bed, you two dear saucy brats, and don't keep me up all night.

7.  Ford has been at Epsom, to avoid Good Friday and Easter Sunday.  He forced
me to-day to dine with him; and tells me there are letters from Ireland,
giving an account of a great indiscretion in the Archbishop of Dublin, who
applied a story out of Tacitus very reflectingly on Mr. Harley, and that
twenty people have written of it; I do not believe it yet.[3]  I called this
evening to see Mr. Secretary, who has been very ill with the gravel and pain
in his back, by burgundy and champagne, added to the sitting up all night at
business; I found him drinking tea while the rest were at champagne, and was
very glad of it.  I have chid him so severely that I hardly knew whether he
would take it well:  then I went and sat an hour with Mrs. St. John, who is
growing a great favourite of mine; she goes to the Bath on Wednesday, for she
is much out of health, and has begged me to take care of the Secretary.

8.  I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John; he gave me a letter to read,
which was from the publisher of the newspaper called the Postboy;[4] in it
there was a long copy of a letter from Dublin, giving an account of what the
Whigs said upon Mr. Harley's being stabbed, and how much they abuse him and
Mr. Secretary St. John; and at the end there were half a dozen lines, telling
the story of the Archbishop of Dublin, and abusing him horribly; this was to
be printed on Tuesday.  I told the Secretary I would not suffer that about the
Archbishop to be printed, and so I crossed it out; and afterwards, to prevent
all danger, I made him give me the letter, and, upon further thought, would
let none of it be published:  and I sent for the printer, and told him so, and
ordered him, in the Secretary's name, to print nothing reflecting on anybody
in Ireland till he had showed it me.  Thus I have prevented a terrible scandal
to the Archbishop, by a piece of perfect good fortune.  I will let him know it
by next post; and pray, if you pick it out, let me know, and whether he is
thankful for it; but say nothing.

9.  I was to-day at the House of Commons again about their yarn, at Lord
Anglesea's desire; but the business is again put off till Monday.  I dined
with Sir John Stanley, by an assignation I had made with Mr. St. John, and
George Granville, the Secretary at War; but they let in other company, some
ladies, and so we were not so easy as I intended.  My head is pretty
tolerable, but every day I feel some little disorders; I have left off snuff
since Sunday, finding myself much worse after taking a good deal at the
Secretary's.  I would not let him drink one drop of champagne or burgundy
without water, and in compliment I did so myself.  He is much better; but when
he is well, he is like Stella, and will not be governed.  So go to your
Stoyte's, and I'll go sleep.

10.  I have been visiting Lady Worsley and Mrs. Barton today, and dined
soberly with my friend Lewis.  The Dauphin is dead of an apoplexy; I wish he
had lived till the finishing of this letter, that it might be news to you.
Duncombe,[5] the rich alderman, died to-day, and I hear has left the Duke of
Argyle, who married his niece, two hundred thousand pounds; I hope it is true,
for I love that Duke mightily.  I writ this evening to the Archbishop of
Dublin, about what I told you; and then went to take leave of poor Mrs. St.
John, who gave me strict charge to take care of the Secretary in her absence;
said she had none to trust but me; and the poor creature's tears came fresh in
her eyes.  Before we took leave, I was drawn in by the other ladies and Sir
John Stanley to raffle for a fan, with a pox; it was four guineas, and we put
in seven shillings apiece, several raffling for absent people; but I lost, and
so missed an opportunity of showing my gallantry to Mrs. St. John, whom I
designed to have presented it to if I had won.  Is Dilly[6] gone to the Bath?
His face will whizz in the water; I suppose he will write to us from thence,
and will take London in his way back.--The rabble will say, "There goes a
drunken parson"; and, which is worse, they will say true.  Oh, but you must
know I carried Ford to dine with Mr. St. John last Sunday, that he may brag,
when he goes back, of dining with a Secretary of State.  The Secretary and I
went away early, and left him drinking with the rest, and he told me that two
or three of them were drunk.  They talk of great promotions to be made; that
Mr. Harley is to be Lord Treasurer, and Lord Poulett[7] Master of the Horse,
etc., but they are only conjecture.  The Speaker is to make Mr. Harley a
compliment the first time he comes into the House, which I hope will be in a
week.  He has had an ill surgeon, by the caprice of that puppy Dr. Radcliffe,
which has kept him back so long; and yesterday he got a cold, but is better
to-day.--What! I think I am stark mad, to write so much in one day to little
saucy MD; here is a deal of stuff, indeed! can't you bid those little dear
rogues good-night, and let them go sleep, Mr. Presto?  When your tongue runs
there's no ho with you, pray.

11.  Again at the lobby (like a lobcock)[8] of the House of Commons, about
your Irish yarn, and again put off till Friday; and I and Patrick went into
the City by water, where I dined, and then I went to the auction of Charles
Barnard's books; but the good ones were so monstrous dear, I could not reach
them, so I laid out one pound seven shillings but very indifferently, and came
away, and will go there no more.  Henley would fain engage me to go with
Steele and Rowe, etc., to an invitation at Sir William Read's.[9]  Surely you
have heard of him.  He has been a mountebank, and is the Queen's oculist; he
makes admirable punch, and treats you in gold vessels.  But I am engaged, and
will not go, neither indeed am I fond of the jaunt.  So good-night, and go
sleep.

12.  I went about noon to the Secretary, who is very ill with a cold, and
sometimes of the gravel, with his champagne, etc.  I scolded him like a dog,
and he promises faithfully more care for the future.  To-day my Lord Anglesea,
and Sir Thomas Hammer, and Prior, and I dined, by appointment, with
Lieutenant-General Webb.[10]  My lord and I stayed till ten o'clock; but we
drank soberly, and I always with water.  There was with us one Mr.
Campain,[11] one of the October Club, if you know what that is; a Club of
country members, who think the Ministers are too backward in punishing and
turning out the Whigs.  I found my lord and the rest thought I had more credit
with the Ministry than I pretend to have, and would have engaged me to put
them upon something that would satisfy their desires, and indeed I think they
have some reason to complain; however, I will not burn my fingers.  I will
remember Stella's chiding, "What had you to do with what did not belong to
you?" etc.  However, you will give me leave to tell the Ministry my thoughts
when they ask them, and other people's thoughts sometimes when they do not
ask; so thinks Dingley.

13.  I called this morning at Mrs. Vedeau's again, who has employed a friend
to get the money; it will be done in a fortnight, and then she will deliver me
up the parchment.  I went then to see Mr. Harley, who I hope will be out in a
few days; he was in excellent good humour, only complained to me of the
neglect of Guiscard's cure, how glad he would have been to have had him live.
Mr. Secretary came in to us, and we were very merry till Lord Chamberlain
(Duke of Shrewsbury)[12] came up; then Colonel Masham and I went off, after I
had been presented to the Duke, and that we made two or three silly
compliments suitable to the occasion.  Then I attended at the House of Commons
about your yarn, and it is again put off.  Then Ford drew me to dine at a
tavern; it happened to be the day and the house where the October Club dine.
After we had dined, coming down we called to inquire whether our yarn business
had been over that day, and I sent into the room for Sir George Beaumont.[13]
But I had like to be drawn into a difficulty; for in two minutes out comes Mr.
Finch,[14] Lord Guernsey's son, to let me know that my Lord Compton,[15] the
steward of this feast, desired, in the name of the Club, that I would do them
the honour to dine with them.  I sent my excuses, adorned with about thirty
compliments, and got off as fast as I could.  It would have been a most
improper thing for me to dine there, considering my friendship with the
Ministry.  The Club is about a hundred and fifty, and near eighty of them were
then going to dinner at two long tables in a great ground-room.  At evening I
went to the auction of Barnard's books, and laid out three pounds three
shillings, but I'll go there no more; and so I said once before, but now I'll
keep to it.  I forgot to tell that when I dined at Webb's with Lord Anglesea,
I spoke to him of Clements, as one recommended for a very honest gentleman and
good officer, and hoped he would keep him.  He said he had not thought
otherwise, and that he should certainly hold his place while he continued to
deserve it; and I could not find there had been any intentions from his
lordship against him.  But I tell you, hunny, the impropriety of this.  A
great man will do a favour for me, or for my friend; but why should he do it
for my friend's friend?  Recommendations should stop before they come to that.
Let any friend of mine recommend one of his to me for a thing in my power, I
will do it for his sake; but to speak to another for my friend's friend is
against all reason; and I desire you will understand this, and discourage any
such troubles given me.--I hope this may do some good to Clements, it can do
him no hurt; and I find by Mrs. Pratt,[16] that her husband is his friend; and
the Bishop of Clogher says Clements's danger is not from Pratt, but from some
other enemies, that think him a Whig.

14.  I was so busy this morning that I did not go out till late.  I writ to-
day to the Duke of Argyle, but said nothing of Bernage, who, I believe, will
not see him till Spain is conquered, and that is, not at all.  I was to-day at
Lord Shelburne's, and spoke to Mrs. Pratt again about Clements; her husband
himself wants some good offices, and I have done him very good ones lately,
and told Mrs. Pratt I expected her husband should stand by Clements in return.
Sir Andrew Fountaine and I dined with neighbour Vanhomrigh; he is mighty ill
of an asthma, and apprehends himself in much danger; 'tis his own fault, that
will rake and drink, when he is but just crawled out of his grave.  I will
send this letter just now, because I think my half-year is out for my lodging;
and, if you please, I would be glad it were paid off, and some deal boxes made
for my books, and kept in some safe place.  I would give something for their
keeping:  but I doubt that lodging will not serve me when I come back; I would
have a larger place for books, and a stable, if possible.  So pray be so kind
to pay the lodging, and all accounts about it; and get Mrs. Brent to put up my
things.  I would have no books put in that trunk where my papers are.  If you
do not think of going to the Bath, I here send you a bill on Parvisol for
twenty pounds Irish, out of which you will pay for the lodging, and score the
rest to me.  Do as you please, and love poor Presto, that loves MD better than
his life a thousand millions of times.  Farewell, MD, etc. etc.



LETTER 21.

LONDON, April 14, 1711.

Remember, sirrahs, that there are but nine days between the dates of my two
former letters.  I sent away my twentieth this moment, and now am writing on
like a fish, as if nothing was done.  But there was a cause for my hasting
away the last, for fear it should not come time enough before a new quarter
began.  I told you where I dined to-day; but forgot to tell you what I
believe, that Mr. Harley will be Lord Treasurer in a short time, and other
great removes and promotions made.  This is my thought, etc.

15.  I was this morning with Mr. Secretary, and he is grown pretty well.  I
dined with him to-day, and drank some of that wine which the Duke of Tuscany
used to send to Sir William Temple:[1]  he always sends some to the chief
Ministers.  I liked it mightily, but he does not; and he ordered his butler to
send me a chest of it to-morrow.  Would to God MD had it!  The Queen is well
again, and was at chapel to-day, etc.

16.  I went with Ford into the City to-day, and dined with Stratford, and
drank Tokay, and then we went to the auction; but I did not lay out above
twelve shillings.  My head is a little out of order to-night, though no formal
fit.  My Lord Keeper has sent to invite me to dinner to-morrow, and you'll
dine better with the Dean; and God bless you.  I forgot to tell you that
yesterday was sent me a Narrative printed, with all the circumstances of Mr.
Harley's stabbing.  I had not time to do it myself; so I sent my hints to the
author of the Atalantis,[2] and she has cooked it into a sixpenny pamphlet, in
her own style, only the first page is left as I was beginning it.  But I was
afraid of disobliging Mr. Harley or Mr. St. John in one critical point about
it, and so would not do it myself.  It is worth your reading, for the
circumstances are all true.  My chest of Florence was sent me this morning,
and cost me seven and sixpence to two servants.  I would give two guineas you
had it, etc.

17.  I was so out of order with my head this morning, that I was going to send
my excuses to my Lord Keeper; but however I got up at eleven, and walked there
after two, and stayed till eight.  There was Sir Thomas Mansel, Prior, George
Granville, and Mr. Caesar,[3] and we were very merry.  My head is still wrong,
but I have had no formal fit, only I totter a little.  I have left off snuff
altogether.  I have a noble roll of tobacco for grating, very good.  Shall I
send it to MD, if she likes that sort?  My Lord Keeper and our this day's
company are to dine on Saturday with George Granville, and to-morrow I dine
with Lord Anglesea.

18.  Did you ever see such a blundering goosecap as Presto?  I saw the number
21 at top, and so I went on as if it were the day of the month, whereas this
is but Wednesday the 18th.  How shall I do to blot and alter them?  I have
made a shift to do it behind, but it is a great botch.  I dined with Lord
Anglesea to-day, but did not go to the House of Commons about the yarn; my
head was not well enough.  I know not what is the matter; it has never been
thus before:  two days together giddy from morning till night, but not with
any violence or pain; and I totter a little, but can make shift to walk.  I
doubt I must fall to my pills again:  I think of going into the country a
little way.  I tell you what you must do henceforward:  you must enclose your
letter in a fair half-sheet of paper, and direct the outside "To Erasmus
Lewis, Esquire, at my Lord Dartmouth's office at Whitehall":  for I never go
to the Coffee-house, and they will grudge to take in my letters.  I forgot to
tell you that your mother was to see me this morning, and brought me a flask
of sweet-water for a present, admirable for my head; but I shall not smell to
it.  She is going to Sheen, with Lady Giffard:  she would fain send your
papers over to you, or give them to me.  Say what you would have done, and it
shall be done; because I love Stella, and she is a good daughter, they say,
and so is Dingley.

19.  This morning General Webb was to give me a visit:  he goes with a crutch
and stick, yet was forced to come up two pair of stairs.  I promised to dine
with him, but afterwards sent my excuses, and dined privately in my friend
Lewis's lodgings at Whitehall, with whom I had much business to talk of,
relating to the public and myself.  Little Harrison the Tatler goes to-morrow
to the secretaryship I got him at the Hague, and Mr. St. John has made him a
present of fifty guineas to bear his charges.  An't I a good friend?  Why are
not you a young fellow, that I might prefer you?  I had a letter from Bernage
from Kinsale:  he tells me his commission for captain-lieutenant was ready for
him at his arrival:  so there are two jackanapeses I have done with.  My head
is something better this evening, though not well.

20.  I was this morning with Mr. Secretary, whose packets were just come in,
and among them a letter from Lord Peterborow to me:  he writes so well, I have
no mind to answer him, and so kind, that I must answer him.  The Emperor's[4]
death must, I think, cause great alterations in Europe, and, I believe, will
hasten a peace.  We reckon our King Charles will be chosen Emperor, and the
Duke of Savoy set up for Spain; but I believe he will make nothing of it.  Dr.
Freind and I dined in the City at a printer's, and it has cost me two
shillings in coach-hire, and a great deal more this week and month, which has
been almost all rain, with now and then sunshine, and is the truest April that
I have known these many years.  The lime-trees in the Park are all out in
leaves, though not large leaves yet.  Wise people are going into the country;
but many think the Parliament can hardly be up these six weeks.  Mr. Harley
was with the Queen on Tuesday.  I believe certainly he will be Lord Treasurer:
I have not seen him this week.

21.  Morning.  Lord Keeper, and I, and Prior, and Sir Thomas Mansel, have
appointed to dine this day with George Granville.  My head, I thank God, is
better; but to be giddyish three or four days together mortified me.  I take
no snuff, and I will be very regular in eating little and the gentlest meats.
How does poor Stella just now, with her deans and her Stoytes?  Do they give
you health for the money you lose at ombre, sirrah?  What say you to that?
Poor Dingley frets to see Stella lose that four and elevenpence, the other
night.  Let us rise.  Morrow, sirrahs.  I will rise, spite of your little
teeth; good-morrow.--At night.  O, faith, you are little dear saucyboxes.  I
was just going in the morning to tell you that I began to want a letter from
MD, and in four minutes after Mr. Ford sends me one that he had picked up at
St. James's Coffee-house; for I go to no coffee-house at all.  And, faith, I
was glad at heart to see it, and to see Stella so brisk.  O Lord, what
pretending?  Well, but I will not answer it yet; I'll keep it for t'other
side.  Well, we dined to-day according to appointment:  Lord Keeper went away
at near eight, I at eight, and I believe the rest will be fairly fuddled; for
young Harcourt,[5] Lord Keeper's son, began to prattle before I came away.  It
will not do with Prior's lean carcass.  I drink little, miss my glass often,
put water in my wine, and go away before the rest, which I take to be a good
receipt for sobriety.  Let us put it into rhyme, and so make a proverb--

     Drink little at a time;
     Put water with your wine;
     Miss your glass when you can;
     And go off the first man.

God be thanked, I am much better than I was, though something of a totterer.
I ate but little to-day, and of the gentlest meat.  I refused ham and pigeons,
pease-soup, stewed beef, cold salmon, because they were too strong.  I take no
snuff at all, but some herb snuff prescribed by Dr. Radcliffe.

     Go to your deans,
     You couple of queans.

I believe I said that already.  What care I?  what cares Presto?

22.  Morning.  I must rise and go to the Secretary's.  Mr. Harley has been out
of town this week to refresh himself before he comes into Parliament.  Oh, but
I must rise, so there is no more to be said; and so morrow, sirrahs both.--
Night.  I dined to-day with the Secretary, who has engaged me for every
Sunday; and I was an hour with him this morning deep in politics, where I told
him the objections of the October Club, and he answered all except one, that
no inquiries are made into past mismanagement.  But indeed I believe they are
not yet able to make any:  the late Ministry were too cunning in their
rogueries, and fenced themselves with an Act of general pardon.  I believe Mr.
Harley must be Lord Treasurer; yet he makes one difficulty which is hard to
answer:  he must be made a lord, and his estate is not large enough, and he is
too generous to make it larger; and if the Ministry should change soon by any
accident, he will be left in the suds.  Another difficulty is, that if he be
made a peer, they will want him prodigiously in the House of Commons, of which
he is the great mover, and after him the Secretary, and hardly any else of
weight.  Two shillings more to-day for coach and chair.  I shall be ruined.

23.  So you expect an answer to your letter, do you so?  Yes, yes, you shall
have an answer, you shall, young women.  I made a good pun on Saturday to my
Lord Keeper.  After dinner we had coarse Doiley napkins,[6] fringed at each
end, upon the table, to drink with:  my Lord Keeper spread one of them between
him and Mr. Prior; I told him I was glad to see there was such a fringeship
[friendship] between Mr. Prior and his lordship.  Prior swore it was the worst
he ever heard:  I said I thought so too; but at the same time I thought it was
most like one of Stella's that ever I heard.  I dined to-day with Lord
Mountjoy, and this evening saw the Venetian Ambassador[7] coming from his
first public audience.  His coach was the most monstrous, huge, fine, rich
gilt thing that ever I saw.  I loitered this evening, and came home late.

24.  I was this morning to visit the Duchess of Ormond,[8] who has long
desired it, or threatened she would not let me visit her daughters.  I sat an
hour with her, and we were good company, when in came the Countess of
Bellamont,[9] with a pox.  I went out, and we did not know one another; yet
hearing me named, she asked, "What, is that Dr. Swift?" said she and I were
very well acquainted, and fell a railing at me without mercy, as a lady told
me that was there; yet I never was but once in the company of that drab of a
Countess.  Sir Andrew Fountaine and I dined with my neighbour Van.  I design
in two days, if possible, to go lodge at Chelsea for the air, and put myself
under a necessity of walking to and from London every day.  I writ this post
to the Bishop of Clogher a long politic letter, to entertain him.  I am to buy
statues and harnese[10] for them, with a vengeance.  I have packed and sealed
up MD's twelve letters against I go to Chelsea.  I have put the last
commissions of MD in my account-book; but if there be any former ones, I have
forgot them.  I have Dingley's pocket-book down, and Stella's green silk
apron, and the pound of tea; pray send me word if you have any other, and down
they shall go.  I will not answer your letter yet, saucy boxes.  You are with
the Dean just now, Madam Stella, losing your money.  Why do not you name what
number you have received?  You say you have received my letters, but do not
tell the number.

25.  I was this day dining in the City with very insignificant, low, and
scurvy company.  I had a letter from the Archbishop of Dublin, with a long
denial of the report raised on him,[11] which yet has been since assured to me
from those who say they have it from the first hand; but I cannot believe
them.  I will show it to the Secretary to-morrow.  I will not answer yours
till I get to Chelsea.

26.  Chelsea.  I have sent two boxes of lumber to my friend Darteneuf's house,
and my chest of Florence and other things to Mrs. Vanhomrigb, where I dined
to-day.  I was this morning with the Secretary, and showed him the
Archbishop's letter, and convinced him of his Grace's innocence, and I will do
the same to Mr. Harley.  I got here in the stage-coach with Patrick and my
portmanteau for sixpence, and pay six shillings a week for one silly room with
confounded coarse sheets.[12]  We have had such a horrible deal of rain, that
there is no walking to London, and I must go as I came until it mends; and
besides the whelp has taken my lodging as far from London as this town could
afford, at least half a mile farther than he need; but I must be content.  The
best is, I lodge just over against Dr. Atterbury's house, and yet perhaps I
shall not like the place the better for that.  Well, I will stay till to-
morrow before I answer your letter; and you must suppose me always writing at
Chelsea from henceforward, till I alter, and say London.  This letter goes on
Saturday, which will be just a fortnight; so go and cheat Goody Stoyte, etc.

27.  Do you know that I fear my whole chest of Florence is turned sour, at
least the two first flasks were so, and hardly drinkable.  How plaguy
unfortunate am I! and the Secretary's own is the best I ever tasted; and I
must not tell him, but be as thankful as if it were the best in Christendom.
I went to town in the sixpenny stage to-day; and hearing Mr. Harley was not at
home, I went to see him, because I knew by the message of his lying porter
that he was at home.  He was very well, and just going out, but made me
promise to dine with him; and betwixt that and indeed strolling about, I lost
four pound seven shillings at play--with a--a--a--bookseller, and got but
about half a dozen books.[13]  I will buy no more books now, that's certain.
Well, I dined at Mr. Harley's, came away at six, shifted my gown, cassock, and
periwig, and walked hither to Chelsea, as I always design to do when it is
fair.  I am heartily sorry to find my friend the Secretary stand a little
ticklish with the rest of the Ministry; there have been one or two disobliging
things that have happened, too long to tell:  and t'other day in Parliament,
upon a debate of about thirty-five millions that have not been duly accounted
for, Mr. Secretary, in his warmth of speech, and zeal for his friend Mr.
Brydges,[14] on whom part of the blame was falling, said he did not know that
either Mr. Brydges or the late Ministry were at all to blame in this matter;
which was very desperately spoken, and giving up the whole cause:  for the
chief quarrel against the late Ministry was the ill management of the
treasure, and was more than all the rest together.  I had heard of this
matter:  but Mr. Foley[15] beginning to discourse to-day at table, without
naming Mr. St. John, I turned to Mr. Harley, and said if the late Ministry
were not to blame in that article, he (Mr. Harley) ought to lose his head for
putting the Queen upon changing them.  He made it a jest; but by some words
dropped, I easily saw that they take things ill of Mr. St. John; and by some
hints given me from another hand that I deal with, I am afraid the Secretary
will not stand long.  This is the fate of Courts.  I will, if I meet Mr. St.
John alone on Sunday, tell him my opinion, and beg him to set himself right,
else the consequences may be very bad; for I see not how they can well want
him neither, and he would make a troublesome enemy.  But enough of politics.

28.  Morning.  I forgot to tell you that Mr. Harley asked me yesterday how he
came to disoblige the Archbishop of Dublin.  Upon which (having not his letter
about me) I told him what the Bishop had written to me on that subject,[16]
and desired I might read him the letter some other time.  But after all, from
what I have heard from other hands, I am afraid the Archbishop is a little
guilty.  Here is one Brent Spencer, a brother of Mr. Proby's,[17] who affirms
it, and says he has leave to do so from Charles Dering,[18] who heard the
words; and that Ingoldsby,[19] abused the Archbishop, etc.  Well, but now for
your saucy letter:  I have no room to answer it; O yes, enough on t'other
side.  Are you no sicker?  Stella jeers Presto for not coming over by
Christmas; but indeed Stella does not jeer, but reproach, poor poor Presto.
And how can I come away and the First-Fruits not finished?  I am of opinion
the Duke of Ormond will do nothing in them before he goes, which will be in a
fortnight, they say; and then they must fall to me to be done in his absence.
No, indeed, I have nothing to print:  you know they have printed the
Miscellanies[20] already.  Are they on your side yet?  If you have my snuff
box, I will have your strong box.  Hi, does Stella take snuff again? or is it
only because it is a fine box?  Not the Meddle, but the Medley,[21] you fool.
Yes, yes, a wretched thing, because it is against you Tories:  now I think it
very fine, and the Examiner a wretched thing.--Twist your mouth, sirrah.
Guiscard, and what you will read in the Narrative,[22] I ordered to be
written, and nothing else.  The Spectator is written by Steele, with Addison's
help:  it is often very pretty.  Yesterday it was made of a noble hint I gave
him long ago for his Tatlers, about an Indian supposed to write his Travels
into England.[23]  I repent he ever had it.  I intended to have written a book
on that subject.  I believe he has spent it all in one paper, and all the
under-hints there are mine too; but I never see him or Addison.  The Queen is
well, but I fear will be no long liver; for I am told she has sometimes the
gout in her bowels (I hate the word bowels).  My ears have been, these three
months past, much better than any time these two years; but now they begin to
be a little out of order again.  My head is better, though not right; but I
trust to air and walking.  You have got my letter, but what number?  I suppose
18.  Well, my shin has been well this month.  No, Mrs. Westley[24] came away
without her husband's knowledge, while she was in the country:  she has
written to me for some tea.  They lie; Mr. Harley's wound was very terrible:
he had convulsions, and very narrowly escaped.  The bruise was nine times
worse than the wound:  he is weak still.  Well, Brooks married; I know all
that.  I am sorry for Mrs. Walls's eye:  I hope 'tis better.  O yes, you are
great walkers:  but I have heard them say, "Much talkers, little walkers":
and I believe I may apply the old proverb to you--

     If you talked no more than you walked,
     Those that think you wits would be baulked.

Yes, Stella shall have a large printed Bible:  I have put it down among my
commissions for MD.  I am glad to hear you have taken the fancy of intending
to read the Bible.  Pox take the box; is not it come yet?  This is trusting to
your young fellows, young women; 'tis your fault:  I thought you had such
power with Sterne that he would fly over Mount Atlas to serve you.  You say
you are not splenetic; but if you be, faith, you will break poor Presto's--I
will not say the rest; but I vow to God, if I could decently come over now, I
would, and leave all schemes of politics and ambition for ever.  I have not
the opportunities here of preserving my health by riding, etc., that I have in
Ireland; and the want of health is a great cooler of making one's court.  You
guess right about my being bit with a direction from Walls, and the letter
from MD:  I believe I described it in one of my last.  This goes to-night; and
I must now rise and walk to town, and walk back in the evening.  God Almighty
bless and preserve poor MD.  Farewell.

O, faith, don't think, saucy noses, that I'll fill this third side:  I can't
stay a letter above a fortnight:  it must go then; and you would rather see a
short one like this, than want it a week longer.

My humble service to the Dean, and Mrs. Walls, and good, kind, hearty Mrs.
Stoyte, and honest Catherine.


LETTER 22.

CHELSEA, April 28, 1711.

At night.  I say at night, because I finished my twenty-first this morning
here, and put it into the post-office my own self, like a good boy.  I think I
am a little before you now, young women:  I am writing my twenty-second, and
have received your thirteenth.  I got to town between twelve and one, and put
on my new gown and periwig, and dined with Lord Abercorn, where I had not been
since the marriage of his son Lord Peasley,[1] who has got ten thousand pounds
with a wife.  I am now a country gentleman.  I walked home as I went, and am a
little weary, and am got into bed:  I hope in God the air and exercise will do
me a little good.  I have been inquiring about statues for Mrs. Ashe:  I made
Lady Abercorn[2] go with me; and will send them word next post to Clogher.  I
hate to buy for her:  I am sure she will maunder.  I am going to study.

29.  I had a charming walk to and from town to-day:  I washed, shaved and all,
and changed gown and periwig, by half an hour after nine, and went to the
Secretary, who told me how he had differed with his friends in Parliament:  I
apprehended this division, and told him a great deal of it.  I went to Court,
and there several mentioned it to me as what they much disliked.  I dined with
the Secretary; and we proposed doing some business of importance in the
afternoon, which he broke to me first, and said how he and Mr. Harley were
convinced of the necessity of it; yet he suffered one of his under-secretaries
to come upon us after dinner, who stayed till six, and so nothing was done:
and what care I? he shall send to me the next time, and ask twice.  To-morrow
I go to the election at Westminster School, where lads are chosen for the
University:  they say it is a sight, and a great trial of wits.  Our
Expedition Fleet is but just sailed:  I believe it will come to nothing.  Mr.
Secretary frets at their tediousness, but hopes great things from it, though
he owns four or five princes are in the secret; and, for that reason, I fear
it is no secret to France.  There are eight regiments; and the Admiral[3] is
your Walker's brother the midwife.

30.  Morn.  I am here in a pretty pickle:  it rains hard; and the cunning
natives of Chelsea have outwitted me, and taken up all the three stage
coaches.  What shall I do?  I must go to town:  this is your fault.  I cannot
walk:  I will borrow a coat.  This is the blind side of my lodging out of
town; I must expect such inconveniences as these.  Faith, I'll walk in the
rain.  Morrow.--At night.  I got a gentleman's chaise by chance, and so went
to town for a shilling, and lie this night in town.  I was at the election of
lads at Westminster to-day, and a very silly thing it is; but they say there
will be fine doings to-morrow.  I dined with Dr. Freind,[4] the second master
of the school, with a dozen parsons and others:  Prior would make me stay.
Mr. Harley is to hear the election to-morrow; and we are all to dine with
tickets, and hear fine speeches.  'Tis terrible rainy weather again:  I lie at
a friend's in the City.

May 1.  I wish you a merry May Day, and a thousand more.  I was baulked at
Westminster; I came too late:  I heard no speeches nor verses.  They would not
let me in to their dining-place for want of a ticket; and I would not send in
for one, because Mr. Harley excused his coming, and Atterbury was not there;
and I cared not for the rest:  and so my friend Lewis and I dined with Kitt
Musgrave,[5] if you know such a man:  and, the weather mending, I walked
gravely home this evening; and so I design to walk and walk till I am well:  I
fancy myself a little better already.  How does poor Stella?  Dingley is well
enough.  Go, get you gone, naughty girl, you are well enough.  O dear MD,
contrive to have some share of the country this spring:  go to Finglas, or
Donnybrook, or Clogher, or Killala, or Lowth.  Have you got your box yet?
Yes, yes.  Do not write to me again till this letter goes:  I must make haste,
that I may write two for one.  Go to the Bath:  I hope you are now at the
Bath, if you had a mind to go; or go to Wexford:  do something for your
living.  Have you given up my lodging, according to order?  I have had just
now a compliment from Dean Atterbury's lady,[6] to command the garden and
library, and whatever the house affords.  I lodge just over against them; but
the Dean is in town with his Convocation:  so I have my Dean and Prolocutor as
well as you, young women, though he has not so good wine, nor so much meat.

2.  A fine day, but begins to grow a little warm; and that makes your little
fat Presto sweat in the forehead.  Pray, are not the fine buns sold here in
our town; was it not Rrrrrrrrrare Chelsea buns?[7]  I bought one to-day in my
walk; it cost me a penny; it was stale, and I did not like it, as the man
said, etc.  Sir Andrew Fountaine and I dined at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's, and had a
flask of my Florence, which lies in their cellar; and so I came home gravely,
and saw nobody of consequence to-day.  I am very easy here, nobody plaguing me
in a morning; and Patrick saves many a score lies.  I sent over to Mrs
Atterbury to know whether I might wait on her; but she is gone a visiting:  we
have exchanged some compliments, but I have not seen her yet.  We have no news
in our town.

3.  I did not go to town to-day, it was so terrible rainy; nor have I stirred
out of my room till eight this evening, when I crossed the way to see Mrs.
Atterbury, and thank her for her civilities.  She would needs send me some
veal, and small beer, and ale, to-day at dinner; and I have lived a scurvy,
dull, splenetic day, for want of MD:  I often thought how happy I could have
been, had it rained eight thousand times more, if MD had been with a body.  My
Lord Rochester[8] is dead this morning; they say at one o'clock; and I hear he
died suddenly.  To-morrow I shall know more.  He is a great loss to us:  I
cannot think who will succeed him as Lord President.  I have been writing a
long letter to Lord Peterborow, and am dull.

4.  I dined to-day at Lord Shelburne's, where Lady Kerry[9] made me a present
of four India handkerchiefs, which I have a mind to keep for little MD, only
that I had rather, etc.  I have been a mighty handkerchief-monger, and have
bought abundance of snuff ones since I have left off taking snuff.  And I am
resolved, when I come over, MD shall be acquainted with Lady Kerry:  we have
struck up a mighty friendship; and she has much better sense than any other
lady of your country.  We are almost in love with one another:  but she is
most egregiously ugly; but perfectly well-bred, and governable as I please.  I
am resolved, when I come, to keep no company but MD:  you know I kept my
resolution last time; and, except Mr. Addison, conversed with none but you and
your club of deans and Stoytes.  'Tis three weeks, young women, since I had a
letter from you; and yet, methinks, I would not have another for five pounds
till this is gone; and yet I send every day to the Coffee-house, and I would
fain have a letter, and not have a letter:  and I do not know what, nor I do
not know how, and this goes on very slow; it is a week to-morrow since I began
it.  I am a poor country gentleman, and do not know how the world passes.  Do
you know that every syllable I write I hold my lips just for all the world as
if I were talking in our own little language to MD?  Faith, I am very silly;
but I cannot help it for my life.  I got home early to-night.  My solicitors,
that used to ply me every morning, knew not where to find me; and I am so
happy not to hear "Patrick, Patrick," called a hundred times every morning.
But I looked backward, and find I have said this before.  What care I?  Go to
the Dean, and roast the oranges.

5.  I dined to-day with my friend Lewis, and we were deep in politics how to
save the present Ministry; for I am afraid of Mr. Secretary, as I believe I
told you.  I went in the evening to see Mr. Harley; and, upon my word, I was
in perfect joy.  Mr. Secretary was just going out of the door; but I made him
come back, and there was the old Saturday Club, Lord Keeper, Lord Rivers, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Harley, and I; the first time since his stabbing.  Mr.
Secretary went away; but I stayed till nine, and made Mr. Harley show me his
breast, and tell all the story; and I showed him the Archbishop of Dublin's
letter, and defended him effectually.  We were all in mighty good humour.
Lord Keeper and I left them together, and I walked here after nine two miles,
and I found a parson drunk fighting with a seaman, and Patrick and I were so
wise to part them, but the seaman followed him to Chelsea, cursing at him, and
the parson slipped into a house, and I know no more.  It mortified me to see a
man in my coat so overtaken.  A pretty scene for one that just came from
sitting with the Prime Ministers!  I had no money in my pocket, and so could
not be robbed.  However, nothing but Mr. Harley shall make me take such a
journey again.  We don't yet know who will be President in Lord Rochester's
room.  I measured, and found that the penknife would have killed Mr. Harley if
it had gone but half the breadth of my thumb-nail lower, so near was he to
death.  I was so curious as to ask him what were his thoughts while they were
carrying him home in the chair.  He said he concluded himself a dead man.  He
will not allow that Guiscard gave him the second stab; though my Lord Keeper,
who is blind, and I that was not there, are positive in it.  He wears a
plaster still as broad as half a crown.  Smoke how wide the lines are, but,
faith, I don't do it on purpose:  but I have changed my side in this new
Chelsea bed, and I do not know how, methinks, but it is so unfit, and so
awkward, never saw the like.

6.  You must remember to enclose your letters in a fair paper, and direct the
outside thus:  "To Erasmus Lewis, Esq.; at my Lord Dartmouth's office at
Whitehall."  I said so before, but it may miscarry, you know, yet I think none
of my letters did ever miscarry; faith, I think never one; among all the
privateers and the storms.  O, faith, my letters are too good to be lost.
MD's letters may tarry, but never miscarry, as the old woman used to say.  And
indeed, how should they miscarry, when they never come before their time?  It
was a terrible rainy day; yet I made a shift to steal fair weather overhead
enough to go and come in.  I was early with the Secretary, and dined with him
afterwards.  In the morning I began to chide him, and tell him my fears of his
proceedings.  But Arthur Moore[10] came up and relieved him.  But I forgot,
for you never heard of Arthur Moore.  But when I get Mr. Harley alone, I will
know the bottom.  You will have Dr. Raymond over before this letter, and what
care you?

7.  I hope and believe my walks every day do me good.  I was busy at home, and
set out late this morning, and dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, at whose lodgings I
always change my gown and periwig.  I visited this afternoon, and among
others, poor Biddy Floyd,[11] who is very red, but I believe won't be much
marked.  As I was coming home, I met Sir George Beaumont[12] in the Pall Mall,
who would needs walk with me as far as Buckingham House.  I was telling him of
my head; he said he had been ill of the same disorder, and by all means forbid
me bohea tea, which, he said, always gave it him; and that Dr. Radcliffe said
it was very bad.  Now I had observed the same thing, and have left it off this
month, having found myself ill after it several times; and I mention it that
Stella may consider it for her own poor little head:  a pound lies ready
packed up and directed for Mrs. Walls, to be sent by the first convenience.
Mr. Secretary told me yesterday that Mr. Harley would this week be Lord
Treasurer and a peer; so I expect it every day; yet perhaps it may not be till
Parliament is up, which will be in a fortnight.

8.  I was to-day with the Duke of Ormond, and recommended to him the care of
poor Joe Beaumont, who promises me to do him all justice and favour, and give
him encouragement; and desired I would give a memorial to Ned Southwell about
it, which I will, and so tell Joe when you see him, though he knows it already
by a letter I writ to Mr. Warburton.[13]  It was bloody hot walking to-day.  I
dined in the City, and went and came by water; and it rained so this evening
again, that I thought I should hardly be able to get a dry hour to walk home
in.  I will send to-morrow to the Coffee-house for a letter from MD; but I
would not have one methinks till this is gone, as it shall on Saturday.  I
visited the Duchess of Ormond this morning; she does not go over with the
Duke.  I spoke to her to get a lad touched for the evil,[14] the son of a
grocer in Capel Street, one Bell; the ladies have bought sugar and plums of
him.  Mrs. Mary used to go there often.  This is Patrick's account; and the
poor fellow has been here some months with his boy.  But the Queen has not
been able to touch, and it now grows so warm, I fear she will not at all.  Go,
go, go to the Dean's, and let him carry you to Donnybrook, and cut asparagus.
Has Parvisol sent you any this year?  I cannot sleep in the beginnings of the
nights, the heat or something hinders me, and I am drowsy in the mornings.

9.  Dr. Freind came this morning to visit Atterbury's lady and children as
physician, and persuaded me to go with him to town in his chariot.  He told me
he had been an hour before with Sir Cholmley Dering, Charles Dering's nephew,
and head of that family in Kent, for which he is Knight of the shire.  He said
he left him dying of a pistol-shot quite through the body, by one Mr.
Thornhill.[15]  They fought at sword and pistol this morning in Tuttle
Fields,[16] their pistols so near that the muzzles touched.  Thornhill
discharged first; and Dering, having received the shot, discharged his pistol
as he was falling, so it went into the air.  The story of this quarrel is
long.  Thornhill had lost seven teeth by a kick in the mouth from Dering, who
had first knocked him down; this was above a fortnight ago.  Dering was next
week to be married to a fine young lady.  This makes a noise here, but you
will not value it.  Well, Mr. Harley, Lord Keeper, and one or two more, are to
be made lords immediately; their patents are now passing, and I read the
preamble to Mr. Harley's, full of his praises.  Lewis and I dined with Ford:
I found the wine; two flasks of my Florence, and two bottles of six that Dr.
Raymond sent me of French wine; he sent it to me to drink with Sir Robert
Raymond and Mr. Harley's brother,[17] whom I had introduced him to; but they
never could find time to come; and now I have left the town, and it is too
late.  Raymond will think it a cheat.  What care I, sirrah?

10.  Pshaw, pshaw.  Patrick brought me four letters to-day:  from Dilly at
Bath; Joe; Parvisol; and what was the fourth, who can tell?  Stand away,
who'll guess?  Who can it be?  You old man with a stick, can you tell who the
fourth is from?  Iss, an please your honour, it is from one Madam MD, Number
Fourteen.  Well; but I can't send this away now, because it was here, and I
was in town; but it shall go on Saturday, and this is Thursday night, and it
will be time enough for Wexford.  Take my method:  I write here to Parvisol to
lend Stella twenty pounds, and to take her note promissory to pay it in half a
year, etc.  You shall see, and if you want more, let me know afterwards; and
be sure my money shall be always paid constantly too.  Have you been good or
ill housewives, pray?

11.  Joe has written me to get him a collector's place, nothing less; he says
all the world knows of my great intimacy with Mr. Harley, and that the
smallest word to him will do.  This is the constant cant of puppies who are at
a distance, and strangers to Courts and Ministers.  My answer is this, which
pray send:  that I am ready to serve Joe as far as I can; that I have spoken
to the Duke of Ormond about his money, as I writ to Warburton; that for the
particular he mentions, it is a work of time, which I cannot think of at
present; but, if accidents and opportunities should happen hereafter, I would
not be wanting; that I know best how far my credit goes; that he is at a
distance, and cannot judge; that I would be glad to do him good, and if
fortune throws an opportunity in my way I shall not be wanting.  This is my
answer, which you may send or read to him.  Pray contrive that Parvisol may
not run away with my two hundred pounds; but get Burton's[18] note, and let
the money be returned me by bill.  Don't laugh, for I will be suspiciou