and took her by the hand. 'I must tell you
something,' said she, 'only it must be a secret for awhile.'

'I will not repeat it.'

'Thank you, dear. I am engaged to him as his wife. He asked me this
very afternoon, and nobody knows it but my aunt. When I had accepted
him, he told me all the story about you. He had very often spoken of
you before, and I had guessed how it must have been. He wears his heart
so open for those whom he loves, that there is nothing concealed. He
had seen you just before he came to me. But perhaps I am wrong to tell
you that now. He ought to have been thinking of you again at such a
time.'

'I did not want him to think of me again.'

'Of course you did not. Of course I am joking. You might have been his
wife if you wished it. He has told me all that. And he especially wants
us to be friends. Is there anything to prevent it?'

'On my part? Oh, dear, no except that you will be such grand folk, and
we shall be so poor.'

'We!' said Caroline, laughing. 'I am so glad that there is a "we."'



CHAPTER LXXVII - THE FUTURE LADY PETERBOROUGH

'If you have not sold yourself for British gold, and for British acres,
and for British rank, I have nothing to say against it,' said Miss
Wallachia Petrie that same evening to her friend Caroline Spalding.

'You know that I have not sold myself, as you call it,' said Caroline.
There had been a long friendship between these two ladies, and the
younger one knew that it behoved her to bear a good deal from the
elder. Miss Petrie was honest, clever, and in earnest. We in England
are not usually favourably disposed to women who take a pride in a
certain antagonism to men in general, and who are anxious to shew the
world that they can get on very well without male assistance; but there
are many such in America who have noble aspirations, good intellects,
much energy, and who are by no means unworthy of friendship. The hope
in regard to all such women the hope entertained not by themselves, but
by those who are solicitous for them is that they will be cured at last
by a husband and half-a-dozen children. In regard to Wallachia Petrie
there was not, perhaps, much ground for such hope. She was so
positively wedded to women's rights in general, and to her own rights
in particular, that it was improbable that she should ever succumb to
any man and where would be the man brave enough to make the effort?
From circumstances Caroline Spalding had been the beloved of her heart
since Caroline Spalding was a very little girl; and she had hoped that
Caroline would through life have borne arms along with her in that
contest which she was determined to wage against man, and which she
always waged with the greatest animosity against men of the British
race. She hated rank; she hated riches; she hated monarchy and with a
true woman's instinct in battle, felt that she had a specially strong
point against Englishmen, in that they submitted themselves to dominion
from a woman monarch.

And now the chosen friend of her youth the friend who had copied out
all her poetry, who had learned by heart all her sonnets, who had, as
she thought, reciprocated all her ideas, was going to be married and to
be married to an English lord! She had seen that it was coming for some
time, and had spoken out very plainly, hoping that she might still save
the brand from the burning. Now the evil was done; and Caroline
Spalding, when she told her news, knew well that she would have to bear
some heavy reproaches.

'How many of us are there who never know whether we sell ourselves or
not?' said Wallachia. 'The senator who longs for office, and who votes
this way instead of that in order that he may get it, thinks that he is
voting honestly. The minister who calls himself a teacher of God's
word, thinks that it is God's word that he preaches when he strains his
lungs to fill his church. The question is this, Caroline would you have
loved the same man had he come to you with a woodman's axe in his hand
or a clerk's quill behind his ear? I guess not.'

'As to the woodman's axe, Wally, it is very well in theory; but--'

'Things good in theory, Caroline, will be good also when practised. You
may be sure of that. We dislike theory simply because our intelligences
are higher than our wills. But we will let that pass.'

'Pray let it pass, Wally. Do not preach me sermons tonight. I am so
happy, and you ought to wish me joy.'

'If wishing you joy would get you joy, I would wish it you while I
lived. I cannot be happy that you should be taken from us whither I
shall never see you again.'

'But you are to come to us. I have told him so, and it is settled.'

'No, dear; I shall not do that. What should I be in the glittering
halls of an English baron? Could there be any visiting less fitting,
any admixture less appropriate? Could I who have held up my voice in
the Music Hall of Lacedaemon amidst the glories of the West, in the
great and free State of Illinois, against the corruption of an English
aristocracy could I, who have been listened to by two thousand of my
countrywomen and men while I spurned the unmanly, inhuman errors of
primogeniture could I, think you, hold my tongue beneath the roof of a
feudal lord!' Caroline Spalding knew that her friend could not hold her
tongue, and hesitated to answer. There had been that fatal triumph of a
lecture on the joint rights of men and women, and it had rendered poor
Wallachia Petrie unfit for ordinary society.

'You might come there without talking politics, Wally,' said Caroline.

'No, Caroline; no. I will go into the house of no man in which the free
expression of my opinion is debarred me. I will not sit even at your
table with a muzzled tongue. When you are gone, Caroline, I shall
devote myself to what, after all, must be the work of my life, and I
shall finish the biographical history of our great hero in verse which
I hope may at least be not ephemeral. From month to month I shall send
you what I do, and you will not refuse me your friendly criticism and,
perhaps, some slight meed of approbation because you are dwelling
beneath the shade of a throne. Oh, Caroline, let it not be a upas
tree!'

The Miss Petries of the world have this advantage an advantage which
rarely if ever falls to the lot of a man that they are never convinced
of error. Men, let them be ever so much devoted to their closets, let
them keep their work ever so closely veiled from public scrutiny, still
find themselves subjected to criticism, and under the necessity of
either defending themselves or of succumbing. If, indeed, a man neither
speaks, nor writes if he be dumb as regards opinion he passes simply as
one of the crowd, and is in the way neither of convincing nor of being
convinced; but a woman may speak, and almost write, as she likes,
without danger of being wounded by sustained conflict. Who would have
the courage to begin with such a one as Miss Petrie, and endeavour to
prove to her that she is wrong from the beginning. A little word of
half-dissent, a smile, a shrug, and an ambiguous compliment which is
misunderstood, are all the forms of argument which can be used against
her. Wallachia Petrie, in her heart of hearts, conceived that she had
fairly discussed her great projects from year to year with indomitable
eloquence and unanswerable truth and that none of her opponents had had
a leg to stand upon. And this she believed because the chivalry of men
had given to her sex that protection against which her life was one
continued protest.

'Here he is,' said Caroline, as Mr Glascock came up to them. 'Try and
say a civil word to him, if he speaks about it. Though he is to be a
lord, still he is a man and a brother.'

'Caroline,' said the stern monitress, 'you are already learning to
laugh at principles which have been dear to you since you left your
mother's breast. Alas, how true it is, "You cannot touch pitch and not
be defiled."'

The further progress of these friendly and feminine amenities was
stopped by the presence of the gentleman who had occasioned them. 'Miss
Petrie,' said the hero of the hour, 'Caroline was to tell you of my
good fortune, and no doubt she has done so.'

'I cannot wait to hear the pretty things he has to say,' said Caroline,
'and I must look after my aunt's guests. There is poor Signor
Buonarosci without a soul to say a syllable to him, and I must go and
use my ten Italian words.'

'You are about to take with you to your old country, Mr Glascock,' said
Miss Petrie, 'one of the brightest stars in our young American
firmament.' There could be no doubt, from the tone of Miss Petrie's
voice, that she now regarded this star, however bright, as one of a
sort which is subjected to falling.

'I am going to take a very nice young woman,' said Mr Glascock.

'I hate that word woman, sir, uttered with the halfhidden sneer which
always accompanies its expression from the mouth of a man.'

'Sneer, Miss Petrie!'

'I quite allow that it is involuntary, and not analysed or understood
by yourselves. If you speak of a dog, you intend to do so with
affection, but there is always contempt mixed with it. The so-called
chivalry of man to woman is all begotten in the same spirit. I want no
favour, but I claim to be your equal.'

'I thought that American ladies were generally somewhat exacting as to
those privileges which chivalry gives them.'

'It is true, sir, that the only rank we know in our country is in that
precedence which man gives to woman. Whether we maintain that, or
whether we abandon it, we do not intend to purchase it at the price of
an acknowledgment of intellectual inferiority. For myself, I hate
chivalry what you call chivalry. I can carry my own chair, and I claim
the right to carry it whithersoever I may please.'

Mr Glascock remained with her for some time, but made no opportunity
for giving that invitation to Monkhams of which Caroline had spoken. As
he said afterwards, he found it impossible to expect her to attend to
any subject so trivial; and when, afterwards, Caroline told him, with
some slight mirth the capability of which on such a subject was coming
to her with her new ideas of life that, though he was partly saved as a
man and a brother, still he was partly the reverse as a feudal lord, he
began to reflect that Wallachia Petrie would be a guest with whom he
would find it very difficult to make things go pleasantly at Monkhams.

'Does she not bully you horribly?' he asked.

'Of course she bullies me,' Caroline answered; 'and I cannot expect you
to understand as yet how it is that I love her and like her; but I do.
If I were in distress tomorrow, she would give everything she has in
the world to put me right.'

'So would I,' said he.

'Ah, you that is a matter of course. That is your business now. And she
would give everything she has in the world to set the world right.
Would you do that?'

'It would depend on the amount of my faith. If I could believe in the
result, I suppose I should do it.'

'She would do it on the slightest hope that such giving would have any
tendency that way. Her philanthropy is all real. Of course she is a
bore to you.'

'I am very patient.'

'I hope I shall find you so always. And, of course, she is ridiculous
in your eyes. I have learned to see it, and to regret it; but I shall
never cease to love her.'

'I have not the slightest objection. Her lessons will come from over
the water, and mine will come from where shall I say? over the table.
If I can't talk her down with so much advantage on my side, I ought to
be made a woman's-right man myself.'

Poor Lady Rowley had watched Miss Petrie and Mr Glascock during those
moments that they had been together, and had half believed the rumour,
and had half doubted, thinking in the moments of her belief that Mr
Glascock must be mad, and in the moments of unbelief that the rumours
had been set afloat by the English Minister's wife with the express
intention of turning Mr Glascock into ridicule. It had never occurred
to her to doubt that Wallachia was the eldest of that family of nieces.
Could it be possible that a man who had known her Nora, who had
undoubtedly loved her Nora who had travelled all the way from London to
Nuncombe Putney to ask Nora to be his wife should within twelve months
of that time have resolved to marry a woman whom he must have selected
simply as being the most opposite to Nora of any female human being
that he could find? It was not credible to her; and if it were not
true, there might still be a hope. Nora had met him, and had spoken to
him, and it had seemed that for a moment or two they had spoken as
friends. Lady Rowley, when talking to Mrs Spalding, had watched them
closely; and she had seen that Nora's eyes had been bright, and that
there had been something between them which was pleasant. Suddenly she
found herself close to Wallachia, and thought that she would trust
herself to a word.

'Have you been long in Florence?' asked Lady Rowley in her softest
voice.

'A pretty considerable time, ma'am that is, since the fall began.'

What a voice what an accent and what words! Was there a man living with
sufficient courage to take this woman to England, and shew her to the
world as Lady Peterborough?

'Are you going to remain in Italy for the summer?' continued Lady
Rowley.

'I guess I shall or, perhaps, locate myself in the purer atmosphere of
the Swiss mountains.'

'Switzerland in summer must certainly be much pleasanter.'

'I was thinking at the moment of the political atmosphere,' said Miss
Petrie; 'for although, certainly, much has been done in this country in
the way of striking off shackles and treading sceptres under foot,
still, Lady Rowley, there remains here that pernicious thing a king.
The feeling of the dominion of a single man and that of a single woman
is, for aught I know, worse with me so clouds the air, that the breath
I breathe fails to fill my lungs.' Wallachia, as she said this, put
forth her hand, and raised her chin, and extended her arm. She paused,
feeling that justice demanded that Lady Rowley should have a right of
reply. But Lady Rowley had not a word to say, and Wallachia Petrie went
on. 'I cannot adapt my body to the sweet savours and the soft luxuries
of the outer world with any comfort to my inner self, while the
circumstances of the society around me are oppressive to my spirit.
When our war was raging all around me I was light-spirited as the lark
that mounts through the morning sky.'

'I should have thought it was very dreadful,' said Lady Rowley.

'Full of dread, of awe, and of horror, were those fiery days of
indiscriminate slaughter; but they were not days of desolation, because
hope was always there by our side. There was a hope in which the soul
could trust, and the trusting soul is ever light and buoyant.'

'I dare say it is,' said Lady Rowley.

'But apathy, and serfdom, and kinghood, and dominion, drain the
fountain of its living springs, and the soul becomes like the plummet
of lead, whose only tendency is to hide itself in subaqueous mud and
unsavoury slush.'

Subaqueous mud and unsavoury slush! Lady Rowley repeated the words to
herself as she made good her escape, and again expressed to herself her
conviction that it could not possibly be so. The 'subaqueous mud and
unsavoury slush,' with all that had gone before it about the soul, was
altogether unintelligible to her; but she knew that it was American
buncom of a high order of eloquence, and she told herself again and
again that it could not be so. She continued to keep her eyes upon Mr
Glascock, and soon saw him again talking to Nora. It was hardly
possible, she thought, that Nora should speak to him with so much
animation, or he to her, unless there was some feeling between them
which, if properly handled, might lead to a renewal of the old
tenderness. She went up to Nora, having collected the other girls, and
said that the carriage was then waiting for them. Mr Glascock
immediately offered Lady Rowley his arm, and took her down to the hall.
Could it be that she was leaning upon a future son-in-law? There was
something in the thought which made her lay her weight upon him with a
freedom which she would not otherwise have used. Oh! that her Nora
should live to be Lady Peterborough! We are apt to abuse mothers for
wanting high husbands for their daughters but can there be any point in
which the true maternal instinct can shew itself with more affectionate
enthusiasm? This poor mother wanted nothing for herself from Mr
Glascock. She knew very well that it was her fate to go back to the
Mandarins, and probably to die there. She knew also that such men as Mr
Glascock, when they marry beneath themselves in rank and fortune, will
not ordinarily trouble themselves much with their mothers-in-law. There
was nothing desired for herself. Were such a match accomplished, she
might, perhaps, indulge herself in talking among the planters' wives of
her daughter's coronet; but at the present moment there was no idea
even of this in her mind. It was of Nora herself, and of Nora's
sisters, that she was thinking for them that she was plotting that the
one might be rich and splendid, and the others have some path opened
for them to riches and splendour. Husband-hunting mothers may be
injudicious; but surely they are maternal and unselfish. Mr Glascock
put her into the carriage, and squeezed her hand and then he squeezed
Nora's hand. She saw it, and was sure of it. 'I am so glad you are
going to be happy,' Nora had said to him before this. 'As far as I have
seen her, I like her so much.' 'If you do not come and visit her in her
own house, I shall think you have no spirit of friendship,' he said. 'I
will,' Nora had replied 'I will.' This had been said just as Lady
Rowley was coming to them, and on this understanding, on this footing,
Mr Glascock had pressed her hand.

As she went home, Lady Rowley's mind was full of doubt as to the course
which it was best that she should follow with her daughter. She was not
unaware how great was the difficulty before her. Hugh Stanbury's name
had not been mentioned since they left London, but at that time Nora
was obstinately bent on throwing herself away upon the 'penny-a-liner.'
She had never been brought to acknowledge that such a marriage would be
even inappropriate, and had withstood gallantly the expression of her
father's displeasure. But with such a spirit as Nora's, it might be
easier to prevail by silence than by many words. Lady Rowley was quite
sure of this that it would be far better to say nothing further of Hugh
Stanbury. Let the cure come, if it might be possible, from absence and
from her daughter's good sense. The only question was whether it would
be wise to say any word about Mr Glascock. In the carriage she was not
only forbearing but flattering in her manner to Nora. She caressed her
girl's hand and spoke to her as mothers know how to speak when they
want to make much of their girls, and to have it understood that those
girls are behaving as girls should behave. There was to be nobody to
meet them tonight, as it had been arranged that Sir Marmaduke and Mrs
Trevelyan should sleep at Siena. Hardly a word had been spoken in the
carriage; but upstairs, in their drawing-room, there came a moment in
which Lucy and Sophie had left them, and Nora was alone with her
mother. Lady Rowley almost knew that it would be most prudent to be
silent but a word spoken in season how good it is! And the thing was so
near to her that she could not hold her peace. 'I must say, Nora,' she
began, 'that I do like your Mr Glascock.'

'He is not my Mr Glascock, mamma,' said Nora, smiling.

'You know what I mean, dear.' Lady Rowley had not intended to utter a
word that should appear like pressure on her daughter at this moment.
She had felt how imprudent it would be to do so. But now Nora seemed to
be leading the way herself to such discourse. 'Of course, he is not
your Mr Glascock. You cannot eat your cake and have it, nor can you
throw it away and have it.'

'I have thrown my cake away altogether, and certainly I cannot have
it.' She was still smiling as she spoke, and seemed to be quite merry
at the idea of regarding Mr Glascock as the cake which she had declined
to eat.

'I can see one thing quite plainly, dear.'

'What is that, mamma?'

'That in spite of what you have done, you can still have your cake
whenever you choose to take it.'

'Why, mamma, he is engaged to be married!'

'Mr Glascock?'

'Yes, Mr Glascock. It's quite settled. Is it not sad?'

'To whom is he engaged?' Lady Rowley's solemnity as she asked this
question was piteous to behold.

'To Miss Spalding Caroline Spalding.'

'The eldest of those nieces?'

'Yes the eldest.'

'I cannot believe it.'

'Mamma, they both told me so. I have sworn an eternal friendship with
her already.'

'I did not see you speaking to her.'

'But I did talk to her a great deal.'

'And he is really going to marry that dreadful woman?'

'Dreadful, mamma!'

'Perfectly awful! She talked to me in a way that I have read about in
books, but which I did not before believe to be possible. Do you mean
that he is going to be married to that hideous old maid that
bell-clapper?'

'Oh, mamma, what slander! I think her so pretty.'

'Pretty!'

'Very pretty. And, mamma, ought I not to be happy that he should have
been able to make himself so happy? It was quite, quite, quite
impossible that I should have been his wife. I have thought about it
ever so much, and I am so glad of it! I think she is just the girl that
is. fit for him.'

Lady Rowley took her candle and went to bed, professing to herself that
she could not understand it. But what did it signify? It was, at any
rate, certain now that the man had put himself out of Nora's reach, and
if he chose to marry a republican virago, with a red nose, it could now
make no difference to Nora. Lady Rowley almost felt a touch of
satisfaction in reflecting on the future misery of his married life.



CHAPTER LXXVIII - CASALUNGA

Sir Marmaduke had been told at the Florence post-office that he would
no doubt be able to hear tidings of Trevelyan, and to learn his
address, from the officials in the post-office at Siena. At Florence he
had been introduced to some gentleman who was certainly of importance a
superintendent who had clerks under him and who was a big man. This
person had been very courteous to him, and he had gone to Siena
thinking that he would find it easy to obtain Trevelyan's address or to
learn that there was no such person there. But at Siena he and his
courier together could obtain no information. They rambled about the
huge cathedral and the picturesque market-place of that quaint old city
for the whole day, and on the next morning after breakfast they
returned to Florence. They had learned nothing. The young man at the
post-office had simply protested that he knew nothing of the name of
Trevelyan. If letters should come addressed to such a name, he would
keep them till they were called for; but, to the best of his knowledge,
he had never seen or heard the name. At the guard-house of the
gendarmerie they could not, or would not, give him any information, and
Sir Marmaduke came back with an impression that everybody at Siena was
ignorant, idiotic, and brutal. Mrs Trevelyan was so dispirited as to be
ill, and both Sir Marmaduke and Lady Rowley were disposed to think that
the world was all against them. 'You have no conception of the sort of
woman that man is going to marry,' said Lady Rowley.

'What man?'

'Mr Glascock! A horrid American female, as old almost as I am, who
talks through her nose, and preaches sermons about the rights of women.
It is incredible! And Nora might have had him just for lifting up her
hand.' But Sir Marmaduke could not interest himself much about Mr
Glascock. When he had been told that his daughter had refused the heir
to a great estate and a peerage, it had been matter of regret; but he
had looked upon the affair as done, and cared nothing now though Mr
Glascock should marry a transatlantic Xantippe. He was angry with Nora
because by her obstinacy she was adding to the general perplexities of
the family, but he could not make comparisons on Mr Glascock's behalf
between her and Miss Spalding as his wife was doing, either mentally or
aloud, from hour to hour. 'I suppose it 'is too late now,' said Lady
Rowley, shaking her head.

'Of course it is too late. The man must marry whom he pleases. I am
beginning to wonder that anybody should ever want to get married. I am
indeed.'

'But what are the girls to do?'

'I don't know what anybody is to do. Here is a man as mad as a March
hare, and yet nobody can touch him. If it was not for the child, I
should advise Emily to put him out of her head altogether.'

But though Sir Marmaduke could not bring himself to take any interest
in Mr Glascock's affairs, and would not ask a single question
respecting the fearful American female whom this unfortunate man was
about to translate to the position of an English peeress, yet
circumstances so fell out that before three days were over he and Mr
Glascock were thrown together in very intimate relations. Sir Marmaduke
had learned that Mr Glascock was the only Englishman in Florence to
whom Trevelyan had been known, and that he was the only person with
whom Trevelyan had been seen to speak while passing through the city.
In his despair, therefore, Sir Marmaduke had gone to Mr Glascock, and
it was soon arranged that the two gentlemen should renew the search at
Siena together, without having with them either Mrs Trevelyan or the
courier. Mr Glascock knew the ways of the people better than did Sir
Marmaduke, and could speak the language. He obtained a passport to the
good offices of the police at Siena, and went prepared to demand rather
than to ask for assistance. They started very early, before breakfast,
and on arriving at Siena at about noon, first employed themselves in
recruiting exhausted nature. By the time that they had both declared
that the hotel at Siena was the very worst in all Italy, and that a
breakfast without eatable butter was not to be considered a breakfast
at all, they had become so intimate that Mr Glascock spoke of his own
intended marriage. He must have done this with the conviction on his
mind that Nora Rowley would have told her mother of his former
intention, and that Lady Rowley would have told Sir Marmaduke; but he
did not feel it to be incumbent on himself to say anything on that
subject. He had nothing to excuse. He had behaved fairly and
honourably. It was not to be expected that he should remain unmarried
for ever for the sake of a girl who had twice refused him. 'Of course
there are very many in England,' he said, 'who will think me foolish to
marry a girl from another country.'

'It is done every day,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'No doubt it is. I admit, however, that I ought to be more careful than
some other persons. There is a title and an estate to be perpetuated,
and I cannot, perhaps, be justified in taking quite so much liberty as
some other men may do; but I think I have chosen a woman born to have a
high position, and who will make her own way in any society in which
she may be placed.'

'I have no doubt she will,' said Sir Marmaduke, who had still sounding
in his ears the alarming description which his wife had given him of
this infatuated man's proposed bride. But he would have been bound to
say as much had Mr Glascock intended to marry as lowly as did King
Cophetua.

'She is highly educated, gentle-mannered, as sweetly soft as any
English girl I ever met, and very pretty. You have met her, I think.'

'I do not remember that I have observed her.'

'She is too young for me, perhaps,' said Mr Glascock; 'but that is a
fault on the right side.' Sir Marmaduke, as he wiped his beard after
his breakfast, remembered what his wife had told him about the lady's
age. But it was nothing to him.'she is four-and-twenty, I think,' said
Mr Glascock. If Mr Glascock chose to believe that his intended wife was
four-and-twenty instead of something over forty, that was nothing to
Sir Marmaduke.

'The very best age in the world,' said he.

They had sent for an officer of the police, and before they had been
three hours in Siena they had been told that Trevelyan lived about
seven miles from the town, in a small and very remote country house,
which he had hired for twelve months from one of the city hospitals. He
had hired it furnished, and had purchased a horse and small carriage
from a man in the town. To this man they went, and it soon became
evident to them that he of whom they were in search was living at this
house, which was called Casalunga, and was not, as the police officer
told them, on the way to any place. They must leave Siena by the road
for Rome, take a turn to the left about a mile beyond the city gate,
and continue on along the country lane till they saw a certain round
hill to the right. On the top of that round hill was Casalunga. As the
country about Siena all lies in round hills, this was no adequate
description but it was suggested that the country people would know all
about it. They got a small open carriage in the market-place, and were
driven out. Their driver knew nothing of Casalunga, and simply went
whither he was told. But by the aid of the country people they got
along over the unmade lanes, and in little more than an hour were told,
at the bottom of the hill, that they must now walk up to Casalunga.
Though the hill was round-topped, and no more than a hill, still the
ascent at last was very steep, and was paved with stones set edgeway in
a manner that could hardly have been intended to accommodate wheels.
When Mr Glascock asserted that the signor who lived there had a
carriage of his own, the driver suggested that he must keep it at the
bottom of the hill. It was clearly not his intention to attempt to
drive up the ascent, and Sir Marmaduke and Mr Glascock were therefore
obliged to walk. It was now in the latter half of May, and there was a
blazing Italian sky over their heads. Mr Glascock was acclimated to
Italian skies, and did not much mind the work; but Sir Marmaduke, who
never did much in walking, declared that Italy was infinitely hotter
than the Mandarins, and could hardly make his way as far as the house
door.

It seemed to both of them to be a most singular abode for such a man as
Trevelyan. At the top of the hill there was a huge entrance through a
wooden gateway, which seemed to have been constructed with the
intention of defying any intruders not provided with warlike
ammunition. The gates were, indeed, open at the period of their visit,
but it must be supposed that they were intended to be closed at any
rate at night. Immediately on the right, as they entered through the
gates, there was a large barn, in which two men were coopering wine
vats. From thence a path led slanting to the house, of which the door
was shut, and all the front windows blocked with shutters. The house
was very long, and only of one story for a portion of its length. Over
that end at which the door was placed there were upper rooms, and there
must have been space enough for a large family with many domestics.
There was nothing round or near the residence which could be called a
garden, so that its look of desolation was extreme. There were various
large barns and outhouses, as though it had been intended by the
builder that corn and hay and cattle should be kept there; but it
seemed now that there was nothing there except the empty vats at which
the two men were coopering. Had the Englishmen gone farther into the
granary, they would have seen that there were wine-presses stored away
in the dark corners.

They stopped and looked at the men, and the men halted for a moment
from their work and looked at them; but the men spoke never a word. Mr
Glascock then asked after Mr Trevelyan, and one of the coopers pointed
to the house. Then they crossed over to the door, and Mr Glascock
finding there neither knocker nor bell, first tapped with his knuckles,
and then struck with his stick. But no one came. There was not a sound
in the house, and no shutter was removed. 'I don't believe that there
is a soul here,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'We'll not give it up till we've seen it all at any rate,' said Mr
Glascock. And so they went round to the other front.

On this side of the house the tilled ground, either ploughed or dug
with the spade, came up to the very windows. There was hardly even a
particle of grass to be seen. A short way down the hill there were rows
of olive trees, standing in prim order and at regular distances, from
which hung the vines that made the coopering of the vats necessary.
Olives and vines have pretty names, and call up associations of
landscape beauty. But here they were in no way beautiful. The ground
beneath them was turned up, and brown, and arid, so that there was not
a blade of grass to be seen. On some furrows the maize or Indian corn
was sprouting, and there were patches of growth of other kinds each
patch closely marked by its own straight lines; and there were narrow
paths, so constructed as to take as little room as possible. But all
that had been done had been done for economy, and nothing for beauty.
The occupiers of Casalunga had thought more of the produce of their
land than of picturesque or attractive appearance.

The sun was blazing fiercely hot, hotter on this side, Sir Marmaduke
thought, even than on the other; and there was not a wavelet of a cloud
in the sky. A balcony ran the whole length of the house, and under this
Sir Marmaduke took shelter at once, leaning with his back against the
wall. 'There is not a soul here at all,' said he.

'The men in the barn told us that there was,' said Mr Glascock; 'and,
at any rate, we will try the windows.' So saying, he walked along the
front of the house, Sir Marmaduke following him slowly, till they came
to a door, the upper half of which was glazed, and through which they
looked into one of the rooms. Two or three of the other windows in this
frontage of the house came down to the ground, and were made for egress
and ingress; but they had all been closed with shutters, as though the
house was deserted. But they now looked into a room which contained
some signs of habitation. There was a small table with a marble top, on
which lay two or three books, and there were two arm-chairs in the
room, with gilded arms and legs, and a morsel of carpet, and a clock
on, a shelf over a stove, and a rocking-horse. 'The boy is here, you
may be sure,' said Mr Glascock. 'The rocking-horse makes that certain.
But how are we to get at any one!'

'I never saw such a place for an Englishman to come and live in
before,' said Sir Marmaduke. 'What on earth can he do here all day!' As
he spoke the door of the room was opened, and there was Trevelyan
standing before them, looking at them through the window. He wore an
old red English dressing-gown, which came down to his feet, and a small
braided Italian cap on his head. His beard had been allowed to grow,
and he had neither collar nor cravat. His trousers were unbraced, and
he shuffled in with a pair of slippers, which would hardly cling to his
feet. He was paler and still thinner than when he had been visited at
Willesden, and his eyes seemed to be larger, and shone almost with a
brighter brilliancy.

Mr Glascock tried to open the door, but found that it was closed.'sir
Marmaduke and I have come to visit you,' said Mr Glascock, aloud. 'Is
there any means by which we can get into the house?' Trevelyan stood
still and stared at them. 'We knocked at the front door, but nobody
came,' continued Mr Glascock. 'I suppose this is the way you usually go
in and out.'

'He does not mean to let us in,' whispered Sir Marmaduke.

'Can you open this door,' said Mr Glascock, 'or shall we go round
again?' Trevelyan had stood still contemplating them, but at last came
forward and put back the bolt. 'That is all right,' said Mr Glascock,
entering. 'I am sure you will be glad to see Sir Marmaduke.'

'I should be glad to see him or you, if I could entertain you,' said
Trevelyan. His voice was harsh and hard, and his words were uttered
with a certain amount of intended grandeur. 'Any of the family would be
welcome were it not--'

'Were it not what?' asked Mr Glascock.

'It can be nothing to you, sir, what troubles I have here. This is my
own abode, in which I had flattered myself that I could be free from
intruders. I do not want visitors. I am sorry that you should have had
trouble in coming here, but I do not want visitors. I am very sorry
that I have nothing that I can offer you, Mr Glascock.'

'Emily is in Florence,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'Who brought her? Did I tell her to come? Let her go back to her home.
I have come here to be free from her, and I mean to be free. If she
wants my money, let her take it.'

'She wants her child,' said Mr Glascock.

'He is my child,' said Trevelyan, 'and my right to him is better than
hers. Let her try it in a court of law, and she shall see. Why did she
deceive me with that man? Why has she driven me to this? Look here, Mr
Glascock my whole life is spent in this seclusion, and it is her
fault.'

'Your wife is innocent of all fault, Trevelyan,' said Mr Glascock.

'Any woman can say as much as that and all women do say it. Yet what
are they worth?'

'Do you mean, sir, to take away your wife's character?' said Sir
Marmaduke, coming up in wrath. 'Remember that she is my daughter, and
that there are things which flesh and blood cannot stand.'

'She is my wife, sir, and that is ten times more. Do you think that you
would do more for her than I would do drink more of Esill? You had
better go away, Sir Marmaduke. You can do no good by coming here and
talking of your daughter. I would have given the world to save her but
she would not be saved.'

'You are a slanderer!' said Sir Marmaduke, in his wrath.

Mr Glascock turned round to the father, and tried to quiet him. It was
so manifest to him that the balance of the poor man's mind was gone,
that it seemed to him to be ridiculous to upbraid the sufferer. He was
such a piteous sight to behold, that it was almost impossible to feel
indignation against him. 'You cannot wonder,' said Mr Glascock,
advancing close to the master of the house, 'that the mother should
want to see her only child. You do not wish that your wife should be
the most wretched woman in the world.'

'Am not I the most wretched of men? Can anything be more wretched than
this? Is her life worse than mine? And whose fault was it? Had I any
friend to whom she objected? Was I untrue to her in a single thought?'

'If you say that she was untrue, it is a falsehood,' said Sir
Marmaduke.

'You allow yourself a liberty of expression, sir, because you are my
wife's father,' said Trevelyan, 'which you would not dare to take in
other circumstances.'

'I say that it is a false calumny a lie! and I would say so to any man
on earth who should dare to slander my child's name.'

'Your child, sir! She is my wife my wife my wife!' Trevelyan, as he
spoke, advanced close up to his father-in-law; and at last hissed out
his words, with his lips close to Sir Marmaduke's face. 'Your right in
her is gone, sir. She is mine mine mine! And you see the way in which
she has treated me, Mr Glascock. Everything I had was hers; but the
words of a grey-haired sinner were sweeter to her than all my love. I
wonder whether you think that it is a pleasant thing for such a one as
I to come out here and live in such a place as this? I have not a
friend a companion hardly a book. There is nothing that I can eat or
drink! I do not stir out of the house and I am ill very ill! Look at
me. See what she has brought me to! Mr Glascock, on my honour as a man,
I never wronged her in a thought or a word.'

Mr Glascock had come to think that his best chance of doing any good
was to get Trevelyan into conversation with himself, free from the
interruption of Sir Marmaduke. The father of the injured woman could
not bring himself to endure the hard words that were spoken of his
daughter. During this last speech he had broken out once or twice; but
Trevelyan, not heeding him, had clung to Mr Glascock's arm.'sir
Marmaduke,' said he, 'would you not like to see the boy?'

'He shall not see the boy,' said Trevelyan. 'You may see him. He shall
not. What is he that he should have control over me?'

'This is the most fearful thing I ever heard of,' said Sir Marmaduke.
'What are we to do with him?'

Mr Glascock whispered a few words to Sir Marmaduke, and then declared
that he was ready to be taken to the child. 'And he will remain here?'
asked Trevelyan.. A pledge was then given by Sir Marmaduke that he
would not force his way farther into the house, and the two other men
left the chamber together. Sir Marmaduke, as he paced up and down the
room alone, perspiring at every pore, thoroughly uncomfortable and ill
at ease, thought of all the hard positions of which he had ever read,
and that his was harder than them all. Here was a man married to his
daughter, in possession of his daughter's child, manifestly mad and yet
he could do nothing to him! He was about to return to the seat of his
government, and he must leave his own child in this madman's power! Of
course, his daughter could not go with him, leaving her child in this
madman's hands. He had been told that even were he to attempt to prove
the man to be mad in Italy, the process would be slow; and, before it
could be well commenced, Trevelyan would be off with the child
elsewhere. There never was an embarrassment, thought Sir Marmaduke, out
of which it was so impossible to find a clear way.

In the meantime, Mr Glascock and Trevelyan were visiting the child. It
was evident that the father, let him be ever so mad, had discerned the
expediency of allowing some one to see that his son was alive and in
health. Mr Glascock did not know much of children, and could only say
afterwards that the boy was silent and very melancholy, but clean, and
apparently well. It appeared that he was taken out daily by his father
in the cool hours of the morning, and that his father hardly left him
from the time that he was taken up till he was put to bed. But Mr
Glascock's desire was to see Trevelyan alone, and this he did after
they had left the boy. 'And now, Trevelyan,' he said, 'what do you mean
to do?'

'To do?'

'In what way do you propose to live? I want you to be reasonable with
me.'

'They do not treat me reasonably.'

'Are you going to measure your own conduct by that of other people? In
the first place, you should go back to England. What good can you do
here?' Trevelyan shook his head, but remained silent. 'You cannot like
this life.'

'No, indeed. But whither can I go now that I shall like to live?'

'Why not home?'

'I have no home.'

'Why not go back to England? Ask your wife to join you, and return with
her. She would go at a word.' The poor wretch again shook his head. 'I
hope you think that I speak as your friend,' said Mr Glascock.

'I believe you do.'

'I will say nothing of any imprudence; but you cannot believe that she
has been untrue to you?' Trevelyan would say nothing to this, but stood
silent waiting for Mr Glascock to continue. 'Let her come back to you
here; and then, as soon as you can arrange it, go to your own home.'

'Shall I tell you something?' said Trevelyan.

'What is it?'

He came up close to Mr Glascock, and put his hand upon his visitor's
shoulder. 'I will tell you what she would do at once. I dare say that
she would come to me. I dare say that she would go with me. I am sure
she would. And directly she got me there, she would say that I was mad!
She my wife, would do it! He that furious, ignorant old man below,
tried to do it before. His wife said that I was mad.' He paused a
moment, as though waiting for a reply; but Mr Glascock had none to
make. It had not been his object, in the advice which he had given, to
entrap the poor fellow by a snare, and to induce him so to act that he
should deliver himself up to keepers; but he was well aware that
wherever Trevelyan might be, it would be desirable that he should be
placed for awhile in the charge of some physician. He could not bring
himself at the spur of the moment to repudiate the idea by which
Trevelyan was actuated. 'Perhaps you think that she would be right?'
said Trevelyan.

'I am quite sure that she would do nothing that is not for the best,'
said Mr Glascock.

'I can see it all. I will not go back to England, Mr Glascock. I intend
to travel. I shall probably leave this and go to to to Greece, perhaps.
It is a healthy place, this, and I like it for that reason; but I shall
not stay here. If my wife likes to travel with me, she can come. But to
England I will not go.'

'You will let the child go to his mother?'

'Certainly not. If she wants to see the child, he is here. If she will
come without her father she shall see him. She shall not take him from
hence. Nor shall she return to live with me, without full
acknowledgment of her fault, and promises of an amended life. I know
what I am saying, Mr Glascock, and have thought of these things perhaps
more than you have done. I am obliged to you for coming to me; but now,
if you please, I would prefer to be alone.'

Mr Glascock, seeing that nothing further could be done, joined Sir
Marmaduke, and the two walked down to their carriage at the bottom of
the hill. Mr Glascock, as he went, declared his conviction that the
unfortunate man was altogether mad, and that it would be necessary to
obtain some interference on the part of the authorities for the
protection of the child. How this could be done, or whether it could be
done in time to intercept a further flight on the part of Trevelyan, Mr
Glascock could not say. It was his idea that Mrs Trevelyan should
herself go out to Casalunga, and try the force of her own persuasion.

'I believe that he would murder her,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'He would not do that. There is a glimmer of sense in all his madness,
which will keep him from any actual violence.'



CHAPTER LXXIX - 'I CAN SLEEP ON THE BOARDS'

Three days after this there came another carriage to the bottom of the
hill on which Casalunga stood, and a lady got out of it all alone. It
was Emily Trevelyan, and she had come thither from Siena in quest of
her husband and her child. On the previous day Sir Marmaduke's courier
had been at the house with a note from the wife to the husband, and had
returned with an answer, in which Mrs Trevelyan was told that, if she
would come quite alone, she should see her child. Sir Marmaduke had
been averse to any further intercourse with the man, other than what
might be made in accordance with medical advice, and, if possible, with
government authority. Lady Rowley had assented to her daughter's wish,
but had suggested that she should at least be allowed to go also at any
rate, as far as the bottom of the hill. But Emily had been very firm,
and Mr Glascock had supported her. He was confident that the man would
do no harm to her, and he was indisposed to believe that any
interference on the part of the Italian Government could be procured in
such a case with sufficient celerity to be of use. He still thought it
might be possible that the wife might prevail over the husband, or the
mother over the father. Sir Marmaduke was at last obliged to yield, and
Mrs Trevelyan went to Siena with no other companion but the courier.
From Siena she made the journey quite alone; and having learned the
circumstances of the house from Mr Glascock, she got out of the
carriage, and walked up the hill. There were still the two men
coopering at the vats, but she did not stay to speak to them. She went
through the big gates, and along the slanting path to the door, not
doubting of her way for Mr Glascock had described it all to her, making
a small plan of the premises, and even explaining to her the position
of the room in which her boy and her husband slept. She found the door
open, and an Italian maid-servant at once welcomed her to the house,
and assured her that the signor would be with her immediately. She was
sure that the girl knew that she was the boy's mother, and was almost
tempted to ask questions at once as to the state of the household; but
her knowledge of Italian was slight, and she felt that she was so
utterly a stranger in the land that she could dare to trust no one.
Though the heat was great, her face was covered with a thick veil. Her
dress was black, from head to foot, and she was as a woman who mourned
for her husband. She was led into the room which her father had been
allowed to enter through the window; and here she sat, in her husband's
house, feeling that in no position in the world could she be more
utterly separated from the interests of all around her. In a few
minutes the door was opened, and her husband was with her, bringing the
boy in his hand. He had dressed himself with some care; but it may be
doubted whether the garments which he wore did not make him appear
thinner even and more haggard than he had looked to be in his old
dressing-gown. He had not shaved himself, but his long hair was brushed
back from his forehead, after a fashion quaint and very foreign to his
former ideas of dress. His wife had not expected that her child would
come to her at once had thought that some entreaties would be
necessary, some obedience perhaps exacted from her, before she would be
allowed to see him; and now her heart was softened, and she was
grateful to her husband. But she could not speak to him till she had
had the boy in her arms. She tore off her bonnet, and then clinging to
the child, covered him with kisses. 'Louey, my darling! Louey; you
remember mamma?' The child pressed himself close to his mother's bosom,
but spoke never a word. He was cowed and overcome, not only by the
incidents of the moment, but by the terrible melancholy of his whole
life. He had been taught to understand, without actual spoken lessons,
that he was to live with his father, and that the former woman-given
happinesses of his life were at an end. In this second visit from his
mother he did not forget her. He recognised the luxury of her love; but
it did not occur to him even to hope that she might have come to rescue
him from the evil of his days. Trevelyan was standing by, the while,
looking on; but he did not speak till she addressed him.

'I am so thankful to you for bringing him to me,' she said.

'I told you that you should see him,' he said. 'Perhaps it might have
been better that I should have sent him by a servant; but there are
circumstances which make me fear to let him out of my sight.'

'Do you think that I did not wish to see you also? Louis, why do you do
me so much wrong? Why do you treat me with such cruelty?' Then she
threw her arms round his neck, and before he could repulse her before
he could reflect whether it would be well that he should repulse her or
not she had covered his brow and cheeks and lips with kisses. 'Louis,'
she said; 'Louis, speak to me!'

'It is hard to speak sometimes,' he said.

'You love me, Louis?'

'Yes I love you. But I am afraid of you!'

'What is it that you fear? I would give my life for you, if you would
only come back to me and let me feel that you believed me to be true.'
He shook his head, and began to think while she still clung to him. He
was quite sure that her father and mother had intended to bring a mad
doctor down upon him, and he knew that his wife was in her mother's
hands. Should he yield to her now should he make her any promise might
not the result be that he would be shut up in dark rooms, robbed of his
liberty, robbed of what he loved better than his liberty his power as a
man. She would thus get the better of him and take the child, and the
world would say that in this contest between him and her he had been
the sinning one, and she the one against whom the sin had been done. It
was the chief object of his mind, the one thing for which he was eager,
that this should never come to pass. Let it once be conceded to him
from all sides that he had been right, and then she might do with him
almost as she willed. He knew well that he was ill. When he thought of
his child, he would tell himself that he was dying. He was at some
moments of his miserable existence fearfully anxious to come to terms
with his wife, in order that at his death his boy might not be without
a protector. Were he to die, then it would be better that his child
should be with its mother. In his happy days, immediately after his
marriage, he had made a will, in which he had left his entire property
to his wife for her life, providing for its subsequent descent to his
child or children. It had never even occurred to his poor shattered
brain that it would be well for him to alter his will. Had he really
believed that his wife had betrayed him, doubtless he would have done
so. He would have hated her, have distrusted her altogether, and have
believed her to be an evil thing. He had no such belief. But in his
desire to achieve empire, and in the sorrows which had come upon him in
his unsuccessful struggle, his mind had wavered so frequently, that his
spoken words were no true indicators of his thoughts; and in all his
arguments he failed to express either his convictions or his desires.
When he would say something stronger than he intended, and it would be
put to him by his wife, by her father or mother, or by some friend of
hers, whether he did believe that she had been untrue to him, he would
recoil from the answer which his heart would dictate, lest he should
seem to make an acknowledgment that might weaken the ground upon which
he stood. Then he would satisfy his own conscience by assuring himself
that he had never accused her of such sin. She was still clinging to
him now as his mind was working after this fashion. 'Louis,' she said,
'let it all be as though there had been nothing.'

'How can that be, my dear?'

'Not to others but to us it can be so. There shall be no word spoken of
the past.' Again he shook his head. 'Will it not be best that there
should be no word spoken?'

'"Forgiveness may be spoken with the tongue,"' he said, beginning to
quote from a poem which had formerly been frequent in his hands.

'Cannot there be real forgiveness between you and me between husband
and wife who, in truth, love each other? Do you think that I would tell
you of it again?' He felt that in all that she said there was an
assumption that she had been right, and that he had been wrong. She was
promising to forgive. She was undertaking to forget. She was willing to
take him back to the warmth of her love, and the comfort of her
kindness but was not asking to be taken back. This was what he could
not and would not endure. He had determined that if she behaved well to
him, he would not be harsh to her, and he was struggling to keep up to
his resolve. He would accuse her of nothing if he could help it. But he
could not say a word that would even imply that she need forget that
she should forgive. It was for him to forgive and he was willing to do
it, if she would accept forgiveness: 'I will never speak a word,
Louis,' she said, laying her head upon his shoulder.

'Your heart is still hardened,' he replied slowly.

'Hard to you?'

'And your mind is dark. You do not see what you have done. In our
religion, Emily, forgiveness is sure, not after penitence, but with
repentance.'

'What does that mean?'

'It means this, that though I would welcome you back to my arms with
joy, I cannot do so, till you have confessed your fault.'

'What fault, Louis? If I have made you unhappy, I do, indeed, grieve
that it has been so.'

'It is of no use,' said he. 'I cannot talk about it. Do you suppose
that it does not tear me to the very soul to think of it?'

'What is it that you think, Louis?' As she had been travelling thither,
she had determined that she would say anything that he wished her to
say make any admission that might satisfy him. That she could be happy
again as other women are happy, she did not expect; but if it could be
conceded between them that bygones should be bygones, she might live
with him and do her duty, and, at least, have her child with her.

Her father had told her that her husband was mad; but she was willing
to put up with his madness on such terms as these. What could her
husband do to her in his madness that he could not do also to the
child? 'Tell me what you want me to say, and I will say it,' she said.

'You have sinned against me,' he said, raising her head gently from his
shoulder.

'Never!' she exclaimed. 'As God is my judge, I never have!' As she said
this, she retreated and took the sobbing boy again into her arms.

He was at once placed upon his guard, telling himself that he saw the
necessity of holding by his child. How could he tell? Might there not
be policemen down from Florence, ready round the house, to seize the
boy and carry him away. Though all his remaining life should be a
torment to him, though infinite plagues should be poured upon his head,
though he should die like a dog, alone, unfriended, and in despair,
while he was fighting this battle of his, he would not give way. 'That
is sufficient,' he said. 'Louey must return now to his own chamber.'

'I may go with him?'

'No, Emily. You cannot go with him now. I will thank you to release
him, that I may take him.' She still held the little fellow closely
pressed in her arms. 'Do not reward me for my courtesy by further
disobedience,' he said.

'You will let me come again?' To this he made no reply. 'Tell me that I
may come again.'

'I do not think that I shall remain here long.'

'And I may not stay now?'

'That would be impossible. There is no accommodation for you.'

'I could sleep on the boards beside his cot,' said Mrs Trevelyan.

'That is my place,' he replied. 'You may know that he is not
disregarded. With my own hands I tend him every morning. I take him out
myself. I feed him myself. He says his prayers to me. He learns from
me, and can say his letters nicely. You need not fear for him. No
mother was ever more tender with her child than I am with him.' Then he
gently withdrew the boy from her arms, and she let her child go, lest
he should learn to know that there was a quarrel between his father and
his mother. 'If you will excuse me,' he said, 'I will not come down to
you again today. My servant will see you to your carriage.'

So he left her; and she, with an Italian girl at her heels, got into
her vehicle, and was taken back to Siena. There she passed the night
alone at the inn, and on the next morning returned to Florence by the
railway.



CHAPTER LXXX - 'WILL THEY DESPISE HIM?'

Gradually the news of the intended marriage between Mr Glascock and
Miss Spalding spread itself over Florence, and people talked about it
with that energy which subjects of such moment certainly deserve. That
Caroline Spalding had achieved a very great triumph, was, of course,
the verdict of all men and of all women; and I fear that there was a
corresponding feeling that poor Mr Glascock had been triumphed over,
and, as it were, subjugated. In some respects he had been remiss in his
duties as a bachelor visitor to Florence as a visitor to Florence who
had manifestly been much in want of a wife. He had not given other
girls a fair chance, but had thrown himself down at the feet of this
American female in the weakest possible manner. And then it got about
the town that he had been refused over and over again by Nora Rowley.
It is too probable that Lady Rowley in her despair and dismay had been
indiscreet, and had told secrets which should never have been mentioned
by her. And the wife of the English minister, who had some grudges of
her own, lifted her eyebrows and shook her head and declared that all
the Glascocks at home would be outraged to the last degree. 'My dear
Lady Rowley,' she said, 'I don't know whether it won't become a
question with them whether they should issue a commission de lunatico.'
Lady Rowley did not know what a commission de lunatico meant, but was
quite willing to regard poor Mr Glascock as a lunatic. 'And there is
poor Lord Peterborough at Naples just at death's door,' continued the
British Ministers wife. In this she was perhaps nearly correct; but as
Lord Peterborough had now been in the same condition for many months,
as his mind had altogether gone, and as the doctor declared that he
might live in his present condition for a year, or for years, it could
not fairly be said that Mr Glascock was acting without due filial
feeling in engaging himself to marry a young lady. 'And she such a
creature!' said Lady Rowley, with emphasis. This the British Minister's
wife noticed simply by shaking her head. Caroline Spalding was
undoubtedly a pretty girl; but, as the British Minister's wife said
afterwards, it was not surprising that poor Lady Rowley should be
nearly out of her mind.

This had occurred a full week after the evening spent at Mr Spalding's
house; and even yet Lady Rowley had never been put right as to that
mistake of hers about Wallachia Petrie. That other trouble of hers, and
her eldest daughter's journey to Siena, had prevented them from going
out; and though the matter had often been discussed between Lady Rowley
and Nora, there had not as yet come between them any proper
explanation. Nora would declare that the future bride was very pretty
and very delightful; and Lady Rowley would throw up her hands in
despair and protest that her daughter was insane. 'Why should he not
marry whom he likes, mamma?' Nora once said, almost with indignation.

'Because he will disgrace his family.'

'I cannot understand what you mean, mamma. They are, at any rate, as
good as we are. Mr Spalding stands quite as high as papa does.'

'She is an American,' said Lady Rowley.

'And her family might say that he is an Englishman,' said Nora.

'My dear, if you do not understand the incongruity between an English
peer and a Yankee female, I cannot help you. I suppose it is because
you have been brought up within the limited society of a small colony.
If so, it is not your fault. But I had hoped you had been in Europe
long enough to have learned what was what. Do you think, my dear, that
she will look well when she is presented to her Majesty as Lord
Peterborough's wife?'

'Splendid,' said Nora.'she has just the brow for a coronet.'

'Heavens and earth!' said Lady Rowley, throwing up her hands. 'And you
believe that he will be proud of her in England?'

'I am sure he will.'

'My belief is that he will leave her behind him, or that they will
settle somewhere in the wilds of America out in Mexico, or
Massachusetts, or the Rocky Mountains. I do not think that he will have
the courage to shew her in London.'

The marriage was to take place in the Protestant church at Florence
early in June, and then the bride and bridegroom were to go over the
Alps, and to remain there subject to tidings as to the health of the
old man at Naples. Mr Glascock had thrown up his seat in Parliament,
some month or two ago, knowing that he could not get back to his duties
during the present session, and feeling that he would shortly be called
upon to sit in the other House. He was thus free to use his time and to
fix his days as he pleased; and it was certainly clear to those who
knew him, that he was not ashamed of his American bride. He spent much
of his time at the Spaldings' house, and was always to be seen with
them in the Casino and at the Opera. Mrs Spalding, the aunt, was, of
course, in great glory. A triumphant, happy, or even simply a splendid
marriage, for the rising girl of a family is a great glory to the
maternal mind. Mrs Spalding could not but be aware that the very air
around her seemed to breathe congratulations into her ears. Her friends
spoke to her, even on indifferent subjects, as though everything was
going well with her better with her than with anybody else; and there
came upon her in these days a dangerous feeling, that in spite of all
the preachings of the preachers, the next world might perhaps be not
so. very much better than this. She was, in fact, the reverse of the
medal of which poor Lady Rowley filled the obverse. And the American
Minister was certainly an inch taller than before, and made longer
speeches, being much more regardless of interruption. Olivia was
delighted at her sister's success, and heard with rapture the
description of Monkhams, which came to her second-hand through her
sister. It was already settled that she was to spend her next Christmas
at Monkhams, and perhaps there might be an idea in her mind that there
were other eldest sons of old lords who would like American brides.
Everything around Caroline Spalding was pleasant except the words of
Wallachia Petrie.

Everything around her was pleasant till there came to her a touch of a
suspicion that the marriage which Mr Glascock was going to make would
be detrimental to her intended husband in his own country. There were
many in Florence who were saying this besides the wife of the English
Minister and Lady Rowley. Of course Caroline Spalding herself was the
last to hear it, and to her the idea was brought by Wallachia Petrie.
'I wish I could think you would make yourself happy or him,' Wallachia
had said, croaking.

'Why should I fail to make him happy?'

'Because you are not of the same blood, or race, or manners as himself.
They say that he is very wealthy in his own country, and that those who
live around him will look coldly on you.'

'So that he does not look coldly, I do not care how others may look,'
said Caroline proudly.

'But when he finds that he has injured himself by such a marriage in
the estimation of all his friends how will it be then?'

This set Caroline Spalding thinking of what she was doing. She began to
realise the feeling that perhaps she might not be a fit bride for an
English lord's son, and in her agony she came to Nora Rowley for
counsel. After all, how little was it that she knew of the home and the
country to which she was to be carried! She might not, perhaps, get
adequate advice from Nora, but she would probably learn something on
which she could act. There was no one else among the English at
Florence to whom she could speak with freedom. When she mentioned her
fears to her aunt, her aunt of course laughed at her. Mrs Spalding told
her that Mr Glascock might be presumed to know his own business best,
and that she, as an American lady of high standing the niece of a
minister! was a fitting match for any Englishman, let him be ever so
much a lord. But Caroline was not comforted by this, and in her
suspense she went to Nora Rowley. She wrote a line to Nora, and when
she called at the hotel, was taken up to her friend's bedroom. She
found great difficulty in telling her story, but she did tell it. 'Miss
Rowley,' she said, 'if this is a silly thing that he is going to do, I
am bound to save him from his own folly. You know your own country
better than I do. Will they think that he has disgraced himself?'

'Certainly not that,' said Nora.

'Shall I be a load round his neck? Miss Rowley, for my own sake I would
not endure such a position as that, not even though I love him. But for
his sake! Think of that. If I find that people think ill of him because
of me!'

'No one will think ill of him.'

'Is it esteemed needful that such a one as he should marry a woman of
his own rank. I can bear to end it all now; but I shall not be able to
bear his humiliation, and my own despair, if I find that I have injured
him. Tell me plainly is it a marriage that he should not make?' Nora
paused for a while before she answered, and as she sat silent the other
girl watched her face carefully. Nora on being thus consulted, was very
careful that her tongue should utter nothing that was not her true
opinion as best she knew how to express it. Her sympathy would have
prompted her to give such an answer as would at once have made Caroline
happy in her mind. She would have been delighted to have been able to
declare that these doubts were utterly groundless, and this hesitation
needless. But she conceived that she owed it as a duty from one woman
to another to speak the truth as she conceived it on so momentous an
occasion, and she was not sure but that Mr Glascock would be considered
by his friends in England to be doing badly in marrying an American
girl. What she did not remember was this that her very hesitation was
in fact an answer, and such an answer as she was most unwilling to
give. 'I see that it would be so,' said Caroline Spalding.

'No not that.'

'What then? Will they despise him and me?'

'No one who knows you can despise you. No one who sees you can fail to
admire you.' Nora, as she said this, thought of her mother, but told
herself at once that in this matter her mother's judgment had been
altogether destroyed by her disappointment. 'What I think will take
place will be this. His family, when first they hear of it, will be
sorry.'

'Then,' said Caroline, 'I will put an end to it.'

'You can't do that, dear. You are engaged, and you haven't a right. I
am engaged to a man, and all my friends object to it. But I shan't put
an end to it. I don't think I have a right. I shall not do it any way,
however.'

'But if it were for his good?'

'It couldn't be for his good. He and I have got to go along together
somehow.'

'You wouldn't hurt him,' said Caroline.

'I won't if I can help it, but he has got to take me along with him any
how; and Mr Glascock has got to take you. If I were you, I shouldn't
ask any more questions.'

'It isn't the same. You said that you were to be poor, but he is very
rich. And I am beginning to understand that these titles of yours are
something like kings' crowns. The man who has to wear them can't do
just as he pleases with them. Noblesse oblige. I can see the meaning of
that, even when the obligation itself is trumpery in its nature. If it
is a man's duty to marry a Talbot because he's a Howard, I suppose he
ought to do his duty.' After a pause she went on again. 'I do believe
that I have made a mistake. It seemed to be absurd at the first to
think of it, but I do believe it now. Even what you say to me makes me
think it.'

'At any rate you can't go back,' said Nora enthusiastically.

'I will try.'

'Go to himself and ask him. You must leave him to decide it at last. I
don't see how a girl when she is engaged, is to throw a man over unless
he consents. Of course you can throw yourself into the Arno.'

'And get the water into my shoes for it wouldn't do much more at
present.'

'And you can jilt him,' said Nora.

'It would not be jilting him.'

'He must decide that. If he so regards it, it will be so. I advise you
to think no more about it; but if you speak to anybody it should be to
him.' This was at last the result of Nora's wisdom, and then the two
girls descended together to the room in which Lady Rowley was sitting
with her other daughters. Lady Rowley was very careful in asking after
Miss Spalding's sister, and Miss Spalding assured her that Olivia was
quite well. Then Lady Rowley made some inquiry about Olivia and Mr
Glascock, and Miss Spalding assured her that no two persons were ever
such allies, and that she believed that they were together at this
moment investigating some old church. Lady Rowley simpered, and
declared that nothing could be more proper, and expressed a hope that
Olivia would like England. Caroline Spalding, having still in her mind
the trouble that had brought her to Nora, had not much to say about
this. 'If she goes again to England I am sure she will like it,'
replied Miss Spalding.

'But of course she is going,' said Lady Rowley.

'Of course she will some day, and of course she'll like it,' said Miss
Spalding. 'We both of us have been there already.'

'But I mean Monkhams,' said Lady Rowley, still simpering.

'I declare I believe mamma thinks that your sister is to be married to
Mr Glascock!' said Lucy.

'And so she is isn't she?' said Lady Rowley.

'Oh, mamma!' said Nora, jumping up. 'It is Caroline this one, this one,
this one,' and Nora took her friend by the arm as she spoke 'it is this
one that is to be Mrs Glascock.'

'It is a most natural mistake to make,' said Caroline. Lady Rowley
became very red in the face, and was unhappy. 'I declare,' she said,
'that they told me it was your elder sister.'

'But I have no elder sister,' said Caroline, laughing. 'Of course she
is oldest,' said Nora 'and looks to be so, ever so much. Don't you,
Miss Spalding?'

'I have always supposed so.'

'I don't understand it at all,' said Lady Rowley, who had no image
before her mind's eye but that of Wallachia Petrie, and who was
beginning to feel that she had disgraced her own judgment by the
criticisms she had expressed everywhere as to Mr Glascock's bride. 'I
don't understand it at all. Do you mean that both your sisters are
younger than you, Miss Spalding?'

'I have only got one, Lady Rowley.'

'Mamma, you are thinking of Miss Petrie,' said Nora, clapping both her
hands together.

'I mean the lady that wears the black bugles.'

'Of course you do Miss Petrie. Mamma has all along thought that Mr
Glascock was going to carry away with him the republican Browning!'

'Oh, mamma, how can you have made such a blunder!' said Sophie Rowley.
'Mamma does make such delicious blunders.'

'Sophie, my dear, that is not a proper way of speaking.'

'But, dear mamma, don't you?'

'If somebody has told me wrong, that has not been my fault,' said Lady
Rowley.

The poor woman was so evidently disconcerted that Caroline Spalding was
quite unhappy.

'My dear Lady Rowley, there has been no fault. And why shouldn't it
have been so. Wallachia is so clever, that it is the most natural thing
in the world to have thought.'

'I cannot say that I agree with you there,' said Lady Rowley, somewhat
recovering herself.

'You must know the whole truth now,' said Nora, turning to her friend,
'and you must not be angry with us if we laugh a little at your
poetess. Mamma has been frantic with Mr Glascock because he has been
going to marry whom shall I say her edition of you. She has sworn that
he must be insane. When we have sworn how beautiful you were, and how
nice, and how jolly, and all the rest of it she has sworn that you were
at least a hundred and that you had a red nose. You must admit that
Miss Petrie has a red nose.'

'Is that a sin?'

'Not at all in the woman who has it; but in the man who is going to
marry it yes. Can't you see how we have all been at cross-purposes, and
what mamma has been thinking and saying of poor Mr Glascock? You
mustn't repeat it, of course; but we have had such a battle here about
it. We thought that mamma had lost her eyes and her ears and her
knowledge of things in general. And now it has all come out! You won't
be angry?'

'Why should I be angry?'

'Miss Spalding,' said Lady Rowley, 'I am really unhappy at what has
occurred, and I hope that there may be nothing more said about it. I am
quite sure that somebody told me wrong, or I should not have fallen
into such an error. I beg your pardon and Mr Glascock's!'

'Beg Mr Glascock's pardon, certainly,' said Lucy.

Miss Spalding looked very pretty, smiled very gracefully, and coming up
to Lady Rowley to say good-bye, kissed her on her cheeks. This overcame
the spirit of the disappointed mother, and Lady Rowley never said
another word against Caroline Spalding or her marriage. 'Now, mamma,
what do you think of her?' said Nora, as soon as Caroline was gone.

'Was it odd, my dear, that I should be astonished at his wanting to
marry that other woman?'

'But, mamma, when we told you that she was young and pretty and
bright!'

'I thought that you were all demented. I did indeed. I still think it a
pity that he should take an American. I think that Miss Spalding is
very nice, but there are English girls quite as nice-looking as her.'
After that there was not another word said by Lady Rowley against
Caroline Spalding.

Nora, when she thought of it all that night, felt that she had hardly
spoken to Miss Spalding as she should have spoken as to the treatment
in England which would be accorded to Mr Glascock's wife. She became
aware of the effect which her own hesitation must have had, and thought
that it was her duty to endeavour to remove it. Perhaps, too, the
conversion of her mother had some effect in making her feel that she
had been wrong in supposing that there would be any difficulty in
Caroline's position in England. She had heard so much adverse criticism
from her mother that she had doubted in spite of her own convictions
but now it had come to light that Lady Rowley's criticisms had all come
from a most absurd blunder. 'Only fancy;' she said to herself 'Miss
Petrie coming out as Lady Peterborough! Poor mamma!' And then she
thought of the reception which would be given to Caroline, and of the
place the future Lady Peterborough would fill in the world, and of the
glories of Monkhams! Resolving that she would do her best to counteract
any evil which she might have done, she seated herself at her desk, and
wrote the following letter to Miss Spalding:



'My Dear Caroline,

I am sure you will let me call you so, as had you not felt towards me
like a friend, you would not have come to me today and told me of your
doubts. I think that I did not answer you as I ought to have done when
you spoke to me. I did not like to say anything off-hand, and in that
way I misled you. I feel quite sure that you will encounter nothing in
England as Mr Glascock's wife to make you uncomfortable, and that he
will have nothing to repent. Of course Englishmen generally marry
Englishwomen; and, perhaps, there may be some people who will think
that such a prize should not be lost to their countrywomen. But that
will be all. Mr Glascock commands such universal respect that his wife
will certainly be respected, and I do not suppose that anything will
ever come in your way that can possibly make you feel that he is looked
down upon. I hope you will understand what I mean.

As for your changing now, that is quite impossible. If I were you, I
would not say a word about it to any living being; but just go on
straight forward in your own way, and take the good the gods provide
you as the poet says to the king in the ode. And I think the gods have
provided for you very well and for him.

I do hope that I may see you sometimes. I cannot explain to you how
very much out of your line "we" shall be for of course there is a "we."
People are more separated with us than they are, I suppose, with you.
And my "we" is a very poor man, who works hard at writing in a dingy
newspaper office, and we shall live in a garret and have brown sugar in
our tea, and eat hashed mutton. And I shall have nothing a year to buy
my clothes with. Still I mean to do it; and I don't mean to be long
before I do do it. When a girl has made up her mind to be married, she
had better go on with it at once, and take it all afterwards as it may
come. Nevertheless, perhaps, we may see each other somewhere, and I may
be able to introduce you to the dearest, honestest, very best, and most
affectionate man in the world. And he is very, very clever.

Yours very affectionately,

NORA ROWLEY.

'Thursday morning.'



CHAPTER LXXXI  - MR GLASCOCK IS MASTER

Caroline Spalding, when she received Nora's letter, was not disposed to
give much weight to it. She declared to herself that the girl's
unpremeditated expression of opinion was worth more than her studied
words. But she was not the less grateful or the less loving towards her
new friend. She thought how nice it would be to have Nora at that
splendid abode in England of which she had heard so much but she
thought also that in that splendid abode she herself ought never to
have part or share. If it were the case that this were an unfitting
match, it was clearly her duty to decide that there should be no
marriage. Nora had been quite right in bidding her speak to Mr Glascock
himself, and to Mr Glascock she would go. But it was very difficult for
her to determine on the manner in which she would discuss the subject
with him. She thought that she could be firm if her mind were once made
up. She believed that perhaps she was by nature more firm than he. In
all their intercourse together he had ever yielded to her; and though
she had been always pleased and grateful, there had grown upon her an
idea that he was perhaps too easy that he was a man as to whom it was
necessary that they who loved him should see that he was not led away
by weakness into folly. But she would want to learn something from him
before her decision was finally reached, and in this she foresaw a
great difficulty. In her trouble she went to her usual counsellor the
Republican Browning. In such an emergency she could hardly have done
worse. 'Wally,' she said, 'we talk about England, and Italy, and
France, as though we knew all about them; but how hard it is to realise
the difference between one's own country and others.'

'We can at least learn a great deal that is satisfactory,' said
Wallachia. 'About one out of every five Italians can read a book, about
two out of every five Englishmen can read a book. Out of every five New
Englanders four and four-fifths can read a book. I guess that is
knowing a good deal.'

'I don't mean in statistics.'

'I cannot conceive how you are to learn anything about any country
except by statistics. I have just discovered that the number of
illegitimate children--'

'Oh, Wally, I can't talk about that not now at least. What I cannot
realise is this what sort of a life it is that they will lead at
Monkhams.'

'Plenty to eat and drink, I guess; and you'll always have to go around
in fine clothes.'

'And that will be all?'

'No not all. There will be carriages and horses, and all manner of
people there who won't care much about you. If he is firm very firm if
he have that firmness which one does not often meet, even in an
American man, he will be able, after a while, to give you a position as
an English woman of rank.' It is to be feared that Wallachia Petrie had
been made aware of Caroline's idea as to Mr Glascock's want of purpose.

'And that will be all?'

'If you have a baby, they'll let you go and see it two or three times a
day. I don't suppose you will be allowed to nurse it, because they
never do in England. You have read what the Saturday Review says. In
every other respect the Saturday Review has been the falsest of all
false periodicals, but I guess it has been pretty true in what it has
said about English women.'

'I wish I knew more about it really.'

'When a man has to leap through a window in the dark, Caroline, of
course he doubts whether the feather bed said to be below will be soft
enough for him.'

'I shouldn't fear the leap for myself, if it wouldn't hurt him. Do you
think it possible that society can be so formed that a man should lose
caste because he doesn't marry just one of his own set?'

'It has been so all over the world, my dear. If like to like is to be
true anywhere, it should be true in marriage.'

'Yes but with a difference. He and I are like to like. We come of the
same race, we speak the same language, we worship the same God, we have
the same ideas of culture and of pleasures. The difference is one that
is not patent to the eye or to the ear. It is a difference of
accidental incident, not of nature or of acquirement.'

'I guess you would find, Caroline, that a jury of English matrons sworn
to try you fairly, would not find you to be entitled to come among them
as one of themselves.'

'And how will that affect him?'

'Less powerfully than many others, because he is not impassioned. He
is, perhaps lethargic.'

'No, Wally, he is not lethargic.'

'If you ask me I must speak. It would harass some men almost to death;
it will not do so with him. He would probably find his happiness best
in leaving his old country and coming among your people.'

The idea of Mr Glascock the future Lord Peterborough leaving England,
abandoning Monkhams, deserting his duty in the House of Lords, and
going away to live in an American town, in order that he might escape
the miseries which his wife had brought upon him in his own country,
was more than Caroline could bear. She knew that, at any rate, it would
not come to that. The lord of Monkhams would live at Monkhams, though
the heavens should fall in regard to domestic comforts. It was clear to
Caroline that Wallachia Petrie had in truth never brought home to her
own imagination the position of an English peer. 'I don't think you
understand the people at all,' she said angrily.

'You think that you can understand them better because you are engaged
to this man!' said Miss Petrie, with well-pronounced irony. 'You have
found generally that when the sun shines in your eyes your sight is
improved by it! You think that the love-talk of a few weeks gives
clearer instruction than the laborious reading of many volumes and
thoughtful converse with thinking persons! I hope that you may find it
so, Caroline.' So saying Wallachia Petrie walked off in great dudgeon.

Miss Petrie, not having learned from her many volumes and her much
converse with thoughtful persons to read human nature aright, was
convinced by this conversation that her friend Caroline was blind to
all results, and was determined to go on with this dangerous marriage,
having the rays of that sun of Monkhams so full upon her eyes that she
could not see at all. She was specially indignant at finding that her
own words had no effect. But, unfortunately, her words had had much
effect; and Caroline, though she had contested her points, had done so
only with the intention of producing her Mentor's admonitions. Of
course it was out of the question that Mr Glascock should go and live
in Providence, Rhode Island, from which thriving town Caroline Spalding
had come; but, because that was impossible, it was not the less
probable that he might be degraded and made miserable in his own home.
That suggested jury of British matrons was a frightful conclave to
contemplate, and Caroline was disposed to believe that the verdict
given in reference to herself would be adverse to her. So she sat and
meditated, and spoke not a word further to any one on the subject till
she was alone with the man that she loved.

Mr Spalding at this time inhabited the ground floor of a large palace
in the city, from which there was access to a garden which at this
period of the year was green, bright, and shady, and which as being in
the centre of a city was large and luxurious. From one end of the house
there projected a covered terrace, or loggia, in which there were
chairs and tables, sculptured ornaments, busts, and old monumental
relics let into the wall in profusion. It was half chamber and half
garden such an adjunct to a house as in our climate would give only an
idea of cold, rheumatism, and a false romance, but under an Italian sky
is a luxury daily to be enjoyed during most months of the year. Here Mr
Glascock and Caroline had passed many hours and here they were now
seated, late in the evening, while all others of the family were away.
As far as regarded the rooms occupied by the American Minister, they
had the house and garden to themselves, and there never could come a
time more appropriate for the saying of a thing difficult to be said.
Mr Glascock had heard from his father's physician, and had said that it
was nearly certain now that he need not go down to Naples again before
his marriage. Caroline was trembling, not knowing how to speak, not
knowing how to begin but resolved that the thing should be done. 'He
will never know you, Carry,' said Mr Glascock. 'It is, perhaps, hardly
a sorrow to me, but it is a regret.'

'It would have been a sorrow perhaps to him had he been able to know
me,' said she, taking the opportunity of rushing at her subject.

'Why so? Of all human beings he was the softest-hearted.'

'Not softer-hearted than you, Charles. But soft hearts have to be
hardened.'

'What do you mean? Am I becoming obdurate?'

'I am, Charles,' she said. 'I have got something to say to you. What
will your uncles and aunts and your mother's relations say of me when
they see me at Monkhams?'

'They will swear to me that you are charming; and then when my back is
turned they'll pick you to pieces a little among themselves. I believe
that is the way of the world, and I don't suppose that we are to do
better than others.'

'And if you had married an English girl, a Lady Augusta Somebody would
they pick her to pieces?'

'I guess they would as you say.'

'Just the same?'

'I don't think anybody escapes, as far as I can see. But that won't
prevent their becoming your bosom friends in a few weeks time.'

'No one will say that you have been wrong to marry an American girl?'

'Now, Carry, what is the meaning of all this?'

'Do you know any man in your position who ever did marry an American
girl any man of your rank in England?' Mr Glascock began to think of
the case, and could not at the moment remember any instance. 'Charles,
I do not think you ought to be the first.'

'And yet somebody must be first, if the thing is ever to be done and I
am too old to wait on the chance of being the second.'

She felt that at the rate she was now progressing she would only run
from one little suggestion to another, and that he, either wilfully or
in sheer simplicity, would take such suggestions simply as jokes; and
she was aware that she lacked the skill to bring the conversation round
gradually to the point which she was bound to reach. She must make
another dash, let it be ever so sudden. Her mode of doing so would be
crude, ugly almost vulgar, she feared; but she would attain her object
and say what she had to say. When once she had warmed herself with the
heat which argument would produce, then, she was pretty sure, she would
find herself at least as strong as he. 'I don't know that the thing
ought to be done at all,' she said. During the last moment or two he
had put his arm round her waist; and she, not choosing to bid him
desist from embracing her, but unwilling in her present mood to be
embraced, got up and stood before him. 'I have thought, and thought,
and thought, and feel that it should not be done. In marriage, like
should go to like.' She despised herself for using Wallachia's words,
but they fitted in so usefully, that she could not refrain from them.
'I was wrong not to know it before, but it is better to know it now,
than not to have known it till too late. Everything that I hear and see
tells me that it would be so. If you were simply an Englishman, I would
go anywhere with you; but I am not fit to be the wife of an English
lord. The time would come when I should be a disgrace to you, and then
I should die.'

'I think I should go near dying myself,' said he, 'if you were a
disgrace to me.' He had not risen from his chair, and sat calmly
looking up into her face.

'We have made a mistake, and let us unmake it,' she continued. 'I will
always be your friend. I will correspond with you. I will come and see
your wife.'

'That will be very kind!'

'Charles, if you laugh at me, I shall be angry with you. It is right
that you should look to your future life, as it is right that I should
do so also. Do you think that I am joking? Do you suppose that I do not
mean it?'

'You have taken an extra dose this morning of Wallachia Petrie, and of
course you mean it.'

'If you think that I am speaking her mind and not my own, you do not
know me.'

'And what is it you propose?' he said, still keeping his seat and
looking calmly up into her face.

'Simply that our engagement should be over.'

'And why?'

'Because it is not a fitting one for you to have made. I did not
understand it before, but now I do. It will not be good for you to
marry an American girl. It will not add to your happiness, and may
destroy it. I have learned, at last, to know how much higher is your
position than mine.'

'And I am to be supposed to know nothing about it?'

'Your fault is only this that you have been too generous. I can be
generous also.'

'Now, look here, Caroline, you must not be angry with me if on such a
subject I speak plainly. You must not even be angry if I laugh a
little.'

'Pray do not laugh at me! not now.'

'I must a little, Carry. Why am I supposed to be so ignorant of what
concerns my own happiness and my own duties? If you will not sit down,
I will get up, and we will take a turn together.' He rose from his
seat, but they did not leave the covered terrace. They moved on to the
extremity, and then he stood hemming her in against a marble table in
the corner. 'In making this rather wild proposition, have you
considered me at all?'

'I have endeavoured to consider you, and you only.'

'And how have you done it? By the aid of some misty, far-fetched ideas
respecting English society, for which you have no basis except your own
dreams and by the fantasies of a rabid enthusiast.'

'She is not rabid,' said Caroline earnestly; 'other people think just
the same.'

'My dear, there is only one person whose thinking on this subject is of
any avail, and I am that person. Of course, I can't drag you into
church to be married, but practically you can not help yourself from
being taken there now. As there need be no question about our marriage
which is a thing as good as done--'

'It is not done at all,' said Caroline.

'I feel quite satisfied you will not jilt me, and as I shall insist on
having the ceremony performed, I choose to regard it as a certainty.
Passing that by, then, I will go on to the results. My uncles, and
aunts, and cousins, and the people you talk of, were very reasonable
folk when I last saw them, and quite sufficiently alive to the fact
that they had to regard me as the head of their family. I do not doubt
that we shall find them equally reasonable when we get home; but should
they be changed, should there be any sign shewn that my choice of a
wife had occasioned displeasure such displeasure would not affect you.'

'But it would affect you.'

'Not at all. In my own house I am master and I mean to continue to be
so. You will be mistress there, and the only fear touching such a
position is that it may be recognised by others too strongly. You have
nothing to fear, Carry.'

'It is of you I am thinking.'

'Nor have I. What if some old women, or even some young women, should
turn up their noses at the wife I have chosen, because she has not been
chosen from among their own countrywomen, is that to be a cause of
suffering to us? Can not we rise above that lasting as it would do for
a few weeks, a month or two perhaps say a year till my Caroline shall
have made herself known? I think that we are strong enough to live down
a trouble so light.' He had come close to her as he was speaking, and
had again put his arm round her waist.

She tried to escape from his embrace not with persistency, not with the
strength which always suffices for a woman when the embrace is in truth
a thing to be avoided, but clutching at his fingers with hers, pressing
them rather than loosening their grasp. 'No, Carry,' he continued; 'we
have got to go through with it now, and we will try and make the best
of it. You may trust me that we shall not find it difficult not, at
least, on the ground of your present fears. I can bear a heavier burden
than you will bring upon me.'

'I know that I ought to prove to you that I am right,' she said, still
struggling with his hand.

'And I know that you can prove nothing of the kind. Dearest, it is
fixed between us now, and do not let us be so silly as to raise
imaginary difficulties. Of course you would have to marry me, even if
there were cause for such fears. If there were any great cause, still
the game would be worth the candle. There could be no going back, let
the fear be what it might. But there need be no fear if you will only
love me.' She felt that he was altogether too strong for her that she
had mistaken his character in supposing that she could be more firm
than he. He was so strong that he treated her almost as a child and yet
she loved him infinitely the better for so treating her. Of course, she
knew now that her objection, whether true or unsubstantial, could not
avail. As he stood with his arm round her, she was powerless to
contradict him in anything. She had so far acknowledged this that she
no longer struggled with him, but allowed her hand to remain quietly
within his. If there was no going back from this bargain that had been
made why, then, there was no need for combating. And when he stooped
over her and kissed her lips, she had not a word to say. 'Be good to
me,' he said, 'and tell me that I am right.'

'You must be master, I suppose, whether you are right or wrong. A man
always thinks himself entitled to his own way.'

'Why, yes. When he has won the battle, he claims his captive. Now, the
truth is this, I have won the battle, and your friend, Miss Petrie, has
lost it. I hope she will understand that she has been beaten at last
out of the field.' As he said this, he heard a step behind them, and
turning round saw Wallachia there almost before he could drop his arm.

'I am sorry that I have intruded on you,' she said very grimly.

'Not in the least,' said Mr Glascock. 'Caroline and I have had a little
dispute, but we have settled it without coming to blows.'

'I do not suppose that an English gentleman ever absolutely strikes a
lady,' said Wallachia Petrie.

'Not except on strong provocation,' said Mr Glascock. 'In reference to
wives, a stick is allowed as big as your thumb.'

'I have heard that it is so by the laws of England,' said Wallachia.

'How can you be so ridiculous, Wally!' said Caroline. 'There is nothing
that you would not believe.'

'I hope that it may never be true in your case,' said Wallachia.

A couple of days after this Miss Spalding found that it was absolutely
necessary that she should explain the circumstances of her position to
Nora. She had left Nora with the purpose of performing a very
high-minded action, of sacrificing herself for the sake of her lover,
of giving up all her golden prospects, and of becoming once again the
bosom friend of Wallachia Petrie, with this simple consolation for her
future life that she had refused to marry an English nobleman because
the English nobleman's condition was unsuited to her. It would have
been an episode in female life in which pride might be taken but all
that was now changed. She had made her little attempt had made it, as
she felt, in a very languid manner, and had found herself treated as a
child for doing so. Of course she was happy in her ill success; of
course she would have been broken-hearted had she succeeded. But,
nevertheless, she was somewhat lowered in her own esteem, and it was
necessary that she should acknowledge the truth to the friend whom she
had consulted. A day or two had passed before she found herself alone
with Nora, but when she did so she confessed her failure at once.

'You told him all, then?' said Nora.

'Oh yes, I told him all. That is, I could not really tell him. When the
moment came I had no words.'

'And what did he say?'

'He had words enough. I never knew him to be eloquent before.'

'He can speak out if he likes,' said Nora.

'So I have found with a vengeance. Nobody was ever so put down as I
was. Don't you know that there are times when it does not seem to be
worth your while to put out your strength against an adversary? So it
was with him. He just told me that he was my master, and that I was to
do as he bade me.'

'And what did you say?'

'I promised to be a good girl,' said Caroline, 'and not to pretend to
have any opinion of my own ever again. And so we kissed, and were
friends.'

'I dare say there was a kiss, my dear.'

'Of course there was and he held me in his arms, and comforted me, and
told me how to behave just as you would do a little girl. It's all over
now, of course; and if there be a mistake, it is his fault. I feel that
all responsibility is gone from myself, and that for all the rest of my
life I have to do just what he tells me.'

'And what says the divine Wallachia?'

'Poor Wally! She says nothing, but she thinks that I am a castaway and
a recreant. I am a recreant, I know but yet I think that I was right. I
know I could not help myself.'

'Of course you were right, my dear,' said the sage Nora. 'If you had
the notion in your head, it was wise to get rid of it; but I knew how
it would be when you spoke to him.'

'You were not so weak when he came to you.'

'That was altogether another thing. It was not arranged in heaven that
I was to become his captive.'

After that Wallachia Petrie never again tried her influence on her
former friend, but admitted to herself that the evil was done, and that
it could not be remedied. According to her theory of life, Caroline
Spalding had been wrong, and weak had shewn herself to be
comfort-loving and luxuriously-minded, had looked to get her happiness
from soft effeminate pleasures rather than from rational work and the
useful, independent exercise of her own intelligence. In the privacy of
her little chamber Wallachia Petrie shed not absolute tears but many
tearful thoughts over her friend. It was to her a thing very terrible
that the chosen one of her heart should prefer the career of an English
lord's wife to that of an American citizeness, with all manner of
capability for female voting, female speechmaking, female poetising,
and, perhaps, female political action before her. It was a thousand
pities! 'You may take a horse to water,' said Wallachia to herself,
thinking of the ever-freshly springing fountain of her own mind, at
which Caroline Spalding would always have been made welcome freely to
quench her thirst 'but you cannot make him drink if he be not athirst.'
In the future she would have no friend. Never again would she subject
herself to the disgrace of such a failure. But the sacrifice was to be
made, and she knew that it was bootless to waste her words further on
Caroline Spalding. She left Florence before the wedding, and returned
alone to the land of liberty. She wrote a letter to Caroline explaining
her conduct, and Caroline Spalding shewed the letter to her husband as
one that was both loving and eloquent.

'Very loving and eloquent,' he said. 'But, nevertheless, one does think
of sour grapes.'

'There I am sure you wrong her,' said Caroline.



CHAPTER LXXXII - MRS FRENCH'S CARVING KNIFE

During these days there were terrible doings at Exeter. Camilla had
sworn that if Mr Gibson did not come to, there should be a tragedy, and
it appeared that she was inclined to keep her word. Immediately after
the receipt of her letter from Mr Gibson she had had an interview with
that gentleman in his lodgings, and had asked him his intentions. He
had taken measures to fortify himself against such an attack; but,
whatever those measures were, Camilla had broken through them. She had
stood before him as he sat in his armchair, and he had been dumb in her
presence. It had perhaps been well for him that the eloquence of her
indignation had been so great that she had hardly been able to pause a
moment for a reply. 'Will you take your letter back again?' she had
said. 'I should be wrong to do that,' he had lisped out in reply,
'because it is true. As a Christian minister I could not stand with you
at the altar with a lie in my mouth.' In no other way did he attempt to
excuse himself but that, twice repeated, filled up all the pause which
she made for him.

There never had been such a case before so impudent, so cruel, so
gross, so uncalled for, so unmanly, so unnecessary, so unjustifiable,
so damnable so sure of eternal condemnation! All this she said to him
with loud voice, and clenched fist, and starting eyes regardless
utterly of any listeners on the stairs, or of outside passers in the
street. In very truth she was moved to a sublimity of indignation. Her
low nature became nearly poetic under the wrong inflicted upon her. She
was almost tempted to tear him with her hands, and inflict upon him at
the moment some terrible vengeance which should be told of for ever in
the annals of Exeter. A man so mean as he, so weak, so cowardly, one so
little of a hero that he should dare to do it, and dare to sit there
before her, and to say that he would do it! 'Your gown shall be torn
off your back, Sir, and the very boys of Exeter shall drag you through
the gutters!' To this threat he said nothing, but sat mute, hiding his
face in his hands. 'And now tell me this, sir is there anything between
you and Bella?' But there was no voice in reply. 'Answer my question,
sir. I have a right to ask it.' Still he said not a word. 'Listen to
me. Sooner than that you and she should be man and wife, I would stab
her! Yes, I would you poor, paltry, lying, cowardly creature!' She
remained with him for more than half an hour, and then banged out of
the room flashing back a look of scorn at him as she went. Martha,
before that day was over, had learned the whole story from Mr Gibson's
cook, and had told her mistress.

'I did not think he had so much spirit in him,' was Miss Stanbury's
answer. Throughout Exeter the great wonder arising from the crisis was
the amount of spirit which had been displayed by Mr Gibson.

When he was left alone he shook himself, and began to think that if
there were danger that such interviews might occur frequently he had
better leave Exeter for good. As he put his hand over his forehead, he
declared to himself that a very little more of that kind of thing would
kill him. When a couple of hours had passed over his head he shook
himself again, and sat down and wrote a letter to his intended
mother-in-law.

'I do not mean to complain,' he said, 'God knows I have no right; but I
cannot stand a repetition of what has occurred just now. If your
younger daughter comes to see me again I must refuse to see her, and
shall leave the town. I am ready to make what reparation may be
possible for the mistake into which I have fallen.

'T. G.'



Mrs French was no doubt much afraid of her younger daughter, but she
was less afraid of her than were other people. Familiarity, they say,
breeds contempt; and who can be so familiar with a child as its parent?
She did not in her heart believe that Camilla would murder anybody, and
she fully realised the conviction that, even after all that was come
and gone, it would be better that one of her daughters should have a
husband than that neither should be so blessed. If only Camilla could
be got out of Exeter for a few months how good a thing it would be for
them all! She had a brother in Gloucester if only he could be got to
take Camilla for a few months! And then, too, she knew that if the true
rights of her two daughters were strictly and impartially examined,
Arabella's claim was much stronger than any that Camilla could put
forward to the hand of Mr Gibson.

'You must not go there again, Camilla,' the mother said.

'I shall go whenever I please,' replied the fury.

'Now, Camilla, we may as well understand each other. I will not have it
done. If I am provoked, I will send to your uncle at Gloucester.' Now
the uncle at Gloucester was a timber merchant, a man with protuberant
eyes and a great square chin known to be a very stern man indeed, and
not at all afraid of young women.

'What do I care for my uncle? My uncle would take my part.'

'No, he would not. The truth is, Camilla, you interfered with Bella
first.'

'Mamma, how dare you say so!'

'You did, my dear. And these are the consequences.'

'And you mean to say that she is to be Mrs Gibson?'

'I say nothing about that. But I do not see why they shouldn't be
married if their hearts are inclined to each other.'

'I will die first!'

'Your dying has nothing to do with it, Camilla.'

'And I will kill her!'

'If you speak to me again in that way I will write to your uncle at
Gloucester. I have done the best I could for you both, and I will not
bear such treatment.'

'And how am I treated?'

'You should not have interfered with your sister.'

'You are all in a conspiracy together,' shouted Camilla, 'you are!
There never was anybody so badly treated never never never! What will
everybody say of me?'

'They will pity you, if you will be quiet.'

'I don't want to be pitied I won't be pitied. I wish I could die and I
will die! Anybody else would, at any rate, have had their mother and
sister with them!' Then she burst into a flood of real, true, womanly
tears.

After this there was a lull at Heavitree for a few days. Camilla did
not speak to her sister, but she condescended to hold some intercourse
with her mother, and to take her meals at the family table. She did not
go out of the house, but she employed herself in her own room, doing no
one knew what, with all that new clothing and household gear which was
to have been transferred in her train to Mr Gibson's house. Mrs French
was somewhat uneasy about the new clothing and household gear, feeling
that, in the event of Bella's marriage, at least a considerable portion
of it must be transferred to the new bride. But it was impossible at
the present moment to open such a subject to Camilla it would have been
as a proposition to a lioness respecting the taking away of her whelps.
Nevertheless, the day must soon come in which something must be said
about the clothing and household gear. All the property that had been
sent into the house at Camilla's orders could not be allowed to remain
as Camilla's perquisites, now that Camilla was not to be married. 'Do
you know what she is doing, my dear?' said Mrs French to her elder
daughter.

'Perhaps she is picking out the marks,' said Bella.

'I don't think she would do that as yet,' said Mrs French.

'She might just as well leave it alone,' said Bella, feeling that one
of the two letters would do for her. But neither of them dared to speak
to her of her occupation in these first days of her despair.

Mr Gibson in the meantime remained at home, or only left his house to
go to the Cathedral or to visit the narrow confines of his little
parish. When he was out he felt that everybody looked at him, and it
seemed to him that people whispered about him when they saw him at his
usual desk in the choir. His friends passed him merely bowing to him,
and he was aware that he had done that which would be regarded by every
one around him as unpardonable. And yet what ought he to have done? He
acknowledged to himself that he had been very foolish, mad quite
demented at the moment when he allowed himself to think it possible
that he should marry Camilla French. But having found out how mad he
had been at that moment, having satisfied himself that to live with her
as his wife would be impossible, was he not right to break the
engagement? Could anything be so wicked as marrying a woman whom he
hated? Thus he tried to excuse himself; but yet he knew that all the
world would condemn him. Life in Exeter would be impossible, if no way
to social pardon could be opened for him. He was willing to do anything
within bounds in mitigation of his offence. He would give up fifty
pounds a year to Camilla for his life or he would marry Bella. Yes; he
would marry Bella at once if Camilla would only consent, and give up
that idea of stabbing some one. Bella French was not very nice in his
eyes; but she was quiet, he thought, and it might be possible to live
with her. Nevertheless, he told himself over and over again that the
manner in which unmarried men with incomes were set upon by ladies in
want of husbands was very disgraceful to the country at large. That
mission to Natal which had once been offered to him would have had
charms for him now, of which he had not recognised the force when he
rejected it.

'Do you think that he ever was really engaged to her?' Dorothy said to
her aunt. Dorothy was now living in a seventh heaven of happiness,
writing love-letters to Brooke Burgess every other day, and devoting to
this occupation a number of hours of which she ought to have been
ashamed; making her purchases for her wedding with nothing, however, of
the magnificence of a Camilla but discussing everything with her aunt,
who urged her on to extravagances which seemed beyond the scope of her
own economical ideas; settling, or trying to settle, little
difficulties which perplexed her somewhat, and wondering at her own
career. She could not of course be married without the presence of her
mother and sister, and her aunt with something of a grim courtesy had
intimated that they should be made welcome to the house in the Close
for the special occasion. But nothing had been said about Hugh. The
wedding was to be in the Cathedral, and Dorothy had a little scheme in
her head for meeting her brother among the aisles. He would no doubt
come down with Brooke, and nothing perhaps need be said about it to
Aunt Stanbury. But still it was a trouble. Her aunt had been so good
that Dorothy felt that no step should be taken which would vex the old
woman. It was evident enough that when permission had been given for
the visit of Mrs Stanbury and Priscilla, Hugh's name had been purposely
kept back. There had been no accidental omission. Dorothy, therefore,
did not dare to mention it and yet it was essential for her happiness
that he should be there. At the present moment Miss Stanbury's intense
interest in the Stanbury wedding was somewhat mitigated by the
excitement occasioned by Mr Gibson's refusal to be married. Dorothy was
so shocked that she could not bring herself to believe the statement
that had reached them through Martha.

'Of course he was engaged to her. We all knew that,' said Miss
Stanbury.

'I think there must have been some mistake,' said Dorothy. 'I don't see
how he could do it.'

'There is no knowing what people can do, my dear, when they're hard
driven. I suppose we shall have a lawsuit now, and he'll have to pay
ever so much money. Well, well, well! see what a deal of trouble you
might have saved!'

'But, he'd have done the same to me, aunt only, you know, I never could
have taken him, Isn't it better as it is, aunt? Tell me.'

'I suppose young women always think it best when they can get their own
ways. An old woman like me has only got to do what she is bid.'

'But this was best, aunt was it not?'

'My dear, you've had your way, and let that be enough. Poor Camilla
French is not allowed to have hers at all. Dear, dear, dear! I didn't
think the man would ever have been such a fool to begin with or that he
would ever have had the heart to get out of it afterwards.' It
astonished Dorothy to find that her aunt was not loud in reprobation of
Mr Gibson's very dreadful conduct.

In the meantime Mrs French had written to her brother at Gloucester.
The maid-servant, in making Miss Camilla's bed, and in 'putting the
room to rights,' as she called it which description probably was
intended to cover the circumstances of an accurate search had
discovered, hidden among some linen a carving knife! such a knife as is
used for the cutting up of fowls; and, after two days' interval, had
imparted the discovery to Mrs French. Instant visit was made to the
pantry, and it was found that a very aged but unbroken and
sharply-pointed weapon was missing. Mrs French at once accused Camilla,
and Camilla, after some hesitation, admitted that it might be there.
Molly, she said, was a nasty, sly, wicked thing, to go looking in her
drawers, and she would never leave anything unlocked again. The knife,
she declared, had been taken upstairs, because she had wanted something
very sharp to cut the bones of her stays. The knife was given up, but
Mrs French thought it best to write to her brother, Mr Crump. She was
in great doubt about sundry matters. Had the carving knife really
pointed to a domestic tragedy and if so, what steps ought a poor widow
to take with such a daughter? And what ought to be done about Mr.,
Gibson? It ran through Mrs French's mind that unless something were
done at once, Mr Gibson would escape scot-free. It was her wish that he
should yet become her son-in-law. Poor Bella was entitled to her
chance. But if Bella was to be disappointed from fear of carving
knives, or for other reasons then there came the question whether Mr
Gibson should not be made to pay in purse for the mischief he had done.
With all these thoughts and doubts running through her head, Mrs French
wrote to her brother at Gloucester.

There came back an answer from Mr Crump, in which that gentleman
expressed a very strong idea that Mr Gibson should be prosecuted for
damages with the utmost virulence, and with the least possible delay.
No compromise should be accepted. Mr Crump would himself come to Exeter
and see the lawyer as soon as he should be told that there was a lawyer
to be seen. As to the carving knife, Mr Crump was of opinion that it
did not mean anything. Mr Crump was a gentleman who did not believe in
strong romance, but who had great trust in all pecuniary claims. The
Frenches had always been genteel. The late Captain French had been an
officer in the army, and at ordinary times and seasons the Frenches
were rather ashamed of the Crump connection. But now the timber
merchant might prove himself to be a useful friend.

Mrs French shewed her brother's letter to Bella and poor Bella was
again sore-hearted, seeing that nothing was said in it of her claims.
'It will be dreadful scandal to have it all in the papers!' said Bella.

'But what can we do?'

'Anything would be better than that,' said Bella. 'And you don't want
to punish Mr Gibson, mamma.'

'But my dear, you see what your uncle says. What can I do, except go to
him for advice?'

'Why don't you go to Mr Gibson yourself, mamma?'

But nothing was said to Camilla about Mr Crump nothing as yet. Camilla
did not love Mr Crump, but there was no other house except that of Mr
Crump's at Gloucester to which she might be sent, if it could be
arranged that Mr Gibson and Bella should be made one. Mrs French took
her eldest daughter's advice, and went to Mr Gibson taking Mr Crump's
letter in her pocket. For herself she wanted nothing but was it not the
duty of her whole life to fight for her daughters? Poor woman! If
somebody would only have taught her how that duty might best be done,
she would have endeavoured to obey the teaching. 'You know I do not
want to threaten you,' she said to Mr Gibson; 'but you see what my
brother says. Of course I wrote to my brother. What could a poor woman
do in such circumstances except write to her brother?'

'If you choose to set the bloodhounds of the law at me, of course you
can,' said Mr Gibson.

'I do not want to go to law at all God knows I do not!' said Mrs
French. Then there was a pause. 'Poor dear Bella!' ejaculated Mrs
French.

'Dear Bella!' echoed Mr Gibson.

'What do you mean to do about Bella?' asked Mrs French.

'I sometimes think that I had better take poison and have done with
it!' said Mr Gibson, feeling himself to be very hard pressed.



CHAPTER LXXXIII - BELLA VICTRIX

Mr Crump arrived at Exeter. Camilla was not told of his coming till the
morning of the day on which he arrived; and then the tidings were
communicated, because it was necessary that a change should be made in
the bed-rooms. She and her sister had separate rooms when there was no
visitor with them, but now Mr Crump must be accommodated. There was a
long consultation between Bella and Mrs French, but at last it was
decided that Bella should sleep with her mother. There would still be
too much of the lioness about Camilla to allow of her being regarded as
a safe companion through the watches of the night. 'Why is Uncle Jonas
coming now?' she asked.

'I thought it better to ask him,' said Mrs French.

After a long pause, Camilla asked another question. 'Does Uncle Jonas
mean to see Mr Gibson?'

'I suppose he will,' said Mrs French.

'Then he will see a low, mean fellow: the lowest, meanest fellow that
ever was heard of! But that won't make much difference to Uncle Jonas.
I wouldn't have him now, if he was to ask me ever so that I wouldn't!'

Mr Crump came, and kissed his sister and two nieces. The embrace with
Camilla was not very affectionate.'so your Joe has been and jilted
you?' said Uncle Jonas 'it's like one of them clergymen. They say so
many prayers, they think they may do almost anything afterwards.
Another man would have had his head punched.'

'The less talk there is about it the better,' said Camilla. On the
following day Mr Crump called by appointment on Mr Gibson, and remained
closeted with that gentleman for the greater portion of the morning.
Camilla knew well that he was going, and went about the house like a
perturbed spirit during his absence. There was a look about her that
made them all doubt whether she was not, in truth, losing her mind. Her
mother more than once went to the pantry to see that the knives were
right; and, as regarded that sharp-pointed weapon, was careful to lock
it up carefully out of her daughter's way. Mr Crump had declared
himself willing to take Camilla back to Gloucester, and had laughed at
the obstacles which his niece might, perhaps, throw in the way of such
an arrangement.'she mustn't have much luggage that is all,' said Mr
Crump. For Mr Crump had been made aware of the circumstances of the
trousseau. About three o'clock Mr Crump came back from Mr Gibson's, and
expressed a desire to be left alone with Camilla. Mrs French was
prepared for everything; and Mr Crump soon found himself with his
younger niece.

'Camilla, my dear,' said he, 'this has been a bad business.'

'I don't know what business you mean, Uncle Jonas.'

'Yes, you do, my dear you know. And I hope it won't come too late to
prove to you that young women shouldn't be too keen in setting their
caps at the gentlemen. It's better for them to be hunted, than to
hunt.'

'Uncle Jonas, I will not be insulted.'

'Stick to that, my dear, and you won't get into a scrape again. Now,
look here. This man can never be made to marry you, anyhow.'

'I wouldn't touch him with a pair of tongs, if he were kneeling at my
feet!'

'That's right; stick to that. Of course, you wouldn't now, after all
that has come and gone. No girl with any spirit would.'

'He's a coward and a thief, and he'll be damned for what he has done,
some of these days!'

'T-ch, t-ch, t-ch! That isn't a proper way for a young lady to talk.
That's cursing and swearing.'

'It isn't cursing and swearing it's what the Bible says.'

'Then we'll leave him to the Bible. In the meantime, Mr Gibson wants to
marry some one else, and that can't hurt you.'

'He may marry whom he likes but he shan't marry Bella that's all!'

'It is Bella that he means to marry.'

'Then he won't. I'll forbid the banns. I'll write to the bishop. I'll
go to the church and prevent its being done. I'll make such a noise in
the town that it can't be done. It's no use your looking at me like
that, Uncle Jonas. I've got my own feelings, and he shall never marry
Bella. It's what they have been intending all through, and it shan't be
done!'

'It will be done.'

'Uncle Jonas, I'll stab her to the heart, and him too, before I'll see
it done! Though I were to be killed the next day, I would. Could you
bear it?'

'I'm not a young woman. Now, I'll tell you what I want you to do.'

'I'll not do anything.'

'Just pack up your things, and start with me to Gloucester tomorrow.'

'I won't!'

'Then you'll be carried, my dear. I'll write to your aunt, to say that
you're coming; and we'll be as jolly as possible when we get you home.'

'I won't go to Gloucester, Uncle Jonas. I won't go away from Exeter. I
won't let it be done. She shall never, never, never be that man's
wife!'

Nevertheless, on the day but one after this, Camilla French did go to
Gloucester. Before she went, however, things had to be done in that
house which almost made Mrs French repent that she had sent for so
stern an assistant. Camilla was at last told, in so many words, that
the things which she had prepared for her own wedding must be given up
for the wedding of her sister; and it seemed that this item in the list
of her sorrows troubled her almost more than any other. She swore that
whither she went there should go the dresses, and the handkerchiefs,
and the hats, the bonnets, and the boots. 'Let her have them,' Bella
had pleaded. But Mr Crump was inexorable. He had looked into his
sister's affairs, and found that she was already in debt. To his
practical mind, it was an absurdity that the unmarried sister should
keep things that were wholly unnecessary, and that the sister that was
to be married should be without things that were needed. There was a
big trunk, of which Camilla had the key, but which, unfortunately for
her, had been deposited in her mother's room. Upon this she sat, and
swore that nothing should move her but a promise that her plunder
should remain untouched. But there came this advantage from the
terrible question of the wedding raiments that in her energy to keep
possession of them, she gradually abandoned her opposition to her
sister's marriage. She had been driven from one point to another till
she was compelled at last to stand solely upon her possessions.
'Perhaps we had better let her keep them,' said Mrs French. 'Trash and
nonsense!' said Mr Crump. 'If she wants a new frock, let her have it;
as for the sheets and tablecloths, you'd better keep them yourself. But
Bella must have the rest.'

It was found on the eve of the day on which she was told that she was
to depart that she had in truth armed herself with a dagger or clasp
knife. She actually displayed it when her uncle told her to come away
from the chest on which she was sitting. She declared that she would
defend herself there to the last gasp of her life; but of course the
knife fell from her hand the first moment that she was touched. 'I did
think once that she was going to make a poke at me,' Mr Crump said
afterwards; 'but she had screamed herself so weak that she couldn't do
it.'

When the morning came, she was taken to the fly and driven to the
station without any further serious outbreak. She had even condescended
to select certain articles, leaving the rest of the hymeneal wealth
behind her. Bella, early on that morning of departure, with great
humility, implored her sister to forgive her; but no entreaties could
induce Camilla to address one gracious word to the proposed bride.
'You've been cheating me all along!' she said; and that was the last
word she spoke to poor Bella.

She went, and the field was once more open to the amorous Vicar of St.
Peter's-cum-Pumpkin. It is astonishing how the greatest difficulties
will sink away, and become as it were nothing, when they are
encountered face to face. It is certain that Mr Gibson's position had
been one most trying to the nerves. He had speculated on various modes
of escape a curacy in the north of England would be welcome, or the
duties of a missionary in New Zealand or death. To tell the truth, he
had, during the last week or two, contemplated even a return to the
dominion of Camilla. That there should ever again be things pleasant
for him in Exeter seemed to be quite impossible. And yet, on the
evening of the day but one after the departure of Camilla, he was
seated almost comfortably with his own Arabella! There is nothing that
a man may not do, nothing that he may not achieve, if he have only
pluck enough to go through with it.

'You do love me?' Bella said to him. It was natural that she should ask
him; but it would have been better perhaps if she had held her tongue.
Had she spoken to him about his house, or his income, or the servants,
or the duties of his parish church, it would have been easier for him
to make a comfortable reply.

'Yes I love you,' he replied; 'of course I love you. We have always
been friends, and I hope things will go straight now. I have had a
great deal to go through, Bella, and so have you but God will temper
the wind to the shorn lambs.' How was the wind to be tempered for the
poor lamb who had gone forth shorn down to the very skin!

Soon after this Mrs French returned to the room, and then there was no
more romance. Mrs French had by no means forgiven Mr Gibson all the
trouble he had brought into the family, and mixed a certain amount of
acrimony with her entertainment of him. She dictated to him, treated
him with but scant respect, and did not hesitate to let him understand
that he was to be watched very closely till he was actually and
absolutely married. The poor man had in truth no further idea of
escape. He was aware that he had done that which made it necessary that
he should bear a great deal, and that he had no right to resent
suspicion. When a day was fixed in June on which he should be married
at the church of Heavitree, and it was proposed that he should be
married by banns, he had nothing to urge to the contrary. And when it
was also suggested to him by one of the prebendaries of the Cathedral
that it might be well for him to change his clerical duties for a
period with the vicar of a remote parish in the north of Cornwall so as
to be out of the way of remark from those whom he had scandalised by
his conduct he had no objection to make to that arrangement. When Mrs
MacHugh met him in the Close, and told him that he was a gay Lothario,
he shook his head with a melancholy self-abasement, and passed on
without even a feeling of anger. 'When they smite me on the right
cheek, I turn unto them my left,' he said to himself, when one of the
cathedral vergers remarked to him that after all he was going to be
married at last. Even Bella became dominant over him, and assumed with
him occasionally the air of one who had been injured.

Bella wrote a touching letter to her sister a letter that ought to have
touched Camilla, begging for forgiveness, and for one word of sisterly
love. Camilla answered the letter, but did not send a word of sisterly
love. 'According to my way of thinking, you have been a nasty sly
thing, and I don't believe you'll ever be happy. As for him, I'll never
speak to him again.' That was nearly the whole of her letter. 'You must
leave it to time,' said Mrs French wisely;'she'll come round some day.'
And then Mrs French thought how bad it would be for her if the daughter
who was to be her future companion did not 'come round' some day.

And so it was settled that they should be married in Heavitree Church
Mr Gibson and his first love and things went on pretty much as though
nothing had been done amiss. The gentleman from Cornwall came down to
take Mr Gibson's place at St. Peter's-cum-Pumpkin, while his duties in
the Cathedral were temporarily divided among the other priest-vicars
-with some amount of grumbling on their part. Bella commenced her
modest preparations without any of the eclat which had attended
Camilla's operations, but she felt more certainty of ultimate success
than had ever fallen to Camilla's lot. In spite of all that had come
and gone, Bella never feared again that Mr Gibson would be untrue to
her. In regard to him, it must be doubted whether Nemesis ever fell
upon him with a hand sufficiently heavy to punish him for the great
sins which he had manifestly committed. He had encountered a bad week
or two, and there had been days in which, as has been said, he thought
of Natal, of ecclesiastical censures, and even of annihilation; but no
real punishment seemed to fall upon him. It may be doubted whether,
when the whole arrangement was settled for him, and when he heard that
Camilla had yielded to the decrees of Fate, he did not rather flatter
himself on being a successful man of intrigue whether he did not take
some glory to himself for his good fortune with women, and pride
himself amidst his self-reproaches for the devotion which had been
displayed for him by the fair sex in general. It is quite possible that
he taught himself to believe that at one time Dorothy Stanbury was
devotedly in love with him, and that when he reckoned up his sins she
was one of those in regard to whom he accounted himself to have been a
sinner. The spirit of intrigue with women, as to which men will flatter
themselves, is customarily so vile, so mean, so vapid a reflection of a
feeling, so aimless, resultless, and utterly unworthy! Passion exists
and has its sway. Vice has its votaries and there is, too, that
worn-out longing for vice, 'prurient, yet passionless, cold-studied
lewdness', which drags on a feeble continuance with the aid of money.
But the commonest folly of man in regard to women is a weak taste for
intrigue, with little or nothing on which to feed it a worse than
feminine aptitude for male coquetry, which never ascends beyond a
desire that somebody shall hint that there is something peculiar; and
which is shocked and retreats backwards into its boots when anything
like a consequence forces itself on the apprehension. Such men have
their glory in their own estimation. We remember how Falstaff flouted
the pride of his companion whose victory in the fields of love had been
but little glorious. But there are victories going now-a-days so
infinitely less glorious, that Falstaff's page was a Lothario, a very
Don Juan, in comparison with the heroes whose praises are too often
sung by their own lips. There is this recompense that their defeats are
always sung by lips louder than their own. Mr Gibson, when he found
that he was to escape apparently unscathed that people standing
respectably before the world absolutely dared to whisper words to him
of congratulation on this third attempt at marriage within little more
than a year, took pride to himself, and bethought himself that he was a
gay deceiver. He believed that he had selected his wife and that he had
done so in circumstances of peculiar difficulty! Poor Mr Gibson we
hardly know whether most to pity him, or the unfortunate, poor woman
who ultimately became Mrs Gibson.

'And so Bella French is to be the fortunate woman after all,' said Miss
Stanbury to her niece.

'It does seem to me to be so odd,' said Dorothy. 'I wonder how he
looked when he proposed it.'

'Like a fool as he always does.'

Dorothy refrained from remarking that Miss Stanbury had not always
thought that Mr Gibson looked like a fool, but the idea occurred to her
mind. 'I hope they will be happy at last,' she said.

'Pshaw! Such people can't be happy, and can't be unhappy. I don't
suppose it much matters which he marries, or whether he marries them
both, or neither. They are to be married by banns, they say at
Heavitree.'

'I don't see anything bad in that.'

'Only Camilla might step out and forbid them,' said Aunt Stanbury. 'I
almost wish she would.'

'She has gone away, aunt to an uncle who lives at Gloucester.'

'It was well to get her out of the way, no doubt. They'll be married
before you now, Dolly.'

'That won't break my heart, aunt.'

'I don't suppose there'll be much of a wedding. They haven't anybody
belonging to them, except that uncle at Gloucester.' Then there was a
pause. 'I think it is a nice thing for friends to collect together at a
wedding,' continued Aunt Stanbury.

'I think it is,' said Dorothy, in the mildest, softest voice.

'I suppose we must make room for that black sheep of a brother of
yours, Dolly or else you won't be contented.'

'Dear, dear, dearest aunt!' said Dorothy, falling down on her knees at
her aunt's feet.



CHAPTER LXXXIV - SELF-SACRIFICE

Trevelyan, when his wife had left him, sat for hours in silence
pondering over his own position and hers. He had taken his child to an
upper room, in which was his own bed and the boy's cot, and before he
seated himself, he spread out various toys which he had been at pains
to purchase for the unhappy little fellow a regiment of Garibaldian
soldiers all with red shirts, and a drum to give the regiment martial
spirit, and a soft fluffy Italian ball, and a battledore and a
shuttlecock instruments enough for juvenile joy, if only there had been
a companion with whom the child could use them. But the toys remained
where the father had placed them, almost unheeded, and the child sat
looking out of the window, melancholy, silent, and repressed. Even the
drum did not tempt him to be noisy. Doubtless he did not know why he
was wretched, but he was fully conscious of his wretchedness. In the
meantime the father sat motionless, in an old worn-out but once
handsome leathern arm-chair, with his eyes fixed against the opposite
wall, thinking of the wreck of his life.

Thought deep, correct, continued, and energetic is quite compatible
with madness. At this time Trevelyan's mind was so far unhinged, his
ordinary faculties were so greatly impaired, that they who declared him
to be mad were justified in their declaration. His condition was such
that the happiness and welfare of no human being not even his own could
safely be entrusted to his keeping. He considered himself to have been
so injured by the world, to have been the victim of so cruel a
conspiracy among those who ought to have been his friends, that there
remained nothing for him but to flee away from them and remain in
solitude. But yet, through it all, there was something approaching to a
conviction that he had brought his misery upon himself by being unlike
to other men; and he declared to him self over and over again that it
was better that he should suffer than that others should be punished.
When he was alone his reflections respecting his wife were much juster
than were his words when he spoke either with her, or to others, of her
conduct. He would declare to himself not only that he did not believe
her to have been false to him, but that he had never accused her of
such crime. He had demanded from her obedience, and she had been
disobedient. It had been incumbent upon him so ran his own ideas, as
expressed to himself in these long unspoken soliloquies to exact
obedience, or at least compliance, let the consequences be what they
might. She had refused to obey or even to comply, and the consequences
were very grievous. But, though he pitied himself with a pity that was
feminine, yet he acknowledged to himself that her conduct had been the
result of his own moody temperament. Every friend had parted from him.
All those to whose counsels he had listened, had counselled him that he
was wrong. The whole world was against him. Had he remained in England,
the doctors and lawyers among them would doubtless have declared him to
be mad. He knew all this, and yet he could not yield. He could not say
that he had been wrong. He could not even think that he had been wrong
as to the cause of the great quarrel. He was one so miserable and so
unfortunate so he thought that even in doing right he had fallen into
perdition!

He had had two enemies, and between them they had worked his ruin.
These were Colonel Osborne and Bozzle. It may be doubted whether he did
not hate the latter the more strongly of the two. He knew now that
Bozzle had been untrue to him, but his disgust did not spring from that
so much as from the feeling that he had defiled himself by dealing with
the man. Though he was quite assured that he had been right in his
first cause of offence, he knew that he had fallen from bad to worse in
every step that he had taken since. Colonel Osborne had marred his
happiness by vanity, by wicked intrigue, by a devilish delight in doing
mischief; but he, he himself, had consummated the evil by his own
folly. Why had he not taken Colonel Osborne by the throat, instead of
going to a low-born, vile, mercenary spy for assistance? He hated
himself for what he had done and yet it was impossible that he should
yield.

It was impossible that he should yield but it was yet open to him to
sacrifice himself. He could not go back to his wife and say that he was
wrong; but he could determine that the destruction should fall upon him
and not upon her. If he gave up his child and then died died, alone,
without any friend near him, with no word of love in his ears, in that
solitary and miserable abode which he had found for himself then it
would at least be acknowledged that he had expiated the injury that he
had done. She would have his wealth, his name, his child to comfort her
and would be troubled no longer by demands for that obedience which she
had sworn at the altar to give him, and which she had since declined to
render to him. Perhaps there was some feeling that the coals of fire
would be hot upon her head when she should think how much she had
received from him and how little she had done for him. And yet he loved
her, with all his heart, and would even yet dream of bliss that might
be possible with her had not the terrible hand of irresistible Fate
come between them and marred it all. It was only a dream now. It could
be no more than a dream. He put out his thin wasted hands and looked at
them, and touched the hollowness of his own cheeks, and coughed that he
might hear the hacking sound of his own infirmity, and almost took
glory in his weakness. It could not be long before the coals of fire
would be heaped upon her head.

'Louey,' he said at last, addressing the child who had sat for an hour
gazing through the window without stirring a limb or uttering a sound;
'Louey, my boy, would you like to go back to mamma?' The child turned
round on the floor, and fixed his eyes on his father's face, but made
no immediate reply. 'Louey, dear, come to papa and tell him. Would it
be nice to go back to mamma?' And he stretched out his hand to the boy.
Louey got up, and approached slowly and stood between his father's
knees. 'Tell me, darling you understand what papa says?'

'Altro!' said the boy, who had been long enough among Italian servants
to pick up the common words of the language. Of course he would like to
go back. How indeed could it be otherwise?

'Then you shall go to her, Louey.'

'To-day, papa?'

'Not today, nor to-morrow.'

'But the day after?'

'That is sufficient. You shall go. It is not so bad with you that one
day more need be a sorrow to you. You shall go and then you will never
see your father again!' Trevelyan as he said this drew his hands away
so as not to touch the child. The little fellow had put out his arm,
but seeing his father's angry gesture had made no further attempt at a
caress. He feared his father from the bottom of his little heart, and
yet was aware that it was his duty to try to love papa. He did not
understand the meaning of that last threat, but slunk back, passing his
untouched toys, to the window, and there seated himself again, filling
his mind with the thought that when two more long long days should have
crept by, he should once more go to his mother.

Trevelyan had tried his best to be soft and gentle to his child. All
that he had said to his wife of his treatment of the boy had been true
to the letter. He had spared no personal trouble, he had done all that
he had known how to do, he had exercised all his intelligence to
procure amusement for the boy but Louey had hardly smiled since he had
been taken from his mother. And now that he was told that he was to go
and never see his father again, the tidings were to him simply tidings
of joy. 'There is a curse upon me,' said Trevelyan; 'it is written down
in the book of my destiny that nothing shall ever love me!'

He went out from the house, and made his way down by the narrow path
through the olives and vines to the bottom of the hill in front of the
villa. It was evening now, but the evening was very hot, and though the
olive trees stood in long rows, there was no shade. Quite at the bottom
of the hill there was a little sluggish muddy brook, along the sides of
which the reeds grew thickly and the dragon-flies were playing on the
water. There was nothing attractive in the spot, but he was weary, and
sat himself down on the dry hard bank which had been made by repeated
clearing of mud from the bottom of the little rivulet. He sat watching
the dragon-flies as they made their short flights in the warm air, and
told himself that of all God's creatures there was not one to whom less
power of disporting itself in God's sun was given than to him. Surely
it would be better for him that he should die, than live as he was now
living without any of the joys of life. The solitude of Casalunga was
intolerable to him, and yet there was no whither that he could go and
find society. He could travel if he pleased. He had money at command,
and, at any rate as yet, there was no embargo on his personal liberty.
But how could he travel alone even if his strength might suffice for
the work? There had been moments in which he had thought that he would
be happy in the love of his child that the companionship of an infant
would suffice for him if only the infant would love him. But all such
dreams as that were over. To repay him for his tenderness his boy was
always dumb before him. Louey would not prattle as he had used to do.
He would not even smile, or give back the kisses with which his father
had attempted to win him. In mercy to the boy he would send him back to
his mother in mercy to the boy if not to the mother also. It was in
vain that he should look for any joy in any quarter. Were he to return
to England, they would say that he was mad!

He lay there by the brook-side till the evening was far advanced, and
then he arose and slowly returned to the house. The labour of ascending
the hill was so great to him that he was forced to pause and hold by
the olive trees as he slowly performed his task. The perspiration came
in profusion from his pores, and he found himself to be so weak that he
must in future regard the brook as being beyond the tether of his daily
exercise. Eighteen months ago he had been a strong walker, and the
snow-bound paths of Swiss mountains had been a joy to him. He paused as
he was slowly dragging himself on, and looked up at the wretched,
desolate, comfortless abode which he called his home. Its dreariness
was so odious to him that he was half-minded to lay himself down where
he was, and let the night air come upon him and do its worst. In such
case, however, some Italian doctor would be sent down who would say
that he was mad. Above all the things, and to the last, he must save
himself from that degradation.

When he had crawled up to the house, he went to his child, and found
that the woman had put the boy to bed. Then he was angry with himself
in that he himself had not seen to this, and kept up his practice of
attending the child to the last. He would, at least, be true to his
resolution, and prepare for the boy's return to his mother. Not knowing
how otherwise to manage it, he wrote that night the following note to
Mr Glascock:



'Casalunga,

Thursday night.

My Dear Sir,

Since you last were considerate enough to call upon me I have resolved
to take a step in my affairs which, though it will rob me of my only
remaining gratification, will tend to lessen the troubles under which
Mrs Trevelyan is labouring. If she desires it, as no doubt she does, I
will consent to place our boy again in her custody trusting to her
sense of honour to restore him to me should I demand it. In my present
unfortunate position I cannot suggest that she should come for the boy.
I am unable to support the excitement occasioned by her presence. I
will, however, deliver up my darling either to you, or to any messenger
sent by you whom I can trust. I beg heartily to apologise for the
trouble I am giving you, and to subscribe myself yours very faithfully.

Louis Trevelyan

The Hon. C. Glascock.

P.S. It is as well, perhaps, that I should explain that I must decline
to receive any visit from Sir Marmaduke Rowley. Sir Marmaduke has
insulted me grossly on each occasion on which I have seen him since his
return home.'



CHAPTER LXXXV - THE BATHS OF LUCCA

June was now far advanced, and the Rowleys and the Spaldings had
removed from Florence to the Baths of Lucca. Mr Glascock had followed
in their wake, and the whole party were living at the Baths in one of
those hotels in which so many English and Americans are wont to
congregate in the early weeks of the Italian summer. The marriage was
to take place in the last week of the month; and all the party were to
return to Florence for the occasion with the exception of Sir Marmaduke
and Mrs Trevelyan. She was altogether unfitted for wedding joys, and
her father had promised to bear her company when the others left her.
Mr Glascock and Caroline Spalding were to be married in Florence, and
were to depart immediately from thence for some of the cooler parts of
Switzerland. After that Sir Marmaduke and Lady Rowley were to return to
London with their daughters, preparatory to that dreary journey back to
the Mandarins; and they had not even yet resolved what they had better
do respecting that unfortunate man who was living in seclusion on the
hilltop near Siena. They had consulted lawyers and doctors in Florence,
but it had seemed that everybody there was afraid of putting the law in
force against an Englishman. Doubtless there was a law in respect to
the custody of the insane; and it was admitted that if Trevelyan were
dangerously mad something could be done; but it seemed that nobody was
willing to stir in such a case as that which now existed. Something, it
was said, might be done at some future time; but the difficulties were
so great that nothing could be done now.

It was very sad, because it was necessary that some decision should be
made as to the future residence of Mrs Trevelyan and of Nora. Emily had
declared that nothing should induce her to go to the Islands with her
father and mother unless her boy went with her. Since her journey to
Casalunga she had also expressed her unwillingness to leave her
husband. Her heart had been greatly softened towards him, and she had
declared that where he remained, there would she remain as near to him
as circumstances would admit. It might be that at last her care would
be necessary for his comfort. He supplied her with means of living, and
she would use these means as well as she might be able in his service.

Then there had arisen the question of Nora's future residence. And
there had come troubles and storms in the family. Nora had said that
she would not go back to the Mandarins, but had not at first been able
to say where or how she would live. She had suggested that she might
stay with her sister, but her father had insisted that she could not
live on the income supplied by Trevelyan. Then, when pressed hard, she
had declared that she intended to live on Hugh Stanbury's income. She
would marry him at once with her father's leave, if she could get it,
but without it if it needs must be so. Her mother told her that Hugh
Stanbury was not himself ready for her; he had not even proposed so
hasty a marriage, nor had he any home fitted for her. Lady Rowley, in
arguing this, had expressed no assent to the marriage, even as a
distant arrangement, but had thought thus to vanquish her daughter by
suggesting small but insuperable difficulties. On a sudden, however,
Lady Rowley found that all this was turned against her, by an offer
that came direct from Mr Glascock. His Caroline, he said, was very
anxious that Nora should come to them at Monkhams as soon as they had
returned home from Switzerland. They intended to be there by the middle
of August, and would hurry there sooner, if there was any immediate
difficulty about finding a home for Nora. Mr Glascock said nothing
about Hugh Stanbury; but, of course, Lady Rowley understood that Nora
had told all her troubles and hopes to Caroline, and that Caroline had
told them to her future husband. Lady Rowley, in answer to this, could
only say that she would consult her husband.

There was something very grievous in the proposition to Lady Rowley. If
Nora had not been self-willed and stiff-necked beyond the usual
self-wilderness and stiff-nakedness of young women she might have been
herself the mistress of Monkhams. It was proposed now that she should
go there to wait till a poor man should have got together shillings
enough to buy a few chairs and tables, and a bed to lie upon! The
thought of this was very bitter. 'I cannot think, Nora, how you could
have the heart to go there,' said Lady Rowley.

'I cannot understand why not, mamma. Caroline and I are friends, and
surely he and I need not be enemies. He has never injured me; and if he
does not take offence, why should I?'

'If you don't see it, I can't help it,' said Lady Rowley.

And then Mrs Spalding's triumph was terrible to Lady Rowley. Mrs
Spalding knew nothing of her future son-in-law's former passion, and
spoke of her Caroline as having achieved triumphs beyond the reach of
other girls. Lady Rowley bore it, never absolutely telling the tale of
her daughter's fruitless victory. She was too good at heart to utter
the boast but it was very hard to repress it. Upon the whole she would
have preferred that Mr Glascock and his bride should not have become
the fast friends of herself and her family. There was more of pain than
of pleasure in the alliance. But circumstances had been too strong for
her. Mr Glascock had been of great use in reference to Trevelyan, and
Caroline and Nora had become attached to each other almost on their
first acquaintance. Here they were together at the Baths of Lucca, and
Nora was to be one of the four bridesmaids. When Sir Marmaduke was
consulted about this visit to Monkhams, he became fretful, and would
give no answer. The marriage, he said, was impossible, and Nora was a
fool. He could give her no allowance more than would suffice for her
clothes, and it was madness for her to think of stopping in England.
But he was so full of cares that he could come to no absolute decision
on this matter. Nora, however, had come to a very absolute decision.

'Caroline,' she said, 'if you will have me, I will go to Monkhams.'

'Of course we will have you. Has not Charles said how delighted he
would be?'

'Oh yes your Charles,' said Nora laughing.

'He is mine now, dear. You must not expect him to change his mind
again. I gave him the chance, you know, and he would not take it. But,
Nora, come to Monkhams, and stay as long as it suits. I have talked it
all over with him, and we both agree that you shall have a home there.
You shall be just like a sister. Olivia is coming too after a bit; but
he says there is room for a dozen sisters. Of course it will be all
right with Mr Stanbury after a while.' And so it was settled among them
that Nora Rowley should find a home at Monkhams, if a home in England
should be wanted for her.

It wanted but four days to that fixed for the marriage at Florence, and
but six to that on which the Rowleys were to leave Italy for England,
when Mr Glascock received Trevelyan's letter. It was brought to him as
he was sitting at a late breakfast in the garden of the hotel; and
there were present at the moment not only all the Spalding family, but
the Rowleys also. Sir Marmaduke was there and Lady Rowley, and the
three unmarried daughters; but Mrs Trevelyan, as was her wont, had
remained alone in her own room. Mr Glascock read the letter, and read
it again, without attracting much attention. Caroline, who was of
course sitting next to him, had her eyes upon him, and could see that
the letter moved him; but she was not curious, and at any rate asked no
question. He himself understood fully how great was the offer made how
all-important to the happiness of the poor mother and he was also
aware, or thought that he was aware, how likely it might be that the
offer would be retracted. As regarded himself, a journey from the Baths
at Lucca to Casalunga and back before his marriage, would be a great
infliction on his patience. It was his plan to stay where he was till
the day before his marriage, and then to return to Florence with the
rest of the party. All this must be altered, and sudden changes must be
made, if he decided on going to Siena himself. The weather now was very
hot, and such a journey would be most disagreeable to him. Of course he
had little schemes in his head, little amatory schemes for prenuptial
enjoyment, which, in spite of his mature years, were exceedingly
agreeable to him. The chestnut woods round the Baths of Lucca are very
pleasant in the early summer, and there were excursions planned in
which Caroline would be close by his side almost already his wife. But,
if he did not go, whom could he send? It would be necessary at least
that he should consult her, the mother of the child, before any
decision was formed.

At last he took Lady Rowley aside, and read to her the letter. She
understood at once that it opened almost a heaven of bliss to her
daughter and she understood also how probable it might be that wretched
man, with his shaken wits, should change his mind. 'I think I ought to
go,' said Mr Glascock. 'But how can you go now?'

'I can go,' said he. 'There is time for it. It need not put off my
marriage to which of course I could not consent. I do not know whom I
could send.'

'Moonier could go,' said Lady Rowley, naming the courier.

'Yes he could go. But it might be that he would return without the
child, and then we should not forgive ourselves. I will go, Lady
Rowley. After all, what does it signify? I am a little old, I sometimes
think, for this philandering. You shall take his letter to your
daughter, and I will explain it all to Caroline.'

Caroline had not a word to say. She could only kiss him, and promise to
make him what amends she could when he came back. 'Of course you are
right,' she said. 'Do you think that I would say a word against it,
even though the marriage were to be postponed?'

'I should a good many words. But I will be back in time for that, and
will bring the boy with me.'

Mrs Trevelyan, when her husband's letter was read to her, was almost
overcome by the feelings which it excited. In her first paroxysm of joy
she declared that she would herself go to Siena, not for her child's
sake, but for that of her husband. She felt at once that the boy was
being given up because of the father's weakness because he felt himself
to be unable to be a protector to his son and her woman's heart was
melted with softness as she thought of the condition of the man to whom
she had once given her whole heart. Since then, doubtless, her heart
had revolted from him. Since that time there had come hours in which
she had almost hated him for his cruelty to her. There had been moments
in which she had almost cursed his name because of the aspersion which
it had seemed that he had thrown upon her. But this was now forgotten,
and she remembered only his weakness. 'Mamma,' she said, 'I will go. It
is my duty to go to him.' But Lady Rowley withheld her, explaining that
were she to go, the mission might probably fail in its express purpose.
'Let Louey be sent to us first,' said Lady Rowley, 'and then we will
see what can be done afterwards.'

And so Mr Glascock started, taking with him a maid-servant who might
help him with the charge of the child. It was certainly very hard upon
him. In order to have time for his journey to Siena and back, and time
also to go out to Casalunga, it was necessary that he should leave the
Baths at five in the morning. 'If ever there was a hero of romance, you
are he!' said Nora to him.

'The heroes of life are so much better than the heroes of romance,'
said Caroline.

'That is a lesson from the lips of the American Browning,' said Mr
Glascock. 'Nevertheless, I think I would rather ride a charge against a
Paynim knight in Palestine than get up at half-past four in the
morning.'

'We will get up too, and give the knight his coffee,' said Nora. They
did get up, and saw him off; and when Mr Glascock and Caroline parted
with a lover's embrace, Nora stood by as a sister might have done. Let
us hope that she remembered that her own time was coming.

There had been a promise given by Nora, when she left London, that she
would not correspond with Hugh Stanbury while she was in Italy, and
this promise had been kept. It may be remembered that Hugh had made a
proposition to his lady-love, that she should walk out of the house one
fine morning, and get herself married without any reference to her
father's or her mother's wishes. But she had not been willing to take
upon herself as yet independence so complete as this would have
required. She had assured her lover that she did mean to marry him some
day, even though it should be in opposition to her father, but that she
thought that the period for filial persuasion was not yet over; and
then, in explaining all this to her mother, she had given a promise
neither to write nor to receive letters during the short period of her
sojourn in Italy. She would be an obedient child for so long but, after
that, she must claim the right to fight her own battle. She had told
her lover that he must not write; and, of course, she had not written a
word herself. But now, when her mother threw it in her teeth that
Stanbury would not be ready to marry her, she thought that an unfair
advantage was being taken of her and of him. How could he be expected
to say that he was ready deprived as he was of the power of saying
anything at all?

'Mamma,' she said, the day before they went to Florence, 'has papa
fixed about your leaving England yet? I suppose you'll go now on the
last Saturday in July?'

'I suppose we shall, my dear.'

'Has not papa written about the berths?'

'I believe he has, my dear.'

'Because he ought to know who are going. I will not go.

'You will not, Nora. Is that a proper way of speaking?'

'Dear mamma, I mean it to be proper. I hope it is proper. But is it not
best that we should understand each other. All my life depends on my
going or my staying now. I must decide.'

'After what has passed, you do not, I suppose, mean to live in Mr
Glascock's house?'

'Certainly not. I mean to live with with with my husband. Mamma, I
promised not to write, and I have not written. And he has not written
because I told him not. Therefore, nothing is settled. But it is not
fair to throw it in my teeth that nothing is settled.'

'I have thrown nothing in your teeth, Nora.'

'Papa talks sneeringly about chairs and tables. Of course, I know what
he is thinking of. As I cannot go with him to the Mandarins, I think I
ought to be allowed to look after the chairs and tables.'

'What do you mean, my dear?'

'That you should absolve me from my promise, and let me write to Mr
Stanbury. I do not want to be left without a home.'

'You cannot wish to write to a gentleman and ask him to marry you!'

'Why not? We are engaged. I shall not ask him to marry me that is
already settled; but I shall ask him to make arrangements.'

'Your papa will be very angry if you break your word to him.'

'I will write, and show you the letter. Papa may see it, and if he will
not let it go, it shall not go. He shall not say that I broke my word.
But, mamma, I will not go out to the Islands. I should never get back
again, and I should be broken-hearted.' Lady Rowley had nothing to say
to this; and Nora went and wrote her letter. 'Dear Hugh,' the letter
ran, 'Papa and mamma leave England on the last Saturday in July. I have
told mamma that I cannot return with them. Of course, you know why I
stay. Mr .Glascock is to be married the day after to-morrow, and they
have asked me to go with them to Monkhams some time in August. I think
I shall do so, unless Emily wants me to remain with her. At any rate, I
shall try to be with her till I go there. You will understand why I
tell you all this. Papa and mamma know that I am writing. It is only a
business letter, and, therefore, I shall say no more, except that I am
ever and always yours NORA.' 'There,' she said, handing her letter to
her mother, 'I think that ought to be sent. If papa chooses to prevent
its going, he can.'

Lady Rowley, when she handed the letter to her husband, recommended
that it should be allowed to go to its destination. She admitted that,
if they sent it, they would thereby signify their consent to her
engagement and she alleged that Nora was so strong in her will, and
that the circumstances of their journey out to the Antipodes were so
peculiar, that it was of no avail for them any longer to oppose the
match. They could not force their daughter to go with them. 'But I can
cast her off from me, if she be disobedient,' said Sir Marmaduke. Lady
Rowley, however, had no desire that her daughter should be cast off,
and was aware that Sir Marmaduke, when it came to the point of casting
off, would be as little inclined to be stern as she was herself. Sir
Marmaduke, still hoping that firmness would carry the day, and
believing that it behoved him to maintain his parental authority, ended
the discussion by keeping possession of the letter, and saying that he
would take time to consider the matter. 'What security have we that he
will ever marry her, if she does stay?' he asked the next morning. Lady
Rowley had no doubt on this score, and protested that her opposition to
Hugh Stanbury arose simply from his want of income. 'I should never be
justified,' said Sir Marmaduke, 'if I were to go and leave my girl as
it were in the hands of a penny-a-liner.' The letter, in the end, was
not sent; and Nora and her father hardly spoke to each other as they
made their journey back to Florence together.

Emily Trevelyan, before the arrival of that letter from her husband,
had determined that she would not leave Italy. It had been her purpose
to remain somewhere in the neighbourhood of her husband and child; and
to overcome her difficulties or be overcome by them, as circumstances
might direct. Now her plans were again changed or, rather, she was now
without a plan. She could form no plan till she should again see Mr
Glascock. Should her child be restored to her, would it not be her duty
to remain near her husband? All this made Nora's line of conduct the
more difficult for her. It was acknowledged that she could not remain
in Italy. Mrs Trevelyan's position would be most embarrassing; but as
all her efforts were to be used towards a reconciliation with her
husband, and as his state utterly precluded the idea of a mixed
household of any such a family arrangement as that which had existed in
Curzon Street Nora could not remain with her. Mrs Trevelyan herself had
declared that she would not wish it. And, in that case, where was Nora
to bestow herself when Sir Marmaduke and Lady Rowley had sailed?
Caroline offered to curtail those honeymoon weeks in Switzerland, but
it was impossible to listen to an offer so magnanimous and so
unreasonable. Nora had a dim romantic idea of sharing Priscilla's
bedroom in that small cottage near Nuncombe Putney, of which she had
heard, and of there learning lessons in strict economy but of this she
said nothing. The short journey from the Baths of Lucca to Florence was
not a pleasant one, and the Rowley family were much disturbed as they
looked into the future. Lodgings had now been taken for them, and there
was the great additional doubt whether Mrs Trevelyan would find her
child there on her arrival.

The Spaldings went one way from the Florence station, and the Rowleys
another. The American Minister had returned to the city some days
previously drawn there nominally by pleas of business, but, in truth,
by the necessities of the wedding breakfast and he met them at the
station. 'Has Mr Glascock come back?' Nora was the first to ask. Yes he
had come. He had been in the city since two o'clock, and had been up at
the American Minister's house for half a minute. 'And has he brought
the child?' asked Caroline, relieved of doubt on her own account. Mr
Spalding did not know indeed, he had not interested himself quite so
intently about Mrs Trevelyan's little boy, as had all those who had
just returned from the Baths. Mr Glascock had said nothing to him about
the child, and he had not quite understood why such a man should have
made a journey to Siena, leaving his sweetheart behind him, just on the
eve of his marriage. He hurried his women-kind into their carriage, and
they were driven away; and then Sir Marmaduke was driven away with his
women-kind. Caroline Spalding had perhaps thought that Mr Glascock
might have been there to meet her.



CHAPTER LXXXVI - MR GLASCOCK AS NURSE

A message had been sent by the wires to Trevelyan, to let him know that
Mr Glascock was himself coming for the boy. Whether such message would
or would not be sent out to Casalunga Mr Glascock had been quite
ignorant but it could, at any rate, do no harm. He did feel it hard as
in this hot weather he made the journey, first to Florence, and then on
to Siena. What was he to the Rowleys, or to Trevelyan himself, that
such a job of work should fall to his lot at such a period of his life?
He had been very much in love with Nora, no doubt; but, luckily for
him, as he thought, Nora had refused him. As for Trevelyan Trevelyan
had never been his friend. As for Sir Marmaduke Sir Marmaduke was
nothing to him. He was almost angry even with Mrs Trevelyan as he
arrived tired, heated, and very dusty, at Siena. It was his purpose to
sleep at Siena that night, and to go out to Casalunga early the next
morning. If the telegram had not been forwarded, he would send a
message on that evening. On inquiry, however, he found that the message
had been sent, and that the paper had been put into the Signore's own
hand by the Sienese messenger. Then he got into some discourse with the
landlord about the strange gentleman at Casalunga. Trevelyan was
beginning to become the subject of gossip in the town, and people were
saying that the stranger was very strange indeed. The landlord thought
that if the Signore had any friends at all, it would be well that such
friends should come and look after him. Mr Glascock asked if Mr
Trevelyan was ill. It was not only that the Signore was out of health
so the landlord heard but that he was also somewhat And then the
landlord touched his head. He eat nothing, and went nowhere, and spoke
to no one; and the people at the hospital to which Casalunga belonged
were beginning to be uneasy about their tenant. Perhaps Mr Glascock had
come to take him away. Mr Glascock explained that he had not come to
take Mr Trevelyan away but only to take away a little boy that was with
him. For this reason he was travelling with a maid-servant a fact for
which Mr Glascock clearly thought it necessary that he should give an
intelligible and credible explanation. The landlord seemed to think
that the people at the hospital would have been much rejoiced had Mr
Glascock intended to take Mr Trevelyan away also.

He started after a very early breakfast, and found himself walking up
over the stone ridges to the house between nine and ten in the morning.
He himself had sat beside the driver and had put the maid inside the
carriage. He had not deemed it wise to take an undivided charge of the
boy even from Casalunga to Siena. At the door of the house, as though
waiting for him, he found Trevelyan, not dirty as he had been before,
but dressed with much appearance of smartness. He had a brocaded cap on
his head, and a shirt with a laced front, and a worked waistcoat, and a
frockcoat, and coloured bright trowsers. Mr Glascock knew at once that
all the clothes which he saw before him had been made for Italian and
not for English wear; and could almost have said that they had been
bought in Siena and not in Florence. 'I had not intended to impose this
labour on you, Mr Glascock,' Trevelyan said, raising his cap to salute
his visitor.

'For fear there might be mistakes, I thought it better to come myself,'
said Mr Glascock. 'You did not wish to see Sir Marmaduke?'

'Certainly not Sir Marmaduke,' said Trevelyan, with a look of anger
that was almost grotesque.

'And you thought it better that Mrs Trevelyan should not come.'

'Yes I thought it better but not from any feeling of anger towards her.
If I could welcome my wife here, Mr Glascock, without a risk of wrath
on her part, I should be very happy to receive her. I love my wife, Mr
Glascock. I love her dearly. But there have been misfortunes. Never
mind. There is no reason why I should trouble you with them. Let us go
in to breakfast. After your drive you will have an appetite.'

Poor Mr Glascock was afraid to decline to sit down to the meal which
was prepared for him. He did mutter something about having already
eaten, but Trevelyan put this aside with a wave of his hand as he led
the way into a spacious room, in which had been set out a table with
almost a sumptuous banquet. The room was very bare and comfortless,
having neither curtains nor matting, and containing not above half a
dozen chairs. But an effort had been made to give it an air of Italian
luxury. The windows were thrown open, down to the ground, and the table
was decorated with fruits and three or four long-necked bottles.
Trevelyan waved with his hand towards an arm-chair, and Mr Glascock had
no alternative but to seat himself. He felt that he was sitting down to
breakfast with a madman; but if he did not sit down, the madman might
perhaps break out into madness. Then Trevelyan went to the door and
called aloud for Catarina. 'In these remote places,' said he, 'one has
to do without the civilisation of a bell. Perhaps one gains as much in
quiet as one loses in comfort.' Then Catarina came with hot meats and
fried potatoes, and Mr Glascock was compelled to help himself.

'I am but a bad trencherman myself,' said Trevelyan, 'but I shall
lament my misfortune doubly if that should interfere with your
appetite.' Then he got up and poured out wine into Mr Glascock's glass.
'They tell me that it comes from the Baron's vineyard,' said Trevelyan,
alluding to the wine-farm of Ricasoli, 'and that there is none better
in Tuscany. I never was myself a judge of the grape, but this to me is
as palatable as any of the costlier French wines. How grand a thing
would wine really be, if it could make glad the heart of man. How truly
would one worship Bacchus if he could make one's heart to rejoice. But
if a man have a real sorrow, wine will not wash it away not though a
man were drowned in it, as Clarence was.'

Mr Glascock hitherto had spoken hardly a word. There was an attempt at
joviality about this breakfast or, at any rate, of the usual
comfortable luxury of hospitable entertainment which, coming as it did
from Trevelyan, almost locked his lips. He had not come there to be
jovial or luxurious, but to perform a most melancholy mission; and he
had brought with him his saddest looks, and was prepared for a few sad
words. Trevelyan's speech, indeed, was sad enough, but Mr Glascock
could not take up questions of the worship of Bacchus at half a
minute's warning. He eat a morsel, and raised his glass to his lips,
and felt himself to be very uncomfortable. It was necessary, however,
that he should utter a word. 'Do you not let your little boy come in to
breakfast?' he said.

'He is better away,' said Trevelyan gloomily.

'But as we are to travel together,' said Mr Glascock, 'we might as well
make acquaintance.'

'You have been a little hurried with me on that score,' said Trevelyan.
'I wrote certainly with a determined mind, but things have changed
somewhat since then.'

'You do not mean that you will not send him?'

'You have been somewhat hurried with me, I say. If I remember rightly,
I named no time, but spoke of the future. Could I have answered the
message which I received from you, I would have postponed your visit
for a week or so.'

'Postponed it! Why I am to be married the day after to-morrow. It was
just as much as I was able to do, to come here at all.' Mr Glascock now
pushed his chair back from the table, and prepared himself to speak up.
'Your wife expects her child now, and you will never break her heart by
refusing to send him.'

'Nobody thinks of my heart, Mr Glascock.'

'But this is your own offer.'

'Yes, it was my own offer, certainly. I am not going to deny my own
words, which have no doubt been preserved in testimony against me.'

'Mr Trevelyan, what do you mean?' Then, when he was on the point of
boiling over with passion, Mr Glascock remembered that his companion
was not responsible for his expressions. 'I do hope you will let the
child go away with me,' he said. 'You cannot conceive the state of his
mother's anxiety, and she will send him back at once if you demand it.'

'Is that to be in good faith?'

'Certainly, in good faith. I would lend myself to nothing, Mr
Trevelyan, that was not said and done in good faith.'

'She will not break her word, excusing herself, because I am mad?'

'I am sure that there is nothing of the kind in her mind.'

'Perhaps not now; but such things grow. There is no iniquity, no breach
of promise, no treason that a woman will not excuse to herself or a man
either by the comfortable self-assurance that the person to be injured
is mad. A hound without a friend is not so cruelly treated. The outlaw,
the murderer, the perjurer has surer privileges than the man who is in
the way, and to whom his friends can point as being mad!' Mr Glascock
knew or thought that he knew that his host in truth was mad, and he
could not, therefore, answer this tirade by an assurance that no such
idea was likely to prevail. 'Have they told you, I wonder,' continued
Trevelyan, 'how it was that, driven to force and an ambuscade for the
recovery of my own child, I waylaid my wife and took him from her? I
have done nothing to forfeit my right as a man to the control of my own
family. I demanded that the boy should be sent to me, and she paid no
attention to my words. I was compelled to vindicate my own authority;
and then, because I claimed the right which belongs to a father, they
said that I was mad! Ay, and they would have proved it, too, had I not
fled from my country and hidden myself in this desert. Think of that,
Mr Glascock! Now they have followed me here not out of love for me; and
that man whom they call a governor comes and insults me; and my wife
promises to be good to me, and says that she will forgive and forget!
Can she ever forgive herself her own folly, and the cruelty that has
made shipwreck of my life? They can do nothing to me here; but they
would entice me home because there they have friends, and can fee
doctors with my own money and suborn lawyers, and put me away somewhere
in the dark, where I shall be no more heard of among men! As you are a
man of honour, Mr Glascock tell me; is it not so?'

'I know nothing of their plans beyond this, that you wrote me word that
you would send them the boy.'

'But I know their plans. What you say is true. I did write you word and
I meant it. Mr Glascock, sitting here alone from morning to night, and
lying down from night till morning, without companionship, without
love, in utter misery, I taught myself to feel that I should think more
of her than of myself.'

'If you are so unhappy here, come back yourself with the child. Your
wife would desire nothing better.'

'Yes and submit to her, and her father, and her mother. No Mr Glascock;
never, never. Let her come to me.'

'But you will not receive her.'

'Let her come in a proper spirit, and I will receive her. She is the
wife of my bosom, and I will receive her with joy. But if she is to
come to me and tell me that she forgives me forgives me for the evil
that she has done then, sir, she had better stay away. Mr Glascock, you
are going to be married. Believe me no man should submit to be forgiven
by his wife. Everything must go astray if that be done. I would rather
encounter their mad doctors, one of them after another ill they had
made me mad I would encounter anything rather than that. But, sir, you
neither eat nor drink, and I fear that my speech disturbs you.'

It was like enough that it may have done so. Trevelyan, as he had been
speaking, had walked about the room, going from one extremity to the
other with hurried steps, gesticulating with his arms, and every now
and then pushing back with his hands the long hair from off his
forehead. Mr Glascock was in truth very much disturbed. He had come
there with an express object; but, whenever he mentioned the child, the
father became almost rabid in his wrath. 'I have done very well, thank
you,' said Mr Glascock. 'I will not eat any more, and I believe I must
be thinking of going back to Siena.'

'I had hoped you would spend the day with me, Mr Glascock.'

'I am to be married, you see, in two days; and I must be in Florence
early to-morrow. I am to meet my wife, as she will be, and the Rowleys,
and your wife. Upon my word I can't stay. Won't you just say a word to
the young woman and let the boy be got ready?'

'I think not no, I think not.'

'And am I to have had all this journey for nothing? You will have made
a fool of me in writing to me.'

'I intended to be honest, Mr Glascock.'

'Stick to your honesty, and send the boy back to his mother. It will be
better for you, Trevelyan.'

'Better for me! Nothing can be better for me. All must be worst. It
will be better for me, you say; and you ask me to give up the last drop
of cold water wherewith I can touch my parched lips. Even in my hell I
had so much left to me of a limpid stream, and you tell me that it will
be better for me to pour it away. You may take him, Mr Glascock. The
woman will make him ready for you. What matters it whether the fiery
furnace be heated seven times, or only six in either degree the flames
are enough! You may take him you may take him!' So saying, Trevelyan
walked out of the window, leaving Mr Glascock seated in his chair. He
walked out of the window and went down among the olive trees. He did
not go far, however, but stood with his arm round the stem of one of
them, playing with the shoots of a vine with his hand. Mr Glascock
followed him to the window and stood looking at him for a few moments.
But Trevelyan did not turn or move. There he stood gazing at the pale,
cloudless, heat-laden, motionless sky, thinking of his own sorrows, and
remembering too, doubtless, with the vanity of a madman, that he was
probably being watched in his reverie.

Mr Glascock was too practical a man not to make the most of the offer
that had been made to him, and he went back among the passages and
called for Catarina. Before long he had two or three women with him,
including her whom he had brought from Florence, and among them Louey
was soon made to appear, dressed for his journey, together with a small
trunk in which were his garments. It was quite clear that the order for
his departure had been given before that scene at the breakfast-table,
and that Trevelyan had not intended to go back on his promise.
Nevertheless Mr Glascock thought it might be as well to hurry his
departure, and he turned back to say the shortest possible word of
farewell to Trevelyan in the garden. But when he got to the window,
Trevelyan was not to be found among the olive trees. Mr Glascock walked
a few steps down the hill, looking for him, but seeing nothing of him,
returned to the house. The elder woman said that her master had not
been there, and Mr Glascock started with his charge. Trevelyan was
manifestly mad, and it was impossible to treat him as a sane man would
have been treated. Nevertheless, Mr Glascock felt much compunction in
carrying the child away without a final kiss or word of farewell from
its father. But it was not to be so. He had got into the carriage with
the child, having the servant seated opposite to him for he was moved
by some undefinable fear which made him determine to keep the boy close
to him, and he had not, therefore, returned to the driver's seat when
Trevelyan appeared standing by the road-side at the bottom of the hill.
'Would you take him away from me without one word!' said Trevelyan
bitterly.

'I went to look for you but you were gone,' said Mr Glascock.

'No, sir, I was not gone. I am here. It is the last time that I shall
ever gladden my eyes with his brightness. Louey, my love, will you come
to your father?' Louey did not seem to be particularly willing to leave
the carriage, but he made no loud objection when Mr Glascock held him
up to the open space above the door. The child had realised the fact
that he was to go, and did not believe that his father would stop him
now; but he was probably of opinion that the sooner the carriage began
to go on the better it would be for him. Mr Glascock, thinking that his
father intended to kiss him over the door, held him by his frock; but
the doing of this made Trevelyan very angry. 'Am I not to be trusted
with my own child in my arms?' said he. 'Give him to me, sir. I begin
to doubt now whether I am right to deliver him to you.' Mr Glascock
immediately let go his hold of the boy's frock and leaned back in the
carriage. 'Louey will tell papa that he loves him before he goes?' said
Trevelyan. The poor little fellow murmured something, but it did not
please his father, who had him in his arms. 'You are like the rest of
them, Louey,' he said; 'because I cannot laugh and be gay, all my love
for you is nothing nothing! You may take him. He is all that I have all
that I have and I shall never see him again!' So saying he handed the
child into the carriage, and sat himself down by the side of the road
to watch till the vehicle should be out of sight. As soon as the last
speck of it had vanished from his sight, he picked himself up, and
dragged his slow footsteps back to the house.

Mr Glascock made sundry attempts to amuse the child, with whom he had
to remain all that night at Siena; but his efforts in that line were
not very successful. The boy was brisk enough, and happy, and social by
nature; but the events, or rather the want of events of the last few
months, had so cowed him, that he could not recover his spirits at the
bidding of a stranger. 'If I have any of my own,' said Mr Glascock to
himself, 'I hope they will be of a more cheerful disposition.'

As we have seen, he did not meet Caroline at the station thereby
incurring his lady-love's displeasure for the period of half-a-minute;
but he did meet Mrs Trevelyan almost at the door of Sir Marmaduke's
lodgings. 'Yes, Mrs Trevelyan; he is here.'

'How am I ever to thank you for such goodness?' said she. 'And Mr
Trevelyan you saw him?'

'Yes I saw him.'

Before he could answer her further she was upstairs, and had her child
in her arms. It seemed to be an age since the boy had been stolen from
her in the early spring in that unknown, dingy street near Tottenham
Court Road. Twice she had seen her darling, since that twice during his
captivity; but on each of these occasions she had seen him as one not
belonging to herself, and had seen him under circumstances which had
robbed the greeting of almost all its pleasure. But now he was her own
again, to take whither she would, to dress and to undress, to feed, to
coax, to teach, and to caress. And the child lay up close to her as she
hugged him, putting up his little cheek to her chin, and burying
himself happily in her embrace. He had not much as yet to say, but she
could feel that he was contented.

Mr Glascock had promised to wait for her a few minutes even at the risk
of Caroline's displeasure and Mrs Trevelyan ran down to him as soon as
the first craving of her mother's love was satisfied. Her boy would at
any rate be safe with her now, and it was her duty to learn something
of her husband. It was more than her duty if only her services might be
of avail to him. 'And you say he was well?' she asked. She had taken Mr
Glascock apart, and they were alone together, and he had determined
that he would tell her the truth.

'I do not know that he is ill though he is pale and altered beyond
belief.'

'Yes I saw that.'

'I never knew a man so thin and haggard.'

'My poor Louis!'

'But that is not the worst of it.'

'What do you mean, Mr Glascock?'

'I mean that his mind is astray, and that he should not be left alone.
There is no knowing what he might do. He is so much more alone there
than he would be in England. There is not a soul who could interfere.'

'Do you mean that you think that he is in danger from himself?'

'I would not say so, Mrs Trevelyan; but who can tell? I am sure of this
that he should not be left alone. if it were only because of the misery
of his life, he should not be left alone.'

'But what can I do? He would not even see papa.'

'He would see you.'

'But he would not let me guide him in anything. I have been to him
twice, and he breaks out as if I were a bad woman.'

'Let him break out. What does it matter?'

'Am I to own to a falsehood and such a falsehood?'

'Own to anything, and you will conquer him at once. That is what I
think. You will excuse what I say, Mrs Trevelyan.'

'Oh, Mr Glascock, you have been such a friend! What should we have done
without you!'

'You cannot take to heart the words that come from a disordered reason.
In truth, he believes no ill of you.'

'But he says so.'

'It is hard to know what he says. Declare that you will submit to him,
and I think that he will be softened towards you. Try to bring him back
to his own country. It may be that were he to die there, alone, the
memory of his loneliness would be heavy with you in after days.' Then,
having so spoken, he rushed off, declaring, with a forced laugh, that
Caroline Spalding would never forgive him.

The next day was the day of the wedding, and Emily Trevelyan was left
all alone. It was of course out of the question that she should join
any party the purport of which was to be festive. Sir Marmaduke went
with some grumbling, declaring that wine and severe food in the
mornings were sins against the plainest rules of life. And the three
Rowley girls went, Nora officiating as one of the bridesmaids. But Mrs
Trevelyan was left with her boy, and during the day she was forced to
resolve what should be the immediate course of her life. Two days after
the wedding her family would return to England. It was open to her to
go with them, and to take her boy with her. But a few days since how
happy she would have been could she have been made to believe that such
a mode of returning would be within her power! But now she felt that
she might not return and leave that poor, suffering wretch behind her.
As she thought of him she tried to interrogate herself in regard to her
feelings. Was it love, or duty, or compassion which stirred her? She
had loved him as fondly as any bright young woman loves the man who is
to take her away from everything else, and make her a part of his house
and of himself. She had loved him as Nora now loved the man whom she
worshipped and thought to be a god, doing godlike work in the dingy
recesses of the D. R. office. Emily Trevelyan was forced to tell
herself that all that was over with her. Her husband had shown himself
to be weak, suspicious, unmanly by no means like a god. She had learned
to feel that she could not trust her comfort in his hands that she
could never know what his thoughts of her might be. But still he was
her husband, and the father of her child; and though she could not dare
to look forward to happiness in living with him, she could understand
that no comfort would be possible to her, were she to return to England
and to leave him to perish alone at Casalunga. Fate seemed to have
intended that her life should be one of misery, and she must bear it as
best she might.

The more she thought of it, however, the greater seemed to be her
difficulties. What was she to do when her father and mother should have
left her? She could not go to Casalunga if her husband would not give
her entrance; and if she did go, would it be safe for her to take her
boy with her? Were she to remain in Florence she would be hardly nearer
to him for any useful purpose than in England; and even should she
pitch her tent at Siena, occupying there' some desolate set of huge
apartments in a deserted palace, of what use could she be to him? Could
she stay there if he desired her to go; and was it probable that he
would be willing that she should be at Siena while he was living at
Casalunga no more than two leagues distant? How should she begin her
work; and if he repulsed her, how should she then continue it?

But during these wedding hours she did make up her mind as to what she
would do for the present. She would certainly not leave Italy while her
husband remained there. She would for a while keep her rooms in
Florence, and there should her boy abide. But from time to time twice a
week perhaps she would go down to Siena and Casalunga, and there form
her plans in accordance with her husband's conduct. She was his wife,
and nothing should entirely separate her from him, now that he so
sorely wanted her aid.



CHAPTER LXXXVII - MR GLASCOCK'S MARRIAGE COMPLETED

The Glascock marriage was a great affair in Florence so much so, that
there were not a few who regarded it as a strengthening of peaceful
relations between the United States and the United Kingdom, and who
thought that the Alabama claims and the question of naturalisation
might now be settled with comparative ease. An English lord was about
to marry the niece of an American Minister to a foreign court. The
bridegroom was not, indeed, quite a lord as yet, but it was known to
all men that he must be a lord in a very short time, and the bride was
treated with more than usual bridal honours because she belonged to a
legation. She was not, indeed, an ambassador's daughter, but the niece
of a daughterless ambassador, and therefore almost as good as a
daughter. The wives and daughters of other ambassadors, and the
ambassadors themselves, of course, came to the wedding; and as the
palace in which Mr Spalding had apartments stood alone, in a garden,
with a separate carriage entrance, it seemed for all wedding purposes
as though the whole palace were his own. The English Minister came, and
his wife although she had never quite given over turning up her nose at
the American bride whom Mr Glascock had chosen for himself. It was such
a pity, she said, that such a man as Mr Glascock should marry a young
woman from Providence, Rhode Island. Who in England would know anything
of Providence, Rhode Island? And it was so expedient, in her
estimation, that a man of family should strengthen himself by marrying
a woman of family. It was so necessary, she declared, that a man when
marrying should remember that his child would have two grandfathers,
and would be called upon to account for four great-grandfathers.
Nevertheless Mr Glascock was Mr Glascock; and, let him marry whom he
would, his wife would be the future Lady Peterborough. Remembering
this, the English Minister's wife gave up the point when the thing was
really settled, and benignly promised to come to the breakfast with all
the secretaries and attaches belonging to the legation, and all the
wives and daughters thereof. What may a man not do, and do with eclat,
if he be heir to a peer and have plenty of money in his pocket?

Mr and Mrs Spalding were covered with glory on the occasion; and
perhaps they did not bear their glory as meekly as they should have
done. Mrs Spalding laid herself open to some ridicule from the British
Minister's wife because of her inability to understand with absolute
clearness the condition of her niece's husband in respect to his late
and future seat in Parliament, to the fact of his being a commoner and
a nobleman at the same time, and to certain information which was
conveyed to her, surely in a most unnecessary manner, that if Mr
Glascock were to die before his father her niece would never become
Lady Peterborough, although her niece's son, if she had one, would be
the future lord. No doubt she blundered, as was most natural; and then
the British Minister's wife made the most of the blunders; and when
once Mrs Spalding ventured to speak of Caroline as her ladyship, not to
the British Minister's wife, but to the sister of one of the
secretaries, a story was made out of it which was almost as false as it
was ill-natured. Poor Caroline was spoken of as her ladyship backward
and forwards among the ladies of the legation in a manner which might
have vexed her had she known anything about it; but nevertheless, all
the ladies prepared their best flounces to go to the wedding. The time
would soon come when she would in truth be a 'ladyship,' and she might
be of social use to any one of the ladies in question.

But Mr Spalding was, for the time, the most disturbed of any of the
party concerned. He was a tall, thin, clever Republican of the North
very fond of hearing himself talk, and somewhat apt to take advantage
of the courtesies of conversation for the purpose of making
unpardonable speeches. As long as there was any give and take going on
in the melee of words he would speak quickly and with energy, seizing
his chances among others; but the moment he had established his right
to the floor as soon as he had won for himself the position of having
his turn at the argument, he would dole out his words with considerable
slowness, raise his hand for oratorical effect, and proceed as though
Time were annihilated. And he would go further even than this, for
fearing by experience the escape of his victims he would catch a man by
the button-hole of his coat, or back him ruthlessly into the corner of
a room, and then lay on to him without quarter. Since the affair with
Mr Glascock had been settled, he had talked an immensity about England
not absolutely taking honour to himself because of his intended
connection with a lord, but making so many references to the
aristocratic side of the British constitution as to leave no doubt on
the minds of his hearers as to the source of his arguments. In old
days, before all this was happening, Mr Spalding, though a courteous
man in his personal relations, had constantly spoken of England with
the bitter indignation of the ordinary American politician. England
must be made to disgorge. England must be made to do justice. England
must be taught her place in the world. England must give up her claims.
In hot moments he had gone further, and had declared that England must
be whipped. He had been specially loud against that aristocracy of
England which, according to a figure of speech often used by him, was
always feeding on the vitals of the people. But now all this was very
much changed. He did not go the length of expressing an opinion that
the House of Lords was a valuable institution; but he discussed
questions of primogeniture and hereditary legislation, in reference to
their fitness for countries which were gradually emerging from feudal
systems, with an equanimity, an impartiality, and a perseverance which
soon convinced those who listened to him where he had learned his
present lessons, and why. 'The conservative nature of your
institutions, sir,' he said to poor Sir Marmaduke at the Baths of Lucca
a very few days before the marriage, 'has to be studied with great care
before its effects can be appreciated in reference to a people who,
perhaps, I may be allowed to say, have more in their composition of
constitutional reverence than of educated intelligence.' Sir Marmaduke,
having suffered before, had endeavoured to bolt; but the American had
caught him and pinned him, and the Governor of the Mandarins was
impotent in his hands. 'The position of the great peer of Parliament is
doubtless very splendid, and may be very useful,' continued Mr
Spalding, who was intending to bring round his argument to the evil
doings of certain scandalously extravagant young lords, and to offer a
suggestion that in such cases a committee of aged and respected peers
should sit and decide whether a second son, or some other heir should
not be called to the inheritance both of the title and the property.
But Mrs Spalding had seen the sufferings of Sir Marmaduke, and had
rescued him. 'Mr Spalding,' she had said, 'it is too late for politics,
and Sir Marmaduke has come out here for a holiday.' Then she took her
husband by the arm, and led him away helpless.

In spite of these drawbacks to the success if ought can be said to be a
drawback on success of which the successful one is unconscious the
marriage was prepared with great splendour, and everybody who was
anybody in Florence was to be present. There were only to be four
bridesmaids, Caroline herself having strongly objected to a greater
number. As Wallachia Petrie had fled at the first note of preparation
for these trivial and unpalatable festivities, another American young
lady was found; and the sister of the English secretary of legation,
who had so maliciously spread that report about her 'ladyship,' gladly
agreed to be the fourth.

As the reader will remember, the whole party from the Baths of Lucca
reached Florence only the day before the marriage, and Nora at the
station promised to go up to Caroline that same evening. 'Mr Glascock
will tell me about the little boy,' said Caroline; 'but I shall be so
anxious to hear about your sister.' So Nora crossed the bridge after
dinner, and went up to the American Minister's palatial residence.
Caroline was then in the loggia, and Mr Glascock was with her; and for
a while they talked about Emily Trevelyan and her misfortunes. Mr
Glascock was clearly of opinion that Trevelyan would soon be either in
an asylum or in his grave. 'I could not bring myself to tell your
sister so,' he said; 'but I think your father should be told or your
mother. Something should be done to put an end to that fearful
residence at Casalunga.' Then by degrees the conversation changed
itself to Nora's prospects; and Caroline, with her friend's hand in
hers, asked after Hugh Stanbury.

'You will not mind speaking before him will you?' said Caroline,
putting her hand on her own lover's arm.

'Not unless he should mind it,' said Nora, smiling.

She had meant nothing beyond a simple reply to her friend's question,
but he took her words in a different sense, and blushed as he
remembered his visit to Nuncombe Putney.

'He thinks almost more of your happiness than he does of mine,' said
Caroline; 'which isn't fair, as I am sure that Mr Stanbury will not
reciprocate the attention. And now, dear, when are we to see you?'

'Who on earth can say?'

'I suppose Mr Stanbury would say something only he is not here.'

'And papa won't send my letter,' said Nora.

'You are sure that you will not go out to the Islands with him?'

'Quite sure,' said Nora. 'I have made up my mind so far as that.'

'And what will your sister do?'

'I think she will stay. I think she will say good-bye to papa and mamma
here in Florence.'

'I am quite of opinion that she should not leave her husband alone in
Italy,' said Mr Glascock.

'She has not told us with certainty,' said Nora; 'but I feel sure that
she will stay. Papa thinks she ought to go with them to London.'

'Your papa seems to have two very intractable daughters,' said
Caroline.

'As for me,' declared Nora, solemnly, 'nothing shall make me go back to
the Islands unless Mr Stanbury should tell me to do so.'

'And they start at the end of July?'

'On the last Saturday.'

'And what will you do then, Nora?'

'I believe there are casual wards that people go to.'

'Casual wards!' said Caroline.

'Miss Rowley is condescending to poke her fun at you,' said Mr
Glascock.

'She is quite welcome, and shall poke as much as she likes; only we
must be serious now. If it be necessary, we will get back by the end of
July won't we, Charles?'

'You will do nothing of the kind,' said Nora. 'What! give up your
honeymoon to provide me with board and lodgings! How can you suppose
that I am so selfish or so helpless? I would go to my aunt, Mrs
Outhouse.'

'We know that that wouldn't do,' said Caroline. 'You might as well be
in Italy as far as Mr Stanbury is concerned.'

'If Miss Rowley would go to Monkhams, she might wait for us,' suggested
Mr Glascock. 'Old Mrs Richards is there; and though of course she would
be dull--'

'It is quite unnecessary,' said Nora. 'I shall take a two-pair back in
a respectable feminine quarter, like any other young woman who wants
such accommodation, and shall wait there till my young man can come and
give me his arm to church. That is about the way we shall do it. I am
not going to give myself any airs, Mr Glascock, or make any
difficulties. Papa is always talking to me about chairs and tables and
frying-pans, and I shall practise to do with as few of them as
possible. As I am headstrong about having my young man and I own that I
am headstrong about that I guess I've got to fit myself for that sort
of life.' And Nora, as she said this, pronounced her words with
something of a nasal twang, imitating certain countrywomen of her
friend's.

'I like to hear you joking about it, Nora; because your voice is so
cheery and you are so bright when you joke. But, nevertheless, one has
to be reasonable, and to look the facts in the face. I don't see how
you are to be left in London alone, and you know that your aunt Mrs
Outhouse or at any rate your uncle would not receive you except on
receiving some strong anti-Stanbury pledge.'

'I certainly shall not give an anti-Stanbury pledge.'

'And, therefore, that is out of the question. You will have a fortnight
or three weeks in London, in all the bustle of their departure, and I
declare I think that at the last moment you will go with them.'

'Never! unless he says so.'

'I don't see how you are even to meet "him," and talk it over.'

'I'll manage that. My promise not to write lasts only while we are in
Italy.'

'I think we had better get back to England, Charles, and take pity on
this poor destitute one.'

'If you talk of such a thing I will swear that I will never go to
Monkhams. You will find that I shall manage it. It may be that I shall
do something very shocking so that all your patronage will hardly be
able to bring me round afterwards; but I will do something that will
serve my purpose. I have not gone so far as this to be turned back
now.' Nora, as she spoke of having 'gone so far,' was looking at Mr
Glascock, who was seated in an easy arm-chair close to the girl whom he
was to make his wife on the morrow, and she was thinking no doubt, of
the visit which he had made to Nuncombe Putney, and of the first
irretrievable step which she had taken when she told him that her love
was given to another. That had been her Rubicon. And though there had
been periods with her since the passing of it, in which she had felt
that she had crossed it in vain, that she had thrown away the splendid
security of the other bank without obtaining the perilous object of her
ambition though there had been moments in which she had almost
regretted her own courage and noble action, still, having passed the
river, there was nothing for her but to go on to Rome. She was not
going to be stopped now by the want of a house in which to hide herself
for a few weeks. She was without money, except so much as her mother
might be able, almost surreptitiously, to give her. She was without
friends to help her except these who were now with her, whose
friendship had come to her in so singular a mariner, and whose power to
aid her at the present moment was cruelly curtailed by their own
circumstances. Nothing was settled as to her own marriage. In
consequence of the promise that had been extorted from her that she
should not correspond with Stanbury, she knew nothing of his present
wishes or intention. Her father was so offended by her firmness that he
would hardly speak to her. And it was evident to her that her mother,
though disposed to yield, was still in hopes that her daughter, in the
press and difficulty of the moment, would allow herself to be carried
away with the rest of the family to the other side of the world. She
knew all this but she had made up her mind that she would not be
carried away. It was not very pleasant, the thought that she would be
obliged at last to ask her young man as she called him, to provide for
her; but she would do that and trust herself altogether in his hands
sooner than be taken to the Antipodes. 'I can be very resolute if I
please, my dear,' she said, looking at Caroline. Mr Glascock almost
thought that she must have intended to address him.

They sat there discussing the matter for some time through the long,
cool, evening hours, but nothing could be settled further except that
Nora would write to her friend as soon as her affairs had begun to
shape themselves after her return to England. At last Caroline went
into the house, and for a few minutes Mr Glascock was alone with Nora.
He had remained, determining that the moment should come, but now that
it was there he was for awhile unable to say the words that he wished
to utter. At last he spoke. 'Miss Rowley, Caroline is so eager to be
your friend.'

'I know she is, and I do love her so dearly. But, without joke, Mr
Glascock, there will be as it were a great gulf between us.'

'I do not know that there need be any gulf, great or little. But I did
not mean to allude to that. What I want to say is this. My feelings are
not a bit less warm or sincere than hers. You know of old that I am not
very good at expressing myself.'

'I know nothing of the kind.'

'There is no such gulf as what you speak of. All that is mostly gone
by, and a nobleman in England, though he has advantages as a gentleman,
is no more than a gentleman. But that has nothing to do with what I am
saying now. I shall never forget my journey to Devonshire. I won't
pretend to say now that I regret its result.'

'I am quite sure you don't.'

'No; I do not though I thought then that I should regret it always. But
remember this, Miss Rowley that you can never ask me to do anything
that I will not, if possible, do for you. You are in some little
difficulty now.,

'It will disappear, Mr Glascock. Difficulties always do.'

'But we will do anything that we are wanted to do; and should a certain
event take place--'

'It will take place some day.'

'Then I hope that we may be able to make Mr Stanbury and his wife quite
at home at Monkhams.' After that he took Nora's hand and kissed it, and
at that moment Caroline came back to them.

'Tomorrow, Mr Glascock,' she said, 'you will, I believe, be at liberty
to kiss everybody; but today you should be more discreet.'

It was generally admitted among the various legations in Florence that
there had not been such a wedding in the City of Flowers since it had
become the capital of Italia. Mr Glascock and Miss Spalding were
married in the chapel of the legation a legation chapel on the ground
floor having been extemporised for the occasion. This greatly enhanced
the pleasantness of the thing, and saved the necessity of matrons and
bridesmaids packing themselves and their finery into close fusty
carriages. A portion of the guests attended in the chapel, and the
remainder, when the ceremony was over, were found strolling about the
shady garden. The whole affair of the breakfast was very splendid and
lasted some hours. In the midst of this the bride and bridegroom were
whisked away with a pair of grey horses to the railway station, and
before the last toast of the day had been proposed by the Belgian
Councillor of Legation, they were half way up the Apennines on their
road to Bologna. Mr Spalding behaved himself like a man on the
occasion. Nothing was spared in the way of expense, and when he made
that celebrated speech, in which he declared that the republican virtue
of the New World had linked itself in a happy alliance with the
aristocratic splendour of the Old, and went on with a simile about the
lion and the lamb, everybody accepted it with good humour in spite of
its being a little too long for the occasion.

'It has gone off very well, mamma; has it not?' said Nora, as she
returned home with her mother to her lodgings.

'Yes, my dear; much, I fancy, as these things generally do.'

'I thought it was so nice. And she looked so very well. And he was so
pleasant, and so much like a gentleman not noisy, you know and yet not
too serious.'

'I dare say, my love.'

'It is easy enough, mamma, for a girl to be married, for she has
nothing to do but to wear her clothes and look as pretty as she can.
And if she cries and has a red nose it is forgiven her. But a man has
so difficult a part to play! If he tries to carry himself as though it
were not a special occasion, he looks like a fool that way; and if he
is very special, he looks like a fool the other way. I thought Mr
Glascock did it very well.'

'To tell you the truth, my dear, I did not observe him.'

'I did narrowly. He hadn't tied his cravat at all nicely.'

'How could you think of his cravat, Nora, with such memories as you
must have, and such regrets, I cannot understand.'

'Mamma, my memories of Mr Glascock are pleasant memories, and as for
regrets I have not one. Can I regret, mamma, that I did not marry a man
whom I did not love and that I rejected him when I knew that I loved
another? You cannot mean that, mamma.'

'I know this that I was thinking all the time how proud I should have
been, and how much more fortunate he would have been, had you been
standing there instead of that American young woman.' As she said this
Lady Rowley burst into tears, and Nora could only answer her mother by
embracing her. They were alone together, their party having been too
large for one carriage, and Sir Marmaduke having taken his two younger
daughters. 'Of course, I feel it,' said Lady Rowley, through her tears.
'It would have been such a position for my child! And that young man
without a shilling in the world; and writing in that way, just for bare
bread!' Nora had nothing more to say. A feeling that in herself would
have been base, was simply affectionate and maternal in her mother. It
was impossible that she should make her mother see it as she saw it.

There was but one intervening day and then the Rowleys returned to
England. There had been, as it were, a tacit agreement among them that,
in spite of all their troubles, their holiday should be a holiday up to
the time of the Glascock marriage. Then must commence at once the stem
necessity of their return home home, not only to England, but to those
antipodean islands from which it was too probable that some of them
might never come back. And the difficulties in their way seemed to be
almost insuperable. First of all there was to be the parting from Emily
Trevelyan. She had determined to remain in Florence, and had written to
her husband saying that she would do so, and declaring her willingness
to go out to him, or to receive him in Florence at any time and in any
manner that he might appoint. She had taken this as a first step,
intending to go to Casalunga very shortly, even though she should
receive no answer from him. The parting between her and her mother and
father and sisters was very bitter. Sir Marmaduke, as he had become
estranged from Nora, had grown to be more and more gentle and loving
with his eldest daughter, and was nearly overcome at the idea of
leaving her in a strange land, with a husband near her, mad, and yet
not within her custody. But he could do nothing could hardly say a word
toward opposing her. Though her husband was mad, he supplied her with
the means of living; and when she said that it was her duty to be near
him, her father could not deny it.

The parting came. 'I will return to you the moment you send to me,'
were Nora's last words to her sister. 'I don't suppose I shall send,'
said Emily. 'I shall try to bear it without assistance.'

Then the journey from Italy to England was made without much
gratification or excitement, and the Rowley family again found
themselves at Gregg's Hotel.



CHAPTER LXXXVIII - CROPPER AND BURGESS

We must now go back to Exeter and look after Mr Brooke Burgess and Miss
Dorothy Stan-bury. It is rather hard upon readers that they should be
thus hurried from the completion of hymeneals at Florence to the
preparations for other hymeneals in Devonshire; but it is the nature of
a complex story to be entangled with many weddings towards its close.
In this little history there are, we fear, three or four more to come.
We will not anticipate by alluding prematurely to Hugh Stanbury's
treachery, or death or the possibility that he after all may turn out
to be the real descendant of the true Lord Peterborough and the actual
inheritor of the title and estate of Monkhams, nor will we speak of
Nora's certain fortitude under either of these emergencies. But the
instructed reader must be aware that Camilla French ought to have a
husband found for her; that Colonel Osborne should be caught in some
matrimonial trap as, how otherwise should he be fitly punished? and
that something should be at least attempted for Priscilla Stanbury, who
from the first has been intended to be the real heroine of these pages.
That Martha should marry Giles Hickbody, and Barty Burgess run away
with Mrs MacHugh, is of course evident to the meanest novel-expounding
capacity; but the fate of Brooke Burgess and of Dorothy will require to
be evolved with some delicacy and much detail.

There was considerable difficulty in fixing the day. In the first place
Miss Stanbury was not very well and then she was very fidgety. She must
see Brooke again before the day was fixed, and after seeing Brooke she
must see her lawyer. 'To have a lot of money to look after is more
plague than profit, my dear,' she said to Dorothy one day;
'particularly when you don't quite know what you ought to do with it.'
Dorothy had always avoided any conversation with her aunt about money
since the first moment in which she had thought of accepting Brooke
Burgess as her husband. She knew that her aunt had some feeling which
made her averse to the idea that any portion of the property which she
had inherited should be enjoyed by a Stanbury after her death, and
Dorothy, guided by this knowledge, had almost convinced herself that
her love for Brooke was treason either against him or against her aunt.
If, by engaging herself to him, she would rob him of his inheritance,
how bitter a burden to him would her love have been! If, on the other
hand, she should reward her aunt for all that had been done for her by
forcing herself, a Stanbury, into a position not intended for her, how
base would be her ingratitude! These thoughts had troubled her much,
and had always prevented her from answering any of her aunt's chance
allusions to the property. For her, things had at last gone very right.
She did not quite know how it had come about, but she was engaged to
marry the man she loved. And her aunt was, at any rate, reconciled to
the marriage. But when Miss Stanbury declared that she did not know
what to do about the property, Dorothy could only hold her tongue. She
had had plenty to say when it had been suggested to her that the
marriage should be put off yet for a short while, and that, in the
meantime, Brooke should come again to Exeter. She swore that she did
not care for how long it was put off only that she hoped it might not
be put off altogether. And as for Brooke's coming, that, for the
present, would be very much nicer than being married out of hand at
once. Dorothy, in truth, was not at all in a hurry to be married, but
she would have liked to have had her lover always coming and going.
Since the courtship had become a thing permitted, she had had the
privilege of welcoming him twice at the house in the Close; and that
running down to meet him in the little front parlour, and the getting
up to make his breakfast for him as he started in the morning, were
among the happiest epochs of her life. And then, as soon as ever the
breakfast was eaten, and he was gone, she would sit down to write him a
letter. Oh, those letters, so beautifully crossed, more than one of
which was copied from beginning to end because some word in it was not
thought to be sweet enough what a heaven of happiness they were to her!
The writing of the first had disturbed her greatly, and she had almost
repented of the privilege before it was ended; but with the first and
second the difficulties had disappeared; and, had she not felt somewhat
ashamed of the occupation, she could have sat at her desk and written
him letters all day. Brooke would answer them, with fair regularity,
but in a most cursory manner sending seven or eight lines in return for
two sheets fully crossed; but this did not discompose her in the least.
He was worked hard at his office, and had hundreds of other things to
do. He, too, could say so thought Dorothy more in eight lines than she
could put into as many pages.

She was quite happy when she was told that the marriage could not take
place till August, but that Brooke must come again in July. Brooke did
come in the first week of July, and somewhat horrified Dorothy by
declaring to her that Miss Stanbury was unreasonable.

'If I insist upon leaving London so often for a day or two,' said he,
'how am I to get anything like leave of absence when the time comes?'
In answer to this Dorothy tried to make him understand that business
should not be neglected, and that, as far as she was concerned, she
could do very well without that trip abroad which he had proposed for
her. 'I'm not going to be done in that way,' said Brooke. 'And now that
I am here she has nothing to say to me. I've told her a dozen times
that I don't want to know anything about her will, and that I'll take
it all for granted. There is something to be settled on you, that she
calls her own.'

'She is so generous, Brooke.'

'She is generous enough, but she is very whimsical. She is going to
make her whole will over again, and now she wants to send some message
to Uncle Barty. I don't know what it is yet, but I am to take it. As
far as I can understand, she has sent all the way to London for me, in
order that I may take a message across the Close.'

'You talk as though it were very disagreeable, coming to Exeter,' said
Dorothy, with a little pout.

'So it is very disagreeable.'

'Oh, Brooke!'

'Very disagreeable if our marriage is to be put off by it. I think it
will be so much nicer making love somewhere on the Rhine than having
snatches of it here, and talking all the time about wills and tenements
and settlements.' As he said this, with his arm round her waist and his
face quite close to hers shewing thereby that he was not altogether
averse even to his present privileges she forgave him.

On that same afternoon, just before the banking hours were over, Brooke
went across to the house of Cropper and Burgess, having first been
closeted for nearly an hour with his aunt and, as he went, his step was
sedate and his air was serious. He found his uncle Barty, and was not
very long in delivering his message. It was to this effect that Miss
Stanbury particularly wished to see Mr Bartholomew Burgess on business,
at some hour on that afternoon or that evening. Brooke himself had been
made acquainted with the subject in regard to which this singular
interview was desired; but it was not a part of his duty to communicate
any information respecting it. It had been necessary that his consent
to certain arrangements should be asked before the invitation to Barty
Burgess could be given; but his present mission was confined to an
authority to give the invitation.

Old Mr Burgess was much surprised, and was at first disposed to decline
the proposition made by the 'old harridan,' as he called her. He had
never put any restraint on his language in talking of Miss Stanbury
with his nephew, and was not disposed to do so now, because she had
taken a new vagary into her head. But there was something in his
nephew's manner which at last induced him to discuss the matter
rationally.

'And you don't know what it's all about?' said Uncle Barty.

'I can't quite say that. I suppose I do know pretty well. At any rate,
I know enough to think that you ought to come. But I must not say what
it is.'

'Will it do me or anybody else any good?'

'It can't do you any harm. She won't eat you.'

'But she can abuse me like a pickpocket, and I should return it, and
then there would be a scolding match. I always have kept out of her
way, and I think I had better do so still.'

Nevertheless Brooke prevailed or rather the feeling of curiosity which
was naturally engendered prevailed. For very, very many years Barty
Burgess had never entered or left his own house of business without
seeing the door of that in which Miss Stanbury lived and he had never
seen that door without a feeling of detestation for the owner of it. It
would, perhaps, have been a more rational feeling on his part had he
confined his hatred to the memory of his brother, by whose will Miss
Stanbury had been enriched, and he had been, as he thought,
impoverished. But there had been a contest, and litigation, and
disputes, and contradictions, and a long course of those incidents in
life which lead to rancour and ill blood, after the death of the former
Brooke Burgess; and, as the result of all this, Miss Stanbury held the
property and Barty Burgess held his hatred. He had never been ashamed
of it, and had spoken his mind out to all who would hear him. And, to
give Miss Stanbury her due, it must be admitted that she had hardly
been behind him in the warmth of her expression of which old Barty was
well aware. He hated, and knew that he was hated in return. And he
knew, or thought that he knew, that his enemy was not a woman to relent
because old age and weakness and the fear of death were coming on her.
His enemy, with all her faults, was no coward. It could not be that now
at the eleventh hour she should desire to reconcile him by any act of
tardy justice nor did he wish to be reconciled at this, the eleventh
hour. His hatred was a pleasant excitement to him. His abuse of Miss
Stanbury was a chosen recreation. His unuttered daily curse, as he
looked over to her door, was a relief to him. Nevertheless he would go.
As Brooke had said no harm could come of his going. He would go, and at
least listen to her proposition.

About seven in the evening his knock was heard at the door. Miss
Stanbury was sitting in the small upstairs parlour, dressed in her
second best gown, and was prepared with considerable stiffness and
state for the occasion. Dorothy was with her, but was desired in a
quick voice to hurry away the moment the knock was heard, as though old
Barty would have jumped from the hall door into the room at a bound.
Dorothy collected herself with a little start, and went without a word.
She had heard much of Barty Burgess, but had never spoken to him, and
was subject to a feeling of great awe when she would remember that the
grim old man of whom she had heard so much evil would soon be her
uncle. According to arrangement, Mr Burgess was shewn upstairs by his
nephew. Barty Burgess had been born in this very house, but had not
been inside the walls of it for more than thirty years. He also was
somewhat awed by the occasion, and followed his nephew without a word.
Brooke was to remain at hand, so that he might be summoned should he be
wanted; but it had been decided by Miss Stanbury that he should not be
present at the interview. As soon as her visitor entered the room she
rose in a stately way, and curtseyed, propping herself with one hand
upon the table as she did so. She looked him full in the face
meanwhile, and curtseying a second time asked him to seat himself in a
chair which had been prepared for him. She did it all very well, and it
may be surmised that she had rehearsed the little scene, perhaps more
than once, when nobody was looking at her. He bowed, and walked round
to the chair and seated himself; but finding that he was so placed that
he could not see his neighbour's face, he moved his chair. He was not
going to fight such a duel as this with the disadvantage of the sun in
his eyes.

Hitherto there had hardly been a word spoken. Miss Stanbury had
muttered something as she was curtseying, and Barty Burgess had made
some return. Then she began: 'Mr Burgess,' she said, 'I am indebted to
you for your complaisance in coming here at my request.' To this he
bowed again. 'I should not have ventured thus to trouble you were it
not that years are dealing more hardly with me than they are with you,
and that I could not have ventured to discuss a matter of deep interest
otherwise than in my own room.' It was her room now, certainly, by law;
but Barty Burgess remembered it when it was his mother's room, and when
she used to give them all their meals there now so many, many years
ago! He bowed again, and said not a word. He knew well that she could
sooner be brought to her point by his silence than by his speech.

She was a long time coming to her point. Before she could do so she was
forced to allude to times long past, and to subjects which she found it
very difficult to touch without saying that which would either belie
herself, or seem to be severe upon him. Though she had prepared
herself, she could hardly get the words spoken, and she was greatly
impeded by the obstinacy of his silence. But at last her proposition
was made to him. She told him that his nephew, Brooke, was about to be
married to her niece, Dorothy; and that it was her intention to make
Brooke her heir in the bulk of the property which she had received
under the will of the late Mr Brooke Burgess. 'Indeed,' she said, 'all
that I received at your brother's hands shall go back to your brother's
family unimpaired' He only bowed, and would not say a word. Then she
went on to say that it had at first been a mater to her of deep regret
that Brooke should have set his affections upon her niece, as there had
been in her mind a strong desire that none of her own people should
enjoy the reversion of the wealth, which she had always regarded as
being hers only for the term of her life; but that she had found that
the young people had been so much in earnest, and that her own feeling
had been so near akin to a prejudice, that she had yielded. When this
was said Barty smiled instead of bowing, and Miss Stanbury felt that
there might be something worse even than his silence. His smile told
her that he believed her to be lying. Nevertheless she went on. She was
not fool, enough to suppose that the whole nature of the man was to be
changed by a few words from her. So she went on. The marriage was a
thing fixed, and she was thinking of settlements, and had been talking
to lawyers about a new will.

'I do not know that I can help you,' said Barty, finding that a longer
pause than usual made some word from him absolutely necessary.

'I am going on to that, and I regret that my story should detain you so
long, Mr Burgess' And she did go on. She had, she said, made some
saving out of her income. She was not going to trouble Mr Burgess with
this matter only that she might explain to him that what she would at
once give to the young couple, and what she would settle on Dorothy
after her own death, would all come from such savings, and that such
gifts and bequests would not diminish the family property. Barty again
smiled as he heard. this, and Miss Stanbury in her heart likened him to
the devil in person. But still she went on. She was very desirous that
Brooke Burgess should come and live at Exeter. His property would be in
the town and the neighbourhood. It would be a seemly thing such was her
word that he should occupy the house that had belonged to his
grandfather and his great-grandfather; and then, moreover she
acknowledged that she spoke selfishly she dreaded the idea of being
left alone for the remainder of her own years. Her proposition at last
was uttered. It was simply this, that Barty Burgess should give to his
nephew, Brooke, his share in the bank.

'I am damned, if I do!' said Barty Burgess, rising up from his chair.

But before he had left the room he had agreed to consider the
proposition. Miss Stanbury had of course known that any such suggestion
coming from her without an adequate reason assigned, would have been
mere idle wind. She was prepared with such adequate reason. If Mr
Burgess could see his way to make the proposed transfer of his share of
the bank business, she, Miss Stanbury, would hand over to him, for his
life, a certain proportion of the Burgess property which lay in the
city, the income of which would exceed that drawn by him from the
business. Would he, at his time of life, take that for doing nothing
which he now got for working hard? That was the meaning of it. And
then, too, as far as the portion of the property went and it extended
to the houses owned by Miss Stanbury on the bank side of the Close it
would belong altogether to Barty Burgess for his life. 'It will simply
be this, Mr Burgess that Brooke will be your heir as would be natural.

'I don't know that it would be at all natural,' said he. 'I should
prefer to choose my own heir.

'No doubt, Mr Burgess in respect to your own property,' said Miss
Stanbury.

At last he said that he would think of it, and consult his partner; and
then he got up to take his leave. 'For myself,' said Miss Stanbury, 'I
would wish that all animosities might be buried.'

'We can say that they are buried,' said the grim old man 'but nobody
will believe us.'

'What matters if we could believe it ourselves?'

'But suppose we didn't. I don't believe that much good can come from
talking of such things, Miss Stanbury. You and I have grown too old to
swear a friendship. I will think of this thing, and if I find that it
can be made to suit without much difficulty, I will perhaps entertain
it.' Then the interview was over, and old Barty made his way
downstairs, and out of the house. He looked over to the tenements in
the Close which were offered to him, every circumstance of each one of
which he knew, and felt that he might do worse. Were he to leave the
bank, he could not take his entire income with him, and it had been
long said of him that he ought to leave it. The Croppers, who were his
partners and whom he had never loved would be glad to welcome in his
place one of the old family who would have money; and then the name
would be perpetuated in Exeter, which, even to Barty Burgess, was
something.

On that night the scheme was divulged to Dorothy, and she was in
ecstasies. London had always sounded bleak and distant and terrible to
her; and her heart had misgiven her at the idea of leaving her aunt. If
only this thing might be arranged! When Brooke spoke the next morning
of returning at once to his office, he was rebuked by both the ladies.
What was the Ecclesiastical Commission Office to any of them, when
matters of such importance were concerned? But Brooke would not be
talked out of his prudence. He was very willing to be made a banker at
Exeter, and to go to school again and learn banking business; but he
would not throw up his occupation in London till he knew that there was
another ready for him in the country. One day longer he spent in
Exeter, and During that day he was more than once with his uncle. He
saw also the Messrs Cropper, and was considerably chilled by the manner
in which they at first seemed to entertain the proposition. Indeed, for
a couple of hours he thought that the scheme must be abandoned. It was
pointed out to him that Mr Barty Burgess's life would probably be
short, and that he Barty had but a small part of the business at his
disposal. But gradually a way to terms was seen not quite so simple as
that which Miss Stanbury had suggested; and Brooke, when he left
Exeter, did believe it possible that he, after all, might become the
family representative in the old banking-house of the Burgesses.

'And how long will it take, Aunt Stanbury?' Dorothy asked.

'Don't you be impatient, my dear.'

'I am not the least impatient; but of course I want to tell mamma and
Priscilla. It will be so nice to live here and not go up to London. Are
we to stay here in this very house?'

'Have you not found out yet that Brooke will be likely to have an
opinion of his own on such things?'

'But would you wish us to live here, aunt?'

'I hardly know, dear. I am a foolish old woman, and cannot say what I
would wish. I cannot bear to be alone.'

'Of course we will stay with you.'

'And yet I should be jealous if I were not mistress of my own house.'

'Of course you will be mistress.'

'I believe, Dolly, that it would be better that I should die. I have
come to feel that I can do more good by going out of the world than by
remaining in it.' Dorothy hardly answered this in words, but sat close
by her aunt, holding the old woman's hand and caressing it, and
administering that love of which Miss Stanbury had enjoyed so little
during her life and which had become so necessary to her.

The news about the bank arrangements, though kept of course as a great
secret, soon became common in Exeter. It was known to be a good thing
for the firm in general that Barty Burgess should be removed from his
share of the management. He was old-fashioned, unpopular, and very
stubborn; and he and a certain Mr Julius Cropper, who was the leading
man among the Croppers, had not always been comfortable together. It
was at first hinted that old Miss Stanbury had been softened by sudden
twinges of conscience, and that she had confessed to some terrible
crime in the way of forgery, perjury, or perhaps worse, and had
relieved herself at last by making full restitution. But such a rumour
as this did not last long or receive wide credence. When it was hinted
to such old friends as Sir Peter Mancrudy and Mrs MacHugh, they laughed
it to scorn and it did not exist even in the vague form of an
undivulged mystery for above three days. Then it was asserted that old
Barty had been found to have no real claim to any share in the bank,
and that he was to be turned out at Miss Stanbury's instance that he
was to be turned out, and that Brooke had been acknowledged to be the
owner of the Burgess share of her business. Then came the fact that old
Barty had been bought out, and that the future husband of Miss
Stanbury's niece was to be the junior partner. A general feeling
prevailed at last that there had been another great battle between Miss
Stanbury and old Barty, and that the old maid had prevailed now as she
had done in former days. Before the end of July the papers were in the
lawyer's hands, and all the terms had been fixed. Brooke came down
again and again, to Dorothy's great delight, and displayed considerable
firmness in the management of his own interest. If Fate intended to
make him a banker in Exeter instead of a clerk in the Ecclesiastical
Commission Office, he would be a banker after a respectable fashion.
There was more than one little struggle between him and Mr Julius
Cropper, which ended in accession of respect on the part of Mr Cropper
for his new partner. Mr Cropper had thought that the establishment
might best be known to the commercial world of the West of England as
"Croppers' Bank"; but Broke had been very firm in asserting that if he
was to have anything to do with it the old name should be maintained.

'It's to be "Cropper and Burgess," he said to Dorothy one afternoon.
'They fought hard for "Cropper, Cropper, and Burgess" but I wouldn't
stand more than one Cropper.'

'Of course not,' said Dorothy, with something almost of scorn in her
voice. By this time Dorothy had gone very deeply into banking business.



CHAPTER LXXXIX - 'I WOULDN'T DO IT, IF I WAS YOU'

Miss Stanbury at this time was known all through Exeter to be very much
altered from the Miss Stanbury of old or even from the Miss Stanbury of
two years since. The Miss Stanbury of old was a stalwart lady who would
play her rubber of whist five nights a week, and could hold her own in
conversation against the best woman in Exeter not to speak of her
acknowledged superiority over every man in that city. Now she cared
little for the glories of debate; and though she still liked her
rubber, and could wake herself up to the old fire in the detection of a
revoke or the claim for a second trick, her rubbers were few and far
between, and she would leave her own house on an evening only when all
circumstances were favourable, and with many precautions against wind
and water. Some said that she was becoming old, and that she was going
out like the snuff of a candle. But Sir Peter Mancrudy declared that
she might live for the next fifteen years, if she would only think so
herself. 'It was true,' Sir Peter said, 'that in the winter she had
been ill, and that there had been danger as to her throat during the
east winds of the spring but those dangers had passed away, and, if she
would only exert herself, she might be almost as good a woman as ever
she had been.' Sir Peter was not a man of many words, or given to talk
frequently of his patients; but it was clearly Sir Peter's opinion that
Miss Stanbury's mind was ill at ease. She had become discontented with
life, and therefore it was that she cared no longer for the combat of
tongues, and had become cold even towards the card-table. It was so in
truth; and yet perhaps the lives of few men or women had been more
innocent, and few had struggled harder to be just in their dealings and
generous in their thoughts.

There was ever present to her mind an idea of failure and a fear lest
she had been mistaken in her views throughout her life. No one had ever
been more devoted to peculiar opinions, or more strong in the use of
language for their expression; and she was so far true to herself, that
she would never seem to retreat from the position she had taken. She
would still scorn the new fangles of the world around her, and speak of
the changes which she saw as all tending to evil. But, through it all,
there was an idea present to herself that it could not be God's
intention that things should really change for the worse, and that the
fault must be in her, because she had been unable to move as others had
moved. She would sit thinking of the circumstances of her own life and
tell herself that with her everything had failed. She had loved, but
had quarrelled with her lover; and her love had come to nothing but
barren wealth. She had fought for her wealth and had conquered and had
become hard in the fight, and was conscious of her own hardness. In the
early days of her riches and power she had taken her nephew by the
hand, and had thrown him away from her because he would not dress
himself in her mirror. She had believed herself to be right, and would
not, even now, tell herself that she had been wrong; but there were
doubts, and qualms of conscience, and an uneasiness because her life
had been a failure. Now she was seeking to appease her self-accusations
by sacrificing everything for the happiness of her niece and her chosen
hero; but as she went on with the work she felt that all would be in
vain, unless she could sweep herself altogether from off the scene. She
had told herself that if she could bring Brooke to Exeter, his
prospects would be made infinitely brighter than they would be in
London, and that she in her last days would not be left utterly alone.
But as the prospect of her future life came nearer to her, she saw, or
thought that she saw, that there was still failure before her. Young
people would not want an old woman in the house with them even though
the old woman would declare that she would be no more in the house than
a tame cat. And she knew herself also too well to believe that she
could make herself a tame cat in the home that had so long been subject
to her dominion. Would it not be better that she should go away
somewhere and die?

'If Mr Brooke is to come here,' Martha said to her one day, 'we ought
to begin and make the changes, ma'am'.

'What changes? You are always wanting to make changes'.

'If they was never made till I wanted them they'd never be made, ma'am.
But if there is to be a married couple there should be things proper.
Anyways, ma'am, we ought to know oughtn't we?'

The truth of this statement was so evident that Miss Stanbury could not
contradict it. But she had not even yet made up her mind. Ideas were
running through her head which she knew to be very wild, but of which
she could not divest herself. 'Martha,' she said after a while, 'I
think I shall go away from this myself.'

'Leave the house, ma'am?' said Martha, awestruck.

'There are other houses in the world, I suppose, in which an old woman
can live and die.'

'There is houses, ma'am, of course,'

'And what is the difference between one and another?'

'I wouldn't do it, ma'am, if I was you. I wouldn't do it if it was ever
so. Sure the house is big enough for Mr Brooke and Miss Dorothy along
with you. I wouldn't go and make such change as that I wouldn't indeed,
ma'am.' Martha spoke out almost with eloquence, so much expression was
there in her face. Miss Stanbury said nothing more at the moment,
beyond signifying her indisposition to make up her mind to anything at
the present moment. Yes the house was big enough as far as rooms were
concerned; but how often had she heard that an old woman must always be
in the way, if attempting to live with a newly-married couple? If a
mother-in-law be unendurable, how much more so one whose connection
would be less near? She could keep her own house no doubt, and let them
go elsewhere; but what then would come of her old dream, that Burgess,
the new banker in the city, should live in the very house that had been
inhabited by the Burgesses, the bankers of old? There was certainly
only one way out of all these troubles, and that way would be that she
should go from them and be at rest.

Her will had now been drawn out and completed for the third or fourth
time, and she had made no secret of is contents either with Brooke or
Dorothy. The whole estate she left to Brooke, including the houses
which were to become his after his uncle's death; and in regard to the
property she had made no further stipulation. 'I might have settled, it
on your children,' she said to him, 'but in doing so I should have
settled it on hers. I don't know why an old woman should try to
interfere with things after she has gone. I hope you won't squander it,
Brooke.'

'I shall be a steady old man by that time,' he said.

'I hope you'll be steady at any rate. But there it is, and God must
direct you in the use of it, if He will. It has been a burthen to me;
but then I have been a solitary old woman.' Half of what she had saved
she proposed to give Dorothy on her marriage, and for doing this
arrangements had already been made. There were various other legacies,
and the last she announced was one to her nephew, Hugh. 'I have left
him a thousand pounds,' she said to Dorothy 'so that he may remember me
kindly at last' As to this, however, she exacted a pledge that no
intimation of the legacy was to be made to Hugh. Then it was that
Dorothy told her aunt that Hugh intended to marry Nora Rowley, one of
the ladies who had been at the Clock House during the days in which her
mother had lived in grandeur; and then it was also that Dorothy
obtained leave to invite Hugh to her own wedding. 'I hope she will be
happier than her sister,' Miss Stanbury said, when she heard of the
intended marriage.

'It wasn't Mrs Trevelyan's fault, you know, aunt.'

'I say nothing about anybody's fault; but this I do say, that it was a
very great misfortune. I fought all that battle with your sister
Priscilla, and I don't mean to fight it again, my dear. If Hugh marries
the young lady, I hope she will be more happy than her sister. There
can be no harm in saying that.'

Dorothy's letter to her brother shall be given, because it will inform
the reader of all the arrangements as they were made up to that time,
and will convey the Exeter news respecting various persons with whom
our story is concerned.



'The Close, July 20, 186-

DEAR HUGH,

The day for my marriage is now fixed, and I wish with all my heart that
it was the same with you. Pray give my love to Nora. It seems so odd
that, though she was living for a while with mamma at Nuncombe Putney,
I never should have seen her yet. I am very glad that Brooke has seen
her, and he declares that she is quite magnificently beautiful. Those
are his own words.

We are to be married on the 10th of August, a Wednesday, and now comes
my great news. Aunt Stanbury says that you are to come and stay in the
house. She bids me tell you so with her love; and that you can have a
room as long as you like. Of course, you must come. In the first place,
you must because you are to give me away, and Brooke wouldn't have me
if I wasn't given away properly; and then it will make me so happy that
you and Aunt Stanbury should be friends again. You can stay as long as
you like, but, of course, you must come the day before the wedding. We
are to be married in the Cathedral, and there are to be two clergymen,
but I don't yet know who they will be not Mr Gibson, certainly, as you
were good enough to suggest.

Mr Gibson is married to Arabella French, and they have gone away
somewhere into Cornwall. Camilla has come back, and I have seen her
once. She looked ever so fierce, as though she intended to declare that
she didn't mind what anybody may think. They say that she still
protests that she never will speak to her sister again.

I was introduced to Mr Barty Burgess the other day. Brooke was here,
and we met him in the Close. I hardly knew what he said to me, I was so
frightened; but Brooke said that he meant to be civil, and that he is
going to send me a present. I have got a quantity of things already,
and yesterday Mrs MacHugh sent me such a beautiful cream-jug. If you'll
come in time on the 9th, you shall see them all before they are put
away.

'Mamma and Priscilla are to be here, and they will come on the 9th
also. Poor, dear mamma is, I know, terribly flurried about it, and so
is Aunt Stanbury. It is so long since they have seen each other. I
don't think Priscilla feels it the same way, because she is so brave.
Do you remember when it was first proposed that I should come here? I
am so glad I came because of Brooke. He will come on the 9th, quite
early, and I do so hope you will come with him.

Yours most affectionately,

DOROTHY STANBURY.

Give my best, best love to Nora'



CHAPTER LIX - LADY ROWLEY CONQUERED

When the Rowleys were back in London, and began to employ themselves on
the terrible work of making ready for their journey to the Islands,
Lady Rowley gradually gave way about Hugh Stanbury. She had become
aware that Nora would not go back with them unless under an amount of
pressure which she would find it impossible to use. And if Nora did not
go out to the Islands, what was to become of her unless she married
this man? Sir Marmaduke, when all was explained to him, declared that a
girl must do what her parents ordered her to do. 'Other girls live with
their fathers and mothers, and so must she.' Lady Rowley endeavoured to
explain that other girls lived with their fathers and mothers, because
they found themselves in established homes from which they are not
disposed to run away; but Nora's position was, as she alleged, very
different. Nora's home had latterly been with her sister, and it was
hardly to be expected that the parental authority should not find
itself impaired by the interregnum which had taken place. Sir Marmaduke
would not see the thing in the same light, and was disposed to treat
his daughter with a high hand. If she would not do as she was bidden,
she should no longer be daughter of his. In answer to this Lady Rowley
could only repeat her conviction that Nora would not go out to the
Mandarins; and that as for disinheriting her, casting her out, cursing
her, and the rest she had no belief in such doings at all. 'On the
stage they do such things as that' she said; 'and, perhaps, they used
to do it once in reality. But you know that it's out of the question
now. Fancy your standing up and cursing at the dear girl, just as we
are all starting from Southampton!' Sir Marmaduke knew as well as his
wife that it would be impossible, and only muttered something about the
'dear girl' behaving herself with great impropriety.

They were all aware that Nora was not going to leave England, because
no berth had been taken for her on board the ship, and because, while
the other girls were preparing for their long voyage, no preparations
were made for her. Of course she was not going. Sir Marmaduke would
probably have given way altogether immediately on his return to London,
had he not discussed the matter with his friend Colonel Osborne. It
became, of course, his duty to make some inquiry as to the Stanbury
family, and he knew that Osborne had visited Mrs Stanbury when he made
his unfortunate pilgrimage to the porch of Cockchaffington Church. He
told Osborne the whole story of Nora's engagement, telling also that
other most heart-breaking tale of her conduct in regard to Mr Glascock,
and asked the Colonel what he thought about the Stanburys. Now the
Colonel did not hold the Stanburys in high esteem. He had met Hugh, as
the reader may perhaps remember, and had had some intercourse with the
young man, which had not been quite agreeable to him, on the platform
of the railway station at Exeter. And he had also heard something of
the ladies at Nuncombe Putney during his short sojourn at the house of
Mrs Crocket. 'My belief is, they are beggars,' said Colonel Osborne.

'I suppose so,' said Sir Marmaduke, shaking his head.

'When I went over to call on Emily that time I was at Cockchaffington,
you know, when Trevelyan made himself such a d fool I found. the mother
and sister living in a decentish house enough; but it wasn't their
house.'

'Not their own, you mean?'

'It was a place that Trevelyan had got this young man to take for
Emily, and they had merely gone there to be with her. They had been
living in a little bit of a cottage; a sort of place that any any
ploughman would live in. Just that kind of cottage.'

'Goodness gracious!'

'And they've gone to another just like it so I'm told.'

'And can't he do anything better for them than that?' asked Sir
Marmaduke.

'I know nothing about him. I have met him, you know. He used to be with
Trevelyan that was when Nora took a fancy for him, of course. And I saw
him once down in Devonshire, when I must say he behaved uncommonly
badly doing all he could to foster Trevelyan's stupid jealousy.'

'He has changed his mind about that, I think.'

'Perhaps he has; but he behaved very badly then. Let him shew up his
income that, I take it, is the question in such a case as this. His
father was a clergyman, and therefore I suppose he must be considered
to he a gentleman. But has he means to support a wife, and keep up a
house in London? If he has not, that is an end to it, I should say.'

But Sir Marmaduke could not see his way to any such end, and, although
he still looked black. upon Nora, and talked to his wife of his
determination to stand no contumacy, and hinted at cursing,
disinheriting, and the like, he began to perceive that Nora would have
her own way. In his unhappiness he regretted this visit to England, and
almost thought that the Mandarins were a pleasanter residence than
London. He could do pretty much as he pleased there, and could live
quietly, without the trouble which encountered him now on every side.

Nora, immediately on her return to London, had written a note to Hugh,
simply telling him of her arrival and begging him to come and see her.
'Mamma,' the said, 'I must see him, and it would be nonsense to say
that he must not come here. I have done what I have said I would do,
and you ought not to make difficulties.' Lady Rowley declared that Sir
Marmaduke would be very angry if Hugh were admitted without his express
permission. 'I don't want to do anything in the dark,' continued Nora,
'but of course I must see him. I suppose it will be better that he
should come to me than that I should go to him?' Lady Rowley quite
understood the threat that was conveyed in this. It would be much
better that Hugh should come to the hotel, and that he should be
treated then as an accepted lover. She had come to that conclusion. But
she was obliged to vacillate for awhile between her husband and her
daughter. Hugh came of course, and Sir Marmaduke, by his wife's advice,
kept out of the way. Lady Rowley, though she was at home, kept herself
also out of the way, remaining above with her two other daughters. Nora
thus achieved the glory and happiness of receiving her lover alone.

'My own true girl!' he said, speaking with his arms still round her
waist.

'I am true enough; but whether I am your own that is another question.'

'You mean to be?'

'But papa doesn't mean it. Papa says that you are nobody, and that you
haven't got an income; and thinks that I had better go back and be an
old maid at the Mandarins.'

'And what do you think yourself, Nora?'

'What do I think? As far as I can understand, young ladies are not
allowed to think at all. They have to do what their papas tell them.
That will do, Hugh. You can talk without taking hold of me.'

'It is such a time since I have had a hold of you as you call it.'

'It will be much longer before you can do so again, if I go back to the
Islands with papa. I shall expect you to be true, you know; and it will
be ten years at the least before I can hope to be home again.'

'I don't think you mean to go, Nora.'

'But what am I to do? That idea of yours of walking out to the next
church and getting ourselves married sounds very nice and independent,
but you know that it is not practicable.'

'On the other hand, I know it is.'

'It is not practicable for me, Hugh. Of all things in the world I don't
want to be a Lydia. I won't do anything that anybody shall ever say
that your wife ought not to have done. Young women when they are
married ought to have their papas' and mammas' consent, I have been
thinking about it a great deal for the last month or two, and I have
made up my mind to that.'

'What is it all to come to, then?'

'I mean to get papa's consent. That is what it is to come to.'

'And if he is obstinate?'

'I shall coax him round at last. When the time for going comes, he'll
yield then.'

'But you will not go with them?' As he asked this he came to her and
tried again to take her by the waist; but she retreated from him, and
got herself clear from us arm. 'If you are afraid of me, I shall know
that you think it possible that we may be parted.'

'I am not a bit afraid of you, Hugh.'

'Nora, I think you ought to tell me something definitely.'

'I think I have been definite enough, sir. You may be sure of this,
however I will not go back to the Islands.'

'Give me your hand on that.'

'There is my hand. But, remember I had told you just as much before. I
don't mean to go back. I mean to stay here. I mean but I do not think I
will tell you all the things I mean to do.'

'You mean to be my wife?'

'Certainly some day, when the difficulty about the chairs and tables
can settle itself. The real question now is what am I to do with myself
when papa and mamma are gone?'

'Become Mrs H. Stanbury at once. Chairs and tables! You shall have
chairs and tables as many as you want. You won't be too proud to live
in lodgings for a few months?'

'There must be preliminaries, Hugh even for lodgings, though they may
be very slender. Papa goes in less than three weeks now, and mamma has
got something else to think of than my marriage garments. And then
there are all manner of difficulties, money difficulties and others,
out of which I don't see my way yet'. Hugh began to asseverate that it
was his business to help her through all money difficulties as well as
others; but she soon stopped his eloquence. 'It will be by-and-by,
Hugh, and I hope you'll support the burden like a man; but just at
present there is a hitch. I shouldn't have come over at all I should
have stayed with Emily in Italy, had I not thought that I was bound to
see you'

'My own darling!'

'When papa goes, I think that I had better go back to her.'

'I'll take you!' said Hugh, picturing to himself all the pleasures of
such a tour together, over the Alps.

'No you won't, because that would be improper. When we travel together
we must go Darby and Joan fashion, as man and wife. I think I had
better go back to Emily, because her position there is so terrible.
There must come some end to it, I suppose soon. He will be better, or
he will become so bad that that medical interference will be
unavoidable. But I do not like that she should be alone. She gave me a
home when she had one and I must always remember that I met you there.'
After this there was of course another attempt with Hugh's right arm,
which on this occasion was not altogether unsuccessful. And then she
told him of her friendship for Mr Glascock's wife, and of her intention
at some future time to visit them at Monkhams.

'And see all the glories that might have been your own,' he said.

'And think of the young man who has robbed me of them all! And you are
to go there too, so that you may see what you have done. There was a
time, Hugh, when I was very nearly pleasing all my friends and shewing
myself to be a young lady of high taste and noble fortune and an
obedient, good girl.'

'And why didn't you?'

'I thought I would wait just a little longer. Because because because
Oh, Hugh, how cross you were to me afterwards when you came down to
Nuncombe and would hardly speak to me!'

'And why didn't I speak to you?'

'I don't know. Because you were cross, and surly, and thinking of
nothing but your tobacco, I believe. Do you remember how we walked to
Liddon, and you hadn't a word for anybody?'

'I remember I wanted you to go down to the river with me, and you
wouldn't go.'

'You asked me only once, and I did so long to go with you. Do you
remember the rocks in the river? I remember the place as though I saw
it now; and how I longed to jump from one stone to another. Hugh, if we
are ever married, you must take me there, and let me jump on those
stones.'

'You pretended that you could not think of wetting your feet.'

'Of course I pretended because you were so cross, and so cold. Oh,
dear! I wonder whether you will ever know it all.'

'Don't I know it all now?'

'I suppose you do, nearly. There is mighty little of a secret in it,
and it is the same thing that is going on always. Only it seems so
strange to me that I should ever have loved any one so dearly and that
for next to no reason at all. You never made yourself very charming
that I know of did you?'

'I did my best. It wasn't much, I dare say.'

'You did nothing, sir except just let me fall in love with you. And you
were not quite sure that you would let me do that.'

'Nora, I don't think you do understand.'

'I do perfectly. Why were you cross with me, instead of saying one nice
word when you were down at Nuncombe? I do understand.'

'Why was it?'

'Because you did not think well enough of me to believe that I would
give myself to a man who had no fortune of his own. I know it now, and
I knew it then; and therefore I wouldn't dabble in the river with you.
But it's all over now, and we'll go and get wet together like dear
little children, and Priscilla shall scold us when we come back.'

They were alone in the sitting-room for more than an hour, and Lady
Rowley was patient upstairs; as mothers will be patient in such
emergencies. Sophie and Lucy had gone out and left her; and there she
remained telling herself, as the weary minutes went by, that as the
thing was to be, it was well that the young people should be together.
Hugh Stanbury could never be to her what Mr Glascock would have been a
son-in-law to sit and think about, and dream of, and be proud of whose
existence as her son-in-law would in itself have been a happiness to
her out in her banishment at the other side of the world; but
nevertheless it was natural to her, as a soft-hearted loving mother
with many daughters, that any son-in-law should be dear to her. Now
that she had gradually brought herself round to believe in Nora's
marriage, she was disposed to make the best of Hugh, to remember that
he was certainly a clever man, that he was an honest fellow, and that
she had heard of him as a good son and a kind brother, and that he had
behaved well in reference to her Emily and Trevelyan. She was quite
willing now that Hugh should be happy, and she sat there thinking that
the time was very long, but still waiting patiently till she should be
summoned. 'You must let me go for mamma for a moment,' Nora said. 'I
want you to see her and make yourself a good boy before her. If you are
ever to be her son-in-law, you ought to be in her good graces.' Hugh
declared that he would do his best, and Nora fetched her mother.

Stanbury found some difficulty in making himself a 'good boy' in Lady
Rowley's presence; and Lady Rowley herself, for sometime, felt very
strongly the awkwardness of the meeting. She had never formally
recognised the young man as her daughter's accepted suitor, and as not
yet justified in doing so by any permission from Sir Marmaduke; but, as
the young people had been for the last hour or two alone together, with
her connivance and sanction, it was indispensable that she should in
some way signify her parental adherence to the arrangement. Nora began
by talking about Emily, and Trevelyan's condition and mode of living
were discussed. Then Lady Rowley said something about their coming
journey, and Hugh, with a lucky blunder, spoke of Nora's intended
return to Italy. 'We don't know how that may be,' said Lady Rowley.
'Her papa still wishes her to go back with us.'

'Mamma, you know that that is impossible,' said Nora.

'Not impossible, my love.'

'But she will not go back,' said Hugh. 'Lady Rowley, you would not
propose to separate us by such a distance as that?'

'It is Sir Marmaduke that you must ask.'

'Mamma, mamma!' exclaimed Nora, rushing to her mother's side, 'it is
not papa that we must ask not now. We want you to be our friend. Don't
we, Hugh? And, mamma, if you will really be our friend, of course, papa
will come round.'

'My dear Nora!'

'You know he will, mamma; and you know that you mean to be good and
kind to us. Of course I can't go back to the Islands with you. How
could I go so far and leave him behind? He might have half-a-dozen
wives before I could get back to him--'

'If you have not more trust in him than that--'

'Long engagements are awful bores,' said Hugh, finding it to be
necessary that he also should press forward his argument.

'I can trust him as far as I can see him,' said Nora, 'and therefore I
do not want to lose sight of him altogether.'

Lady Rowley of course gave way and embraced her accepted son-in-law.
After all it might have been worse. He saw his way clearly, he said, to
making six hundred a year, and did not at all doubt that before long he
would do better than that. He proposed that they should be married some
time in the autumn, but was willing to acknowledge that much must
depend on the position of Trevelyan and his wife. He would hold himself
ready at any moment, he said, to start to Italy, and would do all that
could be done by a brother. Then Lady Rowley gave him her blessing, and
kissed him again and Nora kissed him too, and hung upon him, and did
not push him away at all when his arm crept round her waist. And that
feeling came upon him which must surely be acknowledged by all engaged
young men when they first find themselves encouraged by mammas in the
taking of liberties which they have hitherto regarded as mysteries to
be hidden, especially from maternal eyes, that feeling of being a fine
fat calf decked out with ribbons for a sacrifice.



CHAPTER XCI - FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING

Another week went by and Sir Marmaduke had even yet not surrendered. He
quite understood that Nora was not to go back to the Islands. And had
visited Mr and Mrs Outhouse at St. Diddulph's in order to secure a home
for her there, if it might be possible. Mr Outhouse did not refuse, but
gave the permission in such a fashion as to make it almost equal to a
refusal. 'He was,' he said, 'much attached to his niece Nora, but he
had heard that there was a love affair.' Sir Marmaduke, of course,
could not deny the love affair. There was certainly a love affair of
which he did not personally approve, as the gentleman had no fixed
income and as far as he could understand no fixed profession.'such a
love affair,' thought Mr Outhouse, 'was a sort of thing that he didn't
know how to manage at all. If Nora came to him, was the young man to
visit at the house, or was he not?' Then Mrs Outhouse said something as
to the necessity of an anti-Stanbury pledge on Nora's part, and Sir
Marmaduke found that that scheme must be abandoned. Mrs Trevelyan had
written from Florence more than once or twice, and in her last letter
had said that she would prefer not to have Nora with her. She was at
that time living in lodgings at Siena and had her boy there also. She
saw her husband every other day; but nevertheless according to her
statements her visits to Casalunga were made in opposition to his
wishes. He had even expressed a desire that she should leave Siena and
return to England. He had once gone so far as to say that if she would
do so, he would follow her. But she clearly did not believe him, and in
all her letters spoke of him as one whom she could not regard as being
under the guidance of reason. She had taken her child with her once or
twice to the house, and on the first occasion Trevelyan had made much
of his son, had wept over him, and professed that in losing him he had
lost his only treasure; but after that he had not noticed the boy, and
latterly she had gone alone. She thought that perhaps her visits
cheered him, breaking the intensity of his solitude; but he never
expressed himself gratified by them, never asked her to remain at the
house, never returned with her into Siena, and continually spoke of her
return to England as a step which must be taken soon and the sooner the
better. He intended to follow her, he said; and she explained very
fully how manifest was his wish that she should go, by the temptation
to do so which he thought that he held out by this promise. He had
spoken, on every occasion of her presence with him, of Sir Marmaduke's
attempt to prove him to be a madman; but declared that he was afraid of
no one in England, and would face all the lawyers in Chancery Lane and
all the doctors in Savile Row. Nevertheless, so said Mrs Trevelyan, he
would undoubtedly remain at Casalunga till after Sir Marmaduke should
have sailed. He was not so mad but that he knew that no one else would
be so keen to take steps against him as would Sir Marmaduke. As for his
health, her account of him was very sad. 'He seemed,' she said, 'to be
withering away.' His hand was mere skin and bone. His hair and beard so
covered his thin long cheeks, that there was nothing left of his face
but his bright, large, melancholy eyes. His legs had become so frail
and weak that they would hardly bear his weight as he walked; and his
clothes, though he had taken a fancy to throw aside all that he had
brought with him from England, hung so loose about him that they seemed
as though they would fall from him. Once she had ventured to send out
to him from Siena a doctor to whom she had been recommended in
Florence; but he had taken the visit in very bad part, had told the
gentleman that he had no need for any medical services, and had been
furious with her, because of her offence in having sent such a visitor.
He had told her that if ever she ventured to take such a liberty again,
he would demand the child back, and refuse her permission inside the
gates of Casalunga. 'Don't come, at any rate, till I send for you,' Mrs
Trevelyan said in her last letter to her sister. 'Your being here would
do no good, and would, I think, make him feel that he was being
watched. My hope is, at last, to get him to return with me. If you were
here, I think this would be less likely. And then why should you be
mixed up with such unutterable sadness and distress more than is
essentially necessary? My health stands wonderfully well, though the
heat here is very great. It is cooler at Casalunga than in the town of
which I am glad for his sake. He perspires so profusely that it seems
to me he cannot stand the waste much longer. I know he will not go to
England as long as papa is there but I hope that he may be induced to
do so by slow stages as soon as he knows that papa has gone. Mind you
send me a newspaper, so that he may see it stated in print that papa
has sailed.'

It followed as one consequence of these letters from Florence that Nora
was debarred from the Italian scheme as a mode of passing her time till
some house should be open for her reception. She had suggested to Hugh
that she might go for a few weeks to Nuncombe Putney, but he had
explained to her the nature of his mother's cottage, and had told her
that there was no hole there in which she could lay her head. 'There
never was such a forlorn young woman,' she said. 'When papa goes I
shall literally be without shelter.' There had come a letter from Mrs
Glascock at least it was signed Caroline Glascock, though another name
might have been used dated from Milan, saying that they were hurrying
back to Naples even at that season of the year, because Lord
Peterborough was dead. 'And she is Lady Peterborough!' said Lady
Rowley, unable to repress the expression of the old regrets. 'Of course
she is Lady Peterborough, mamma; what else should she be? though she
does not so sign herself.' 'We think,' said the American peeress, 'that
we shall be at Monkhams before the end of August, and Charles says that
you are to come just the same. There will be nobody else there, of
course, because of Lord Peterborough's death.' 'I saw it in the paper,'
said Sir Marmaduke, 'and quite forgot to mention it.'

That same evening there was a long family discussion about Nora's
prospects. They were all together in the gloomy sitting-room at Gregg's
Hotel, and Sir Marmaduke had not yielded. The ladies had begun to feel
that it would be well not to press him to yield. Practically he had
yielded. There was now no question of cursing and of so-called
disinheritance. Nora was to remain in England, of course with the
intention of being married to Hugh Stanbury; and the difficulty
consisted in the need of an immediate home for her. It wanted now but
twelve days to that on which the family were to sail from Southampton,
and nothing had been settled. 'If papa will allow me something ever so
small, and will trust me, I will live alone in lodgings,' said Nora.

'It is the maddest thing I ever heard,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'Who would take care of you, Nora?' asked Lady Rowley.

'And who would walk about with you?' said Lucy.

'I don't see how it would be possible to live alone like that,' said
Sophie.

'Nobody would take care of me, and nobody would walk about with me, and
I could live alone very well,' said Nora. 'I don't see why a young
woman is to be supposed to be so absolutely helpless as all that comes
to. Of course it won't be very nice but it need not be for long.'

'Why not for long?' asked Sir Marmaduke.

'Not for very long,' said Nora.

'It does not seem to me,' said Sir Marmaduke, after a considerable
pause, 'that this gentleman himself is so particularly anxious for the
match. I have heard no day named, and no rational proposition made.'

'Papa, that is unfair, most unfair and ungenerous.'

'Nora,' said her mother, 'do not speak in that way to your father.'

'Mamma, it is unfair. Papa accuses Mr Stanbury of being being lukewarm
and untrue of not being in earnest.'

'I would rather that he were not in earnest,' said Sir Marmaduke.

'Mr Stanbury is ready at any time,' continued Nora. 'He would have the
banns at once read, and marry me in three weeks if I would let him.'

'Good gracious, Nora!' exclaimed Lady Rowley.

'But I have refused to name any day, or to make any arrangement,
because I did not wish to do so before papa had given his consent. That
is why things are in this way. If papa will but let me take a room till
I can go to Monkhams, I will have everything arranged from there. You
can trust Mr Glascock for that, and you can trust her.'

'I suppose your papa will make you some allowance,' said Lady Rowley.

'She is entitled to nothing, as she has refused to go to her proper
home,' said Sir Marmaduke.

The conversation, which had now become very disagreeable, was not
allowed to go any further. And it was well that it should be
interrupted. They all knew that Sir Marmaduke must be brought round by
degrees, and that both Nora and Lady Rowley had gone as far as was
prudent at present. But all trouble on this head was suddenly ended for
this evening by the entrance of the waiter with a telegram. It was
addressed to Lady Rowley, and she opened it with trembling hands as
ladies always do open telegrams. It was from Emily Trevelyan. 'Louis is
much worse. Let somebody come to me. Hugh Stanbury would be the best.'

In a few minutes they were so much disturbed that no one quite knew
what should be done at once. Lady Rowley began by declaring that she
would go herself. Sir Marmaduke of course pointed out that this was
impossible, and suggested that he would send a lawyer. Nora professed
herself ready to start immediately on the journey, but was stopped by a
proposition from her sister Lucy that in that case Hugh Stanbury would
of course go with her. Lady Rowley asked whether Hugh would go, and
Nora asserted that he would go immediately as a matter of course. She
was sure he would go, let the people at the D. R. say what they might.
According to her there was always somebody at the call of the editor of
the D. R. to do the work of anybody else, when anybody else wanted to
go away. Sir Marmaduke shook his head, and was very uneasy. He still
thought that a lawyer would be best, feeling, no doubt, that if
Stanbury's services were used on such an occasion, there must be an end
of all opposition to the marriage. But before half-an-hour was over
Stanbury was sent for. The boots of the hotel went off in a cab to the
office of the D. R. with a note from Lady Rowley. 'Dear Mr Stanbury We
have had a telegram from Emily, and want to see you, at once. Please
come. We shall sit up and wait for you till you do come E. R.'

It was very distressing to them because, let the result be what it
might, it was all but impossible that Mrs Trevelyan should be with them
before they had sailed, and it was quite out of the question that they
should now postpone their journey. Were Stanbury to start by the
morning train on the following day, he could not reach Siena till the
afternoon of the fourth day; and let the result be what it might when
he arrived there, it would be out of the question that Emily Trevelyan
should come back quite at once, or that she should travel at the same
speed. Of course they might hear again by telegram, and also by letter;
but they could not see her, or have any hand in her plans. 'If anything
were to happen, she might have come with us,' said Lady Rowley.

'It is out of the question,' said Sir Marmaduke gloomily. 'I could not
give up the places I have taken.'

'A few days more would have done it.'

'I don't suppose she would wish to go,' said Nora. 'Of course she would
not take Louey there. Why should she? And then I don't suppose he is so
ill as that.'

'There is no saying,' said Sir Marmaduke. It was very evident that,
whatever might be Sir Marmaduke's opinion, he had no strongly developed
wish for his son-in-law's recovery.

They all sat up waiting for Hugh Stanbury till eleven, twelve, one, and
two o'clock at night. The 'boots' had returned saying that Mr Stanbury
had not been at the office of the newspaper, but that, according to
information received, he certainly would be there that night. No other
address had been given to the man, and the note had therefore of
necessity been left at the office. Sir Marmaduke became very fretful,
and was evidently desirous of being liberated from his night watch. But
he could not go himself, and shewed his impatience by endeavouring to
send the others away. Lady Rowley replied for herself that she should
certainly remain in her corner on the sofa all night, if it were
necessary; and as she slept very soundly in her corner, her comfort was
not much impaired. Nora was pertinacious in refusing to go to bed. 'I
should only go to my own room, papa, and remain there,' she said. 'Of
course I must speak to him before he goes.' Sophie and Lucy considered
that they had as much right to sit up as Nora, and submitted to be
called geese and idiots by their father.

Sir Marmaduke had arisen with a snort from a short slumber, and had
just sworn that he and everybody else should go to bed, when there came
a ring at the front-door bell. The trusty boots had also remained up,
and in two minutes Hugh Stanbury was in the room. He had to make his
excuses before anything else could be said. When he reached the D. R.
office between ten and eleven, it was absolutely incumbent on him to
write a leading article before he left it. He had been in the
reporter's gallery of the House all the evening, and he had come away
laden with his article. 'It was certainly better that we should remain
up, than that the whole town should be disappointed,' said Sir
Marmaduke, with something of a sneer.

'It is so very, very good of you to come,' said Nora. 'Indeed it is,'
said Lady Rowley; 'but we were quite sure you would come.' Having
kissed and blessed him as her son-in-law, Lady Rowley was now prepared
to love him almost as well as though he had been Lord Peterborough.

'Perhaps, Mr Stanbury, we had better shew you this telegram,' said Sir
Marmaduke, who had been standing with the scrap of paper in his hand
since the ring of the bell had been heard. Hugh took the message and
read it. 'I do not know what should have made my daughter mention your
name,' continued Sir Marmaduke 'but as she has done so, and as perhaps
the unfortunate invalid himself may have alluded to you, we thought it
best to send for you.'

'No doubt it was best, Sir Marmaduke.'

'We are so situated that I cannot go. It is absolutely necessary that
we should leave town for Southampton on Friday week. The ship sails on
Saturday.'

'I will go as a matter of course,' said Hugh. 'I will start at once at
any time. To tell the truth, when I got Lady Rowley's note, I thought
that it was to be so. Trevelyan and I were very intimate at one time,
and it may be that he will receive me without displeasure.'

There was much to be discussed, and considerable difficulty in the
discussion. This was enhanced, too, by the feeling in the minds of all
of them that Hugh and Sir Marmaduke would not meet again probably for
many years. Were they to part now on terms of close affection, or were
they to part almost as strangers? Had Lucy and Sophie not persistently
remained up, Nora would have faced the difficulty, and taken the bull
by the horns, and asked her father to sanction her engagement in the
presence of her lover. But she could not do it before so many persons,
even though the persons were her own nearest relatives. And then there
arose another embarrassment. Sir Marmaduke, who had taught himself to
believe that Stanbury was so poor as hardly to have the price of a
dinner in his pocket although, in fact, our friend Hugh was probably
the richer man of the two said something about defraying the cost of
the journey. 'It is taken altogether on our behalf,' said Sir
Marmaduke. Hugh became red in the face, looked angry, and muttered a
word or two about Trevelyan being the oldest friend he had in the world
'even if there were nothing else.' Sir Marmaduke felt ashamed of
himself without cause, indeed, for the offer was natural said nothing
further about it; but appeared to be more stiff and ungainly than ever.

The Bradshaw was had out and consulted, and nearly half an hour was
spent in poring over that wondrous volume. It is the fashion to abuse
Bradshaw we speak now especially of Bradshaw the Continental because
all the minutest details of the autumn tour, just as the tourist thinks
that it may be made, cannot be made patent to him at once without close
research amidst crowded figures. After much experience we make bold to
say that Bradshaw knows more, and will divulge more in a quarter of an
hour, of the properest mode of getting from any city in Europe to any
other city more than fifty miles distant, than can be learned in that
first city in a single morning with the aid of a courier, a carriage, a
pair of horses, and all the temper that any ordinary tourist possesses.
The Bradshaw was had out, and it was at last discovered that nothing
could be gained in the journey from London to Siena by starting in the
morning. Intending as he did to travel through without sleeping on the
road, Stanbury could not do better than leave London by the night mail
train, and this he determined to do. But when that was arranged, then
came the nature of his commission. What was he to do? No commission
could be given to him. A telegram should be sent to Emily the next
morning to say that he was coming; and then he would hurry on and take
his orders from her.

They were all in doubt, terribly in doubt, whether the aggravated
malady of which the telegram spoke was malady of the mind or of the
body. If of the former nature then the difficulty might be very great
indeed; and it would be highly expedient that Stanbury should have some
one in Italy to assist him. It was Nora who suggested that he should
carry a letter of introduction to Mr Spalding, and it was she who wrote
it. Sir Marmaduke had not foregathered very closely with the English
Minister, and nothing was said of assistance that should be peculiarly
British. Then, at last, about three or four in the morning came the
moment for parting. Sir Marmaduke had suggested that Stanbury should
dine with them on the next day before he started, but Hugh had
declined, alleging that as the day was at his command it must be
devoted to the work of providing for his absence. In truth, Sir
Marmaduke had given the invitation with a surly voice, and Hugh, though
he was ready to go to the North Pole for any others of the family, was
at the moment in an aggressive mood of mind towards Sir Marmaduke.

'I will send a message directly I get there,' he said, holding Lady
Rowley by the hand, 'and will write fully to you immediately.'

'God bless you, my dear friend!' said Lady Rowley, crying.

'Good night, Sir Marmaduke,' said Hugh.

'Good night, Mr Stanbury.'

Then he gave a hand to the two girls, each of whom, as she took it,
sobbed, and looked away from Nora. Nora was. standing away from them,
by herself, and away from the door, holding on to her chair, and with
her hands clasped together. She had prepared nothing not a word, or an
attitude, not a thought, for this farewell. But she had felt that it
was coming, and had known that she must trust to him for a cue for her
own demeanour. If he could say adieu with a quiet voice, and simply
with a touch of the hand, then would she do the same and endeavour to
think no worse of him. Nor had he prepared anything; but when the
moment came he could not leave her after that fashion. He stood a
moment hesitating, not approaching her, and merely called her by her
name 'Nora!' For a moment she was still; for a moment she held by her
chair; and then she rushed into his arms. He did not much care for her
father now, but kissed her hair and her forehead, and held her closely
to his bosom. 'My own, own Nora!'

It was necessary that Sir Marmaduke should say something. There was at
first a little scene between all the women, during which he arranged
his deportment.

'Mr Stanbury,' he said, 'let it be so. I could wish for my child's
sake, and also for your own, that your means of living were less
precarious.' Hugh accepted this simply as an authority for another
embrace, and then he allowed them all to go to bed.



CHAPTER XCII - TREVELYAN DISCOURSES ON LIFE

Stanbury made his journey without pause or hindrance till he reached
Florence, and as the train for Siena made it necessary that he should
remain there for four or five hours, he went to an inn, and dressed and
washed himself, and had a meal, and was then driven to Mr Spalding's
house. He found the American Minister at home, and was received with
cordiality; but Mr Spalding could tell him little or nothing about
Trevelyan. They went up to Mrs Spalding's room, and Hugh was told by
her that she had seen Mrs Trevelyan once since her niece's marriage,
and that then she had represented her husband as being very feeble.
Hugh, in the midst of his troubles, was amused by a second and a third,
perhaps by a fourth, reference to 'Lady Peterborough.' Mrs Spalding's
latest tidings as to the Trevelyans had been received through 'Lady
Peterborough' from Nora Rowley.

'Lady Peterborough' was at the present moment at Naples, but was
expected to pass north through Florence in a day or two. They, the
Spaldings themselves, were kept in Florence in this very hot weather by
this circumstance. They were going up to the Tyrolese mountains for a
few weeks as soon as 'Lady Peterborough' should have left them for
England. 'Lady Peterborough' would have been so happy to make Mr
Stanbury's acquaintance, and to have heard something direct from her
friend Nora. Then Mrs Spalding smiled archly, showing thereby that she
knew all about Hugh Stanbury and his relation to Nora Rowley. From all
which, and in accordance with the teaching which we got alas, now many
years ago from a great master on the subject, we must conclude that
poor, dear Mrs Spalding was a snob. Nevertheless, with all deference to
the memory of that great master, we think that Mrs Spalding's allusions
to the success in life achieved by her niece were natural and
altogether pardonable; and that reticence on the subject a calculated
determination to abstain from mentioning a triumph which must have been
very dear to her would have betrayed on the whole a condition of mind
lower than that which she exhibited. While rank, wealth, and money are
held to be good things by all around us, let them be acknowledged as
such. It is natural that a mother should be as proud when her daughter
marries an Earl's heir as when her son becomes Senior Wrangler; and
when we meet a lady in Mrs Spalding's condition who purposely abstains
from mentioning the name of her titled daughter, we shall be disposed
to judge harshly of the secret workings of that lady's thoughts on the
subject. We prefer the exhibition, which we feel to be natural. Mr
Spalding got our friend by the button-hole, and was making him a speech
on the perilous condition in which Mrs Trevelyan was placed; but
Stanbury, urged by the circumstances of his position, pulled out his
watch, pleaded the hour, and escaped.

He found Mrs Trevelyan waiting for him at, the station at Siena. He
would hardly have known her not from any alteration that was physically
personal to herself, not that she had become older in face, or thin, or
grey, or sickly but that the trouble of her life had robbed her for the
time of that brightness of apparel, of that pride of feminine gear, of
that sheen of high-bred womanly bearing with which our wives and
daughters are so careful to invest themselves. She knew herself to be a
wretched woman, whose work in life was now to watch over a poor
prostrate wretch, and who had thrown behind her all ideas of grace and
beauty. It was not quickly that, this condition had come upon her. She
had been unhappy at Nuncombe Putney; but unhappiness had not then told
upon the outward woman. She had been more wretched still at St.
Diddulph's, and all the outward circumstances of life in her uncle's
parsonage had been very wearisome to her; but she had striven against
it all, and the sheen and outward brightness had still been there.
After that her child had been taken from her, and the days which she
had passed in Manchester Street had been very grievous but even yet she
had not given way. It was not till her child had been brought back to
her, and she had seen the life which her husband was living, and that
her anger hot anger had changed to pity, and that with pity love had
returned, it was not till this point had come in her sad life that her
dress became always black and sombre, that a veil habitually covered
her face, that a bonnet took the place of the jaunty hat that she had
worn, and that the prettinesses of her life were lain aside. 'It is
very good of you to come,' she said; 'very good, I hardly knew what to
do, I was so wretched. On the day that I sent he was so bad that I was
obliged to do something.' Stanbury, of course, inquired after
Trevelyan's health, as they were being driven up to Mrs Trevelyan's
lodgings. On the day on which she had sent the telegram her husband had
again been furiously angry with her. She had interfered, or had
endeavoured to interfere, in some arrangements as to his health and
comfort, and he had turned upon her with an order that the child should
be at once sent back to him, and that she should immediately quit
Siena. 'When I said that Louey could not be sent and who could send a
child into such keeping? he told me that I was the basest liar that
ever broke a promise, and the vilest traitor that had ever returned
evil for good. I was never to come to him again never; and the gate of
the house would be closed against me if I appeared there.'

On the next day she had gone again, however, and had seen him, and had
visited him on every day since. Nothing further had been said about the
child, and he had now become almost too weak for violent anger. 'I told
him you were coming, and though he would not say so, I think he is glad
of it. He expects you tomorrow.'

'I will go this evening, if he will let me.'

'Not to-night. I think he goes to bed almost as the sun sets. I am
never there myself after four or five in the afternoon. I told him that
you should be there tomorrow alone. I have hired a little carriage, and
you can take it. He said specially that I was not to come with you.
Papa goes certainly on next Saturday?' It was a Saturday now this day
on which Stanbury had arrived at Siena.

'He leaves town on Friday.'

'You must make him believe that. Do not tell him suddenly, but bring it
in by degrees. He thinks that I am deceiving him. He would go back if
he knew that papa were gone.'

They spent a long evening together, and Stanbury learned all that Mrs
Trevelyan could tell him of her husband's state. There was no doubt,
she said, that his reason was affected; but she thought the state of
his mind was diseased in a ratio the reverse of that of his body, and
that when he was weakest in health, then were his ideas the most clear
and rational. He never now mentioned Colonel Osborne's name, but would
refer to the affairs of the last two years as though they had been
governed by an inexorable Fate which had utterly destroyed his
happiness without any fault on his part. 'You may be sure,' she said,
'that I never accuse hint Even when he says terrible things of me which
he does I never excuse myself. I do not think I should answer a word,
if he called me the vilest thing on earth.' Before they parted for the
night many questions were of course asked about Nora, and Hugh
described the condition in which he and she stood to each other. 'Papa
has consented, then?'

'Yes at four o'clock in the morning just as I was leaving them.'

'And when is it to be?'

'Nothing has been settled, and I do not as yet know where she will go
to when they leave London. I think she will visit Monkhams when the
Glascock people return to England.'

'What an episode in life to go and see the place, when it might all now
have been hers!'

'I suppose I ought to feel dreadfully ashamed of myself for having
marred such promotion,' said Hugh.

'Nora is such a singular girl so firm, so headstrong, so good, and so
self-reliant that she will do as well with a poor man as she would have
done with a rich. Shall I confess to you that I did wish that she
should accept Mr Glascock, and that I pressed it on her very strongly?
You will not be angry with me?'

'I am only the more proud of her and of myself.'

'When she was told of all that he had to give in the way of wealth and
rank, she took the bit between her teeth and would not be turned an
inch. Of course she was in love.'

'I hope she may never regret it that is all.'

'She must change her nature first. Everything she sees at Monkhams will
make her stronger in her choice. With all her girlish ways, she is like
a rock nothing can move her.'

Early on the next morning Hugh started alone for Casalunga, having
first, however, seen Mrs Trevelyan. He took out with him certain little
things for the sick man's table as to which, however, he was cautioned
to say not a word to the sick man himself. And it was arranged that he
should endeavour to fix a day for Trevelyan's return to England. That
was to be the one object in view. 'If we could get him to England,' she
said, 'he and I would, at any rate, be together, and gradually he would
be taught to submit himself to advice.' Before ten in the morning,
Stanbury was walking up the hill to the house, and wondering at the
dreary, hot, hopeless desolation of the spot. It seemed to him that no
one could live alone in such a place, in such weather, without being
driven to madness. The soil was parched and dusty, as though no drop of
rain had fallen there for months. The lizards, glancing in and out of
the broken walls, added to the appearance of heat. The vegetation
itself was of a faded yellowish green, as though the glare of the sun
had taken the fresh colour out of it. There was a noise of grasshoppers
and a hum of flies in the air, hardly audible, but all giving evidence
of the heat. Not a human voice was to be heard, nor the sound of a
human foot, and there was no shelter; but the sun blazed down full upon
everything. He took off his hat, and rubbed his head with his
handkerchief as he struck the door with his stick. Oh God, to what
misery had a little folly brought two human beings who had had every
blessing that the world could give within their reach!

In a few minutes he was conducted through the house, and found
Trevelyan seated in a chair under the verandah which looked down upon
the olive trees. He did not even get up from his seat, but put out his
left hand and welcomed his old friend. 'Stanbury,' he said, 'I am glad
to see you for auld lang syne's sake. When I found out this retreat, I
did not mean to have friends round me here. I wanted to try what
solitude was and, by heaven, I've tried it!' He was dressed in a bright
Italian dressing-gown, or woollen paletot Italian, as having been
bought in Italy, though, doubtless, it had come from France and on his
feet he had green worked slippers, and on his head a brocaded cap. He
had made but little other preparation for his friend in the way of
dressing. His long dishevelled hair came down over his neck, and his
beard covered his face. Beneath his dressing-gown he had on a
night-shirt and drawers, and was as dirty in appearance as he was gaudy
in colours.'sit down and let us two moralise,' he said. 'I spend my
life here doing nothing nothing nothing; while 'you cudgel your brain
from day to day to mislead the British public. Which of us two is
taking the nearest road to the devil?'

Stanbury seated himself in a second arm-chair, which there was there in
the verandah, and looked as carefully as he dared to do at his friend.
There could be no mistake as to the restless gleam of that eye. And
then the affected air of ease, and the would-be cynicism, and the
pretence of false motives, all told the same story. 'They used to tell
us,' said Stanbury, 'that idleness is the root of all evil.'

'They have been telling us since the world began so many lies, that I
for one have determined never to believe anything again. Labour leads
to greed, and greed to selfishness, and selfishness to treachery, and
treachery straight to the devil straight to the devil. Ha, my friend,
all your leading articles won't lead you out of that. What's the news?
Who's alive? Who dead? Who in? Who out? What think you of a man who has
not seen a newspaper for two months; and who holds no conversation with
the world further than is needed for the cooking of his polenta and the
cooling of his modest wine-flask?'

'You see your wife sometimes,' said Stanbury.

'My wife! Now, my friend, let us drop that subject. Of all topics of
talk it is the most distressing to man in general, and I own that I am
no exception to the lot. Wives, Stanbury, are an evil, more or less
necessary to humanity, and I own to being one who has not escaped. The
world must be populated, though for what reason one does not see. I
have helped to the extent of one male bantling; and if you are one who
consider population desirable, I will express my regret that I should
have done no more.'

It was very difficult to force Trevelyan out of this humour, and it was
not till Stan bury had risen apparently to take his leave that he found
it possible to say a word as to his mission there. 'Don't you think you
would be happier at home?' he asked.

'Where is my home, Sir Knight of the midnight pen?'

'England is your home, Trevelyan.'

'No, sir; England was my home once; but I have taken the liberty
accorded to me by my Creator of choosing a new country. Italy is now my
nation, and Casalunga is my home.'

'Every tie you have in the world is in England.'

'I have no tie, sir no tie anywhere. It has been my study to untie all
the ties; and, by Jove, I have succeeded. Look at me here. I have got
rid of the trammels pretty well haven't I? have unshackled myself, and
thrown off the paddings, and the wrappings, and the swaddling clothes.
I have got rid of the conventionalities, and can look Nature straight
in the face. I don't even want the Daily Record, Stanbury think of
that!'

Stanbury paced the length of the terrace, and then stopped for a moment
down under the blaze of the sun, in order that he might think how to
address this philosopher. 'Have you heard,' he said at last, 'that I am
going to marry your sister-in-law, Nora Rowley?'

'Then there will be two more full-grown fools in the world certainly,
and probably an infinity of young fools coming afterwards. Excuse me,
Stanbury, but this solitude is apt to make one plain-spoken.'

'I got Sir Marmaduke's sanction the day before I left.'

'Then you got the sanction of an illiterate, ignorant, self-sufficient,
and most contemptible old man; and much good may it do you.'

'Let him be what he may, I was glad to have it. Most probably I shall
never see him again. He sails from Southampton for the Mandarins on
this day week.'

'He does does he? May the devil sail along with him! that is all I say.
And does my much respected and ever-to-be-beloved mother-in-law sail
with him?'

'They all return together except Nora.'

'Who remains to comfort you? I hope you may be comforted that is all.
Don't be too particular. Let her choose her own friends, and go her own
gait, and have her own way, and do you be blind and deaf and dumb and
properly submissive; and it may be that she'll give you your breakfast
and dinner in your own house so long as your hours don't interfere with
her pleasures. If she should even urge you beside yourself by her
vanity, folly, and disobedience so that at last you are driven to
express your feeling no doubt she will come to you after a while and
tell you with the sweetest condescension that she forgives you. When
she has been out of your house for a twelvemonth or more, she will
offer to come back to you, and to forget everything on condition that
you will do exactly as she bids you for the future.'

This attempt at satire, so fatuous, so plain, so false, together with
the would-be jaunty manner of the speaker, who, however, failed
repeatedly in his utterances from sheer physical exhaustion, was
excessively painful to Stanbury. What can one do at any time with a
madman? 'I mentioned my marriage,' said he, 'to prove my right to have
an additional interest in your wife's happiness.'

'You are quite welcome, whether you marry the other one or not welcome
to take any interest you please. I have got beyond all that, Stanbury
yes, by Jove, a long way beyond all that.'

'You have not got beyond loving your wife, and your child, Trevelyan?'

'Upon my word, yes I think I have. There may be a grain of weakness
left, you know. But what have you to do with my love for my wife?'

'I was thinking more just now of her love for you. There she is at
Siena. You cannot mean that she should remain there?'

'Certainly not. What the deuce is there to keep her there?'

'Come with her then to England.'

'Why should I go to England with her? Because you bid me, or because
she wishes it or simply because England is the most damnable,
puritanical, God-forgotten, and stupid country on the face of the
globe? I know no other reason for going to England. Will you take a
glass of wine, Stanbury?' Hugh declined the offer. 'You will excuse
me,' continued Trevelyan; 'I always take a glass of wine at this hour.'
Then he rose from his chair, and helped himself from a cupboard that
was near at hand. Stanbury, watching him as he filled his glass, could
see that his legs were hardly strong enough to carry him. And Stanbury
saw, moreover, that the unfortunate man took two glasses out of the
bottle. 'Go to England indeed. I do not think much of this country; but
it is, at any rate, better than England.'

Hugh perceived that he could do nothing more on the present occasion.
Having heard so much of Trevelyan's debility, he had been astonished to
hear the man speak with so much volubility and attempts at high-flown
spirit. Before he had taken the wine he had almost sunk into his chair,
but still he had continued to speak with the same fluent would-be
cynicism. 'I will come and see you again,' said Hugh, getting up to
take his departure.

'You might as well save your trouble, Stanbury; but you can come if you
please, you know. If you should find yourself locked out, you won't be
angry. A hermit such as I am must assume privileges.'

'I won't be angry,' said Hugh, good humouredly.

'I can smell what you are come about,' said Trevelyan. 'You and my wife
want to take me away from here among you, and I think it best to stay
here. I don't want much for myself, and why should I not live here? My
wife can remain at Siena if she pleases, or she can go to England if
she pleases. She must give me the same liberty the same liberty the
same liberty.' After this he fell a-coughing violently, and Stanbury
thought it better to leave him. He had been at Casalunga about two
hours, and did not seem as yet to have done any good. He had been
astonished both by Trevelyan's weakness, and by his strength; by his
folly, and by his sharpness. Hitherto he could see no way for his
future sister-in-law out of her troubles.

When he was with her at Siena, he described what had taken place with
all the accuracy in his power. 'He has intermittent days,' said Emily.
'To-morrow he will be in quite another frame of mind melancholy, silent
perhaps, and self-reproachful. We will both go tomorrow, and we shall
find probably that he has forgotten altogether what has passed to-day
between you and him.'

So their plans for the morrow were formed.



CHAPTER XCIII -'SAY THAT YOU FORGIVE ME'

On the following day, again early in the morning, Mrs Trevelyan and
Stanbury were driven out to Casalunga. The country people along the
road knew the carriage well, and the lady who occupied it, and would
say that the English wife was going to see her mad husband. Mrs
Trevelyan knew that these words were common in the people's mouths, and
explained to her companion how necessary it would be to use these
rumours, to aid her in putting some restraint over her husband even in
this, country, should they fail in their effort to take him to England.
She saw the doctor in Siena constantly, and had learned from him how
such steps might be taken. The measure proposed would be slow,
difficult, inefficient, and very hard to set aside, if once taken but
still it might be indispensable that something should be done. 'He
would be so much worse off here than he would be at home,' she said 'if
we could only make him understand that it would be so.' Then Stanbury
asked about the wine. It seemed that of late Trevelyan had taken to
drink freely, but only of the wine of the country. But the wine of the
country in these parts is sufficiently stimulating, and Mrs Trevelyan
acknowledged that hence had arisen a further cause of fear.

They walked up the hill together, and Mrs Trevelyan, now well knowing
the ways of the place, went round at once to the front terrace. There
he was, seated in his arm-chair, dressed in the same way as yesterday,
dirty, dishevelled, and gaudy with various colours; but Stanbury could
see at once that his mood had greatly changed. He rose slowly, dragging
himself up out of his chair, as they came up to him, but shewing as he
did so and perhaps somewhat assuming the impotency of querulous
sickness. His wife went to him, and took him by the hand, and placed
him back in his chair. He was weak, he said, and had not slept, and
suffered from the heat; and then he begged her to give him wine. This
she did, half filling for him a tumbler, of which he swallowed the
contents greedily. 'You see me very poorly, Stanbury very poorly,' he
said, seeming to ignore all that had taken place on the previous day.

'You want change of climate, old fellow,' said Stanbury.

'Change of everything I want change of everything,' he said. 'If I
could have a new body and a new mind, and a new soul!'

'The mind and soul, dear, will do well enough, if you will let us look
after the body,' said his wife, seating herself on a stool near his
feet. Stanbury, who had settled beforehand how he would conduct
himself, took out a cigar and lighted it and then they sat together
silent, or nearly silent, for half an hour. She had said that if Hugh
would do so, Trevelyan would soon become used to the presence of his
old friend, and it seemed that he had already done so. More than once,
when he coughed, his wife fetched him some drink in a cup, which he
took from her without a word. And Stanbury the while went on smoking in
silence.

'You have heard, Louis,' she said at last, 'that, after all, Nora and
Mr Stanbury are going to be married?'

'Ah yes; I think I was told of it. I hope you may be happy, Stanbury
happier than I have been.' This was unfortunate, but neither of the
visitors winced, or said a word.

'It will be a pity that papa and mamma cannot be present at the
wedding,' said Mrs Trevelyan.

'If I had to do it again, I should not regret your father's absence; I
must say that. He has been my enemy. Yes, Stanbury my enemy. I don't
care who hears me say so. I am obliged to stay here, because that man
would swear every shilling I have away from me if I were in England. He
would strive to do so, and the struggle in my state of health would be
too much for me.'

'But Sir Marmaduke sails from Southampton this very week,' said
Stanbury.

'I don't know. He is always sailing, and always coming back again. I
never asked him for a shilling in my life, and yet he has treated me as
though I were his bitterest enemy.'

'He will trouble you no more now, Louis,' said Mrs Trevelyan.

'He cannot trouble you again. He will have left England before you can
possibly reach it.'

'He will have left other traitors behind him though none as bad as
himself,' said Trevelyan.

Stanbury, when his cigar was finished, rose and left the husband and
wife together on the terrace. There was little enough to be seen at
Casalunga, but he strolled about looking at the place. He went into the
huge granary, and then down among the olive trees, and up into the
sheds which had been built for beasts. He stood and teased the lizards,
and listened to the hum of the insects, and wiping away the
perspiration which rose to his brow even as he was standing. And all
the while he was thinking what he would do next, or what say next, with
the view of getting Trevelyan away from the place. Hitherto he had been
very tender with him, contradicting him in nothing, taking from him
good humouredly any absurd insult which he chose to offer, pressing
upon him none of the evil which he had himself occasioned, saying to
him no word that could hurt either his pride or his comfort. But he
could not see that this would be efficacious for the purpose desired.
He had come thither to help Nora's sister in her terrible distress, and
he must take upon himself to make some plan for giving this aid. When
he had thought of all this and made his plan, he sauntered back round
the house on to the terrace. She was still there, sitting at her
husband's feet, and holding one of his hands in hers. It was well that
the wife should be tender, but he doubted whether tenderness would
suffice.

'Trevelyan,' he said, 'you know why I have come over here?'

'I suppose she told you to come,' said Trevelyan.

'Well; yes; she did tell me. I came to try and get you back to England.
If you remain here, the climate and solitude together will kill you.'

'As for the climate, I like it and as for the solitude, I have got used
even to that.'

'And then there is another thing,' said Stanbury.

'What is that?' asked Trevelyan, starting.

'You are not safe here.'

'How not safe?'

'She could not tell you, but I must.' His wife was still holding his
hand, and he did not at once attempt to withdraw it; but he raised
himself in his chair, and fixed his eyes fiercely on Stanbury. 'They
will not let you remain here quietly,' said Stanbury.

'Who will not?'

'The Italians. They are already saying that you are not fit to be
alone; and if once they get you into their hands under some Italian
medical board, perhaps into some Italian asylum, it might be years
before you could get out if ever. I have come to tell you what the
danger is. I do not know whether you will believe me.'

'Is it so?' he said, turning to his wife.

'I believe it is, Louis.'

'And who has told them? Who has been putting them up to it?' Now his
hand had been withdrawn. 'My God, am I to be followed here too with
such persecution as this?'

'Nobody has told them but people have eyes.'

'Liar, traitor, fiend! it is you!' he said, turning upon his wife.

'Louis, as I hope for mercy, I have said not a word to any one that
could injure you.'

'Trevelyan, do not be so unjust, and so foolish,' said Stanbury. 'It is
not her doing. Do you suppose that you can live here like this and give
rise to no remarks? Do you think that people's eyes are not open, and
that their tongues will not speak? I tell you, you are in danger here.'

'What am I to do? Where am I to go? Can not they let me stay till I
die? Whom am I hurting here? She may have all my money, if she wants
it. She has got my child.'

'I want nothing, Louis, but to take you where you may be safe and
well.'

'Why are you afraid of going to England?' Stanbury asked.

'Because they have threatened to put me in a mad-house.'

'Nobody ever thought of so treating you,' said his wife.

'Your father did and your mother. They told me so.'

'Look here, Trevelyan. Sir Marmaduke and Lady Rowley are gone. They
will have sailed, at least, before we can reach England. Whatever may
have been either their wishes or their power, they can do nothing now.
Here something would be done very soon; you may take my word for that.
If you will return with me and your wife, you shall choose your own
place of abode. Is not that so, Emily?'

'He shall choose everything. His boy will be with him, and I will be
with him, and he shall be contradicted in nothing. If he only knew my
heart towards him!'

'You hear what she says, Trevelyan?'

'Yes; I hear her.'

'And you believe her?'

'I'm not so sure of that, Stanbury, how should you like to be locked up
in a madhouse and grin through the bars till your heart was broken. It
would not take long with me, I know.'

'You shall never be locked up never be touched,' said his wife.

'I am very harmless here,' he said, almost crying; 'very harmless. I do
not think anybody here will touch me,' he added afterwards. 'And there
are other places. There are other places. My God, that I should be
driven about the world like this!' The conference was ended by his
saying that he would take two days to think of it, and by his then
desiring that they would both leave him. They did so, and descended the
hill together, knowing that he was watching them that he would watch
them till they were out of sight from the gate for, as Mrs Trevelyan
said, he never came down the hill now, knowing that the labour of
ascending it was too much for him. When they were at the carriage they
were met by one of the women of the house, and strict injunctions were
given to her by Mrs Trevelyan to send on word to Siena if the Signore
should prepare to move. 'He cannot go far without my knowing it,' said
she, 'because he draws his money in Siena, and lately I have taken to
him what he wants. He has not enough with him for a long journey.' For
Stanbury had suggested that he might be off to seek another residence
in another country, and that they would find Casalunga vacant when they
reached it on the following Tuesday. But he told himself almost
immediately not caring to express such an opinion to Emily that
Trevelyan would hardly have strength even to prepare for such a journey
by himself.

On the intervening day, the Monday, Stanbury had no occupation
whatever, and he thought that since he was born no day had ever been so
long. Siena contains many monuments of interest, and much that is
valuable in art having had a school of painting of its own, and still
retaining in its public gallery specimens of its school, of which as a
city it is justly proud. There are palaces there to be beaten for
gloomy majesty by none in Italy. There is a cathedral which was to have
been the largest in the world, and than which few are more worthy of
prolonged inspection. The town is old, and quaint, and picturesque, and
dirty, and attractive as it becomes a town in Italy to be. But in July
all such charms are thrown away. In July Italy is not a land of charms
to an Englishman. Poor Stanbury did wander into the cathedral, and
finding it the coolest place in the town, went to sleep on a stone
step. He was awoke by the voice of the priests as they began to chant
the vespers. The good-natured Italians had let him sleep, and would
have let him sleep till the doors were closed for the night. At five he
dined with Mrs Trevelyan, and then endeavoured to while away the
evening thinking of Nora with a pipe in his mouth. He was standing in
this way at the hotel gateway, when, on a sudden, all Siena was made
alive by the clatter of an open carriage and four on its way through
the town to the railway. On looking up, Stanbury saw Lord Peterborough
in the carriage with a lady whom he did not doubt to be Lord
Peterborough's wife. He himself had not been recognised, but he slowly
followed the carriage to the railway station. After the Italian
fashion, the arrival was three-quarters of an hour before the proper
time, and Stanbury had full opportunity of learning their news and
telling his own. They were coming up from Rome, and thought it
preferable to take the route by Siena than to use the railway through
the Maremma; and they intended to reach Florence that night.

'And do you think he is really mad?' asked Lady Peterborough.

'He is undoubtedly so mad as to be unfit to manage anything for
himself, but he is not in such a condition that any one would wish to
see him put into confinement. If he were raving mad there would be less
difficulty, though there might be more distress.'

A great deal was said about Nora, and both Lord Peterborough and his
wife insisted that the marriage should take place at Monkhams. 'We
shall be home now in less than three weeks,' said Caroline, 'and she
must come to us at once. But I will write to her from Florence, and
tell her how we saw you smoking your pipe under the archway. Not that
my husband knew you in the least.'

'Upon my word no,' said the husband 'one didn't expect to find you
here. Good-bye. I hope you may succeed in getting him home. I went to
him once, but could do very little.' Then the train started, and
Stanbury went back to Mrs Trevelyan.

On the next day Stanbury went out to Casalunga alone. He had
calculated, on leaving England, that if any good might be done at Siena
it could be done in three days, and that he would have been able to
start on his return on the Wednesday morning or on Wednesday evening at
the latest. But now there did not seem to be any chance of that and he
hardly knew how to guess when he might get away. He had sent a telegram
to Lady Rowley after his first visit, in which he had simply said that
things were not at all changed at Casalunga, and he had written to Nora
each day since his arrival. His stay was prolonged at great expense and
inconvenience to himself; and yet it was impossible that he should go
and leave his work half finished. As he walked up the hill to the house
he felt very angry with Trevelyan, and prepared himself to use hard
words and dreadful threats. But at the very moment of his entrance on
the terrace, Trevelyan professed himself ready to go to England.
'That's right, old fellow,' said Hugh. 'I am so glad.' But in
expressing his joy he had hardly noticed Trevelyan's voice and
appearance.

'I might as well go,' he said. 'It matters little where I am, or
whether they say that I am mad or sane.'

'When we have you over there, nobody shall say a word that is
disagreeable.'

'I only hope that you may not have the trouble of burying me on the
road. You don't know, Stanbury, how ill I am. I cannot eat. If I were
at the bottom of that hill, I could no more walk up it than I could
fly. I cannot sleep, and at night my bed is wet through with
perspiration. I can remember nothing nothing but what I ought to
forget.'

'We'll put you on your legs again when we get you to your own climate.'

'I shall be a poor traveller a poor traveller; but I will do my best.'

When would he start? That was the next question. Trevelyan asked for a
week, and Stanbury brought him down at last to three days. They would
go to Florence by the evening train on Friday, and sleep there. Emily
should come out and assist him to arrange his things on the morrow.
Having finished so much of his business, Stanbury returned to Siena.
They both feared that he might be found on the next day to have
departed from his intention; but no such idea seemed to have occurred
to him. He gave instructions as to the notice to be served on the agent
from the Hospital as to his house, and allowed Emily to go among his
things and make preparations for the journey. He did not say much to
her; and when she attempted, with a soft half-uttered word, to assure
him that the threat of Italian interference, which had come from
Stanbury, had not reached Stanbury from her, he simply shook his head
sadly. She could not understand whether he did not believe her, or
whether he simply wished that the subject should be dropped. She could
elicit no sign of affection from him, nor would he willingly accept
such from her but he allowed her to prepare for the journey, and never
hinted that his purpose might again be liable to change. On the Friday,
Emily with her child, and Hugh with all their baggage, travelled out on
the road to Casalunga, thinking it better that there should be no halt
in the town on their return. At Casalunga, Hugh went up the hill with
the driver, leaving Mrs Trevelyan in the carriage. He had been out at
the house before in the morning, and had given all necessary orders but
still at the last moment he thought that there might be failure. But
Trevelyan was ready, having dressed himself up with a laced shirt, and
changed his dressing-gown for a blue frock-coat, and his brocaded cap
for a Paris hat, very pointed before and behind, and closely turned up
at the sides. But Stanbury did not in the least care for his friend's
dress. 'Take my arm,' he said, 'and we will go down, fair and easy.
Emily would not come up because of the heat.' He suffered himself to be
led, or almost carried down the hill; and three women, and the
coachman, and an old countryman who worked on the farm, followed with
the luggage. It took about an hour and a half to pack the things; but
at last they were all packed, and corded, and bound together with
sticks, as though it were intended that they should travel in that form
to Moscow. Trevelyan the meanwhile sat on a chair which had been
brought out for him from one of the cottages, and his wife stood beside
him with her boy. 'Now then we are ready,' said Stanbury. And in that
way they bade farewell to Casalunga. Trevelyan sat speechless in the
carriage, and would not even notice the child. He seemed to be half
dreaming and to fix his eyes on vacancy. 'He appears to think of
nothing now,' Emily said that evening to Stanbury. But who can tell how
busy and how troubled are the thoughts of a madman!

They had now succeeded in their object of inducing their patient to
return with them to England; but what were they to do with him when
they had reached home with him? They rested only a night at Florence;
but they found their fellow-traveller so weary, that they were unable
to get beyond Bologna on the second day. Many questions were asked of
him as to where he himself would wish to take up his residence in
England; but it was found almost impossible to get an answer. Once he
suggested that he would like to go back to Mrs Fuller's cottage at
Willesden, from whence they concluded that he would wish to live
somewhere out of London. On his first day's journey, he was moody and
silent wilfully assuming the airs of a much-injured person. He spoke
hardly at all, and would notice nothing that was said to him by his
wife. He declared once that he regarded Stanbury as his keeper, and
endeavoured to be disagreeable and sullenly combative; but on the
second day, he was too weak for this, and accepted, without
remonstrance, the attentions that were paid to him. At Bologna they
rested a day, and from thence both Stanbury and Mrs Trevelyan wrote to
Nora. They did not know where she might be now staying, but the
letters, by agreement, were addressed to Gregg's Hotel. It was
suggested that lodgings, or, if possible, a small furnished house,
should be taken in the neighbourhood of Mortlake, Richmond, or
Teddington, and that a telegram as well as letter should be sent to
them at the Paris hotel. As they could not travel quick, there might be
time enough for them in this way to know whither they should go on
their reaching London.

They stayed a day at Bologna, and then they went on again to Turin,
over the mountains to Chambery, thence to Dijon, and on to Paris. At
Chambery they remained a couple of days, fancying that the air there
was cool, and that the delay would be salutary to the sick man. At
Turin, finding that they wanted further assistance, they had hired a
courier, and at last Trevelyan allowed himself to be carried in and out
of the carriages and up and down the hotel stairs almost as though he
were a child. The delay was terribly grievous to Stanbury, and Mrs
Trevelyan, perceiving this more than once, begged him to leave them,
and to allow her to finish the journey with the aid of the courier. But
this he could not do. He wrote letters to his friends at the D. R.
office, explaining his position as well as he could, and suggesting
that this and that able assistant should enlighten the British people
on this and that subject, which would in the course of nature, as
arranged at the D. R. office, have fallen into his hands. He and Mrs
Trevelyan became as brother and sister to each other on their way home
as, indeed, it was natural that they should do. Were they doing right
or wrong in this journey that they were taking? They could not conceal
from themselves that the labour was almost more than the poor wretch
could endure; and that it might be, as he himself had suggested, that
they would be called on to bury him on the road. But that residence at
Casalunga had been so terrible the circumstances of it, including the
solitude, sickness, madness, and habits of life of the wretched hermit,
had been so dangerous the probability of interference on the part of
some native authority so great, and the chance of the house being left
in Trevelyan's possession so small, that it had seemed to him that they
had no other alternative; and yet, how would it be if they were killing
him by the toil of travelling? From Chambery, they made the journey to
Paris in two days, and during that time Trevelyan hardly opened his
mouth. He slept much, and ate better than he had done in the hotter
climate on the other side of the Alps.

They found a telegram at Paris, which simply contained the promise of a
letter for the next day. It had been sent by Nora, before she had gone
out on her search. But it contained one morsel of strange information;
'Lady Milborough is going with me.' On the next day they got a letter,
saying that a cottage had been taken, furnished, between Richmond and
Twickenham. Lady Milborough had known of the cottage, and everything
would be ready then. Nora would herself meet them at the station in
London, if they would, as she proposed, stay a night at Dover. They
were to address to her at Lady Milborough's house, in Eccleston Square.
In that case, she would have a carriage for them at the Victoria
Station, and would go down with them at once to the cottage.

There were to be two days more of weary travelling, and then they were
to be at home again. She and he would have a house together as husband
and wife, and the curse of their separation would, at any rate, be
over. Her mind towards him had changed altogether since the days in
which she had been so indignant, because he had set a policeman to
watch over her. All feeling of anger was over with her now. There is
nothing that a woman will not forgive a man, when he is weaker than she
is herself.

The journey was made first to Dover, and then to London. Once, as they
were making their way through the Kentish hop-fields, he put out his
hand feebly, and touched hers. They had the carriage to themselves, and
she was down on her knees before him instantly. 'Oh, Louis! Oh, Louis!
say that you forgive me!' What could a woman do more than that in her
mercy to a man?

'Yes yes; yes,' he said; 'but do not talk now; I am so tired.'



CHAPTER XCIV - A REAL CHRISTIAN

In the meantime the Rowleys were gone. On the Monday after the
departure of Stanbury for Italy, Lady Rowley had begun to look the
difficulty about Nora in the face, and to feel that she must do
something towards providing the poor girl with a temporary home.
Everybody had now agreed that she was to marry Hugh Stanbury as soon as
Hugh Stanbury could be ready, and it was not to be thought of that she
should be left out in the world as one in disgrace or under a cloud.
But what was to be done? Sir Marmaduke was quite incapable of
suggesting anything. He would make her an allowance, and leave her a
small sum of ready money but as to residence, he could only suggest
again and again that she should be sent to Mrs Outhouse. Now Lady
Rowley was herself not very fond of Mrs Outhouse, and she was aware
that Nora herself was almost as averse to St. Diddulph's as she was to
the Mandarins. Nora already knew that she had the game in her own
hands. Once when in her presence her father suggested the near
relationship and prudent character and intense respectability of Mrs
Outhouse, Nora, who was sitting behind Sir Marmaduke, shook her head at
her mother, and Lady Rowley knew that Nora would not go to St.
Diddulph's. This was the last occasion on which that proposition was
discussed.

Throughout all the Trevelyan troubles Lady Milborough had continued to
shew a friendly anxiety on behalf of Emily Trevelyan. She had called
once or twice on Lady Rowley, and Lady Rowley had of course returned
the visits. She had been forward in expressing her belief that in truth
the wife had been but little if at all to blame, and had won her way
with Lady Rowley, though she had never been a favourite with either of
Lady Rowley's daughters. Now, in her difficulty, Lady Rowley went to
Lady Milborough, and returned with an invitation that Nora should come
to Eccleston Square, either till such time as she might think fit to go
to Monkhams, or till Mrs Trevelyan should have returned, and should be
desirous of having her sister with her. When Nora first heard of this
she almost screamed with surprise, and, if the truth must be told, with
disappointment also.

'She never liked me, mamma.'

'Then she is so much more good-natured.'

'But I don't want to go to her merely because she is good-natured
enough to receive a person she dislikes. I know she is very good. I
know she would sacrifice herself for anything she thought right. But,
mamma, she is such a bore!'

But Lady Rowley would not be talked down, even by Nora, in this
fashion. Nora was somewhat touched with an idea that it would be a fine
independent thing to live alone, if it were only for a week or two,
just because other young ladies never lived alone. Perhaps there was
some half-formed notion in her mind that permission to do so was part
of the reward due to her for having refused to marry a lord. Stanbury
was in some respects a Bohemian, and it would become her, she thought,
to have a little practice herself in the Bohemian line. She had,
indeed, declined a Bohemian marriage, feeling strongly averse to
encounter the loud displeasure of her father and mother but as long as
everything was quite proper, as long as there should be no running
away, or subjection of her name to scandal, she considered that a
little independence would be useful and agreeable. She had looked
forward to sitting up at night alone by a single tallow candle, to
stretching a beefsteak so as to last her for two days' dinners, and
perhaps to making her own bed. Now, there would not be the slightest
touch of romance in a visit to Lady Milborough's house in Eccleston
Square, at the end of July. Lady Rowley, however, was of a different
opinion, and spoke her mind plainly. 'Nora, my dear, don't be a fool. A
young lady like you can't go and live in lodgings by herself. All
manner of things would be said. And this is such a very kind offer! You
must accept it for Hugh's sake. I have already said that you would
accept it.'

'But she will be going out of town.'

'She will stay till you can go to Monkhams if Emily is not back before
then. She knows all about Emily's affairs; and if she does come back
which I doubt, poor thing Lady Milborough and you will be able to judge
whether you should go to her.' So it was settled, and Nora's Bohemian
Castle in the Air fell into shatters.

The few remaining days before the departure to Southampton passed
quickly, but yet sadly. Sir Marmaduke had come to England expecting
pleasure and with that undefined idea which men so employed always have
on their return home that something will turn up which will make their
going back to that same banishment unnecessary. What Governor of
Hong-Kong, what Minister to Bogota, what General of the Forces at the
Gold Coast, ever left the scene of his official or military labours
without a hope, which was almost an expectation, that a grateful
country would do something better for him before the period of his
return should have arrived? But a grateful country was doing nothing
better for Sir Marmaduke, and an ungrateful Secretary of State at the
Colonial Office would not extend the term during which he could regard
himself as absent on special service. How thankful he had been when
first the tidings reached him that he was to come home at the expense
of the Crown, and without diminution of his official income! He had now
been in England for five months, with a per diem allowance, with his
very cabs paid for him, and he was discontented, sullen, and with
nothing to comfort him but his official grievance, because he could not
be allowed to extend his period of special service more than two months
beyond the time at which those special services were in truth ended!
There had been a change of Ministry in the last month, and he had
thought that a Conservative Secretary of State would have been kinder
to him. 'The Duke says I can stay three months with leave of absence
and have half my pay stopped. I wonder whether it ever enters into his
august mind that even a Colonial Governor must eat and drink.' It was
thus he expressed his great grievance to his wife. 'The Duke,' however,
had been as inexorable as his predecessor, and Sir Rowley, with his
large family, was too wise to remain to the detriment of his pocket. In
the meantime the clerks in the office, who had groaned in spirit over
the ignorance displayed in his evidence before the committee, were
whispering among themselves that he ought not to be sent back to his
seat of government at all.

Lady Rowley also was disappointed and unhappy. She had expected so much
pleasure from her visit to her daughter, and she had received so
little! Emily's condition was very sad, but in her heart of hearts
perhaps she groaned more bitterly over all that Nora had lost, than she
did over the real sorrows of her elder child. To have had the cup at
her lip, and then not to have tasted it! And she had the solace of no
communion in this sorrow. She had accepted Hugh Stanbury as her
son-in-law, and not for worlds would she now say a word against him to
any one. She had already taken him to her heart, and she loved him. But
to have had it almost within her grasp to have had a lord, the owner of
Monkhams, for her son-in-law! Poor Lady Rowley!

Sophie and Lucy, too, were returning to their distant and dull
banishment without any realisation of their probable but unexpressed
ambition. They made no complaint, but yet it was hard on them that
their sister's misfortune should have prevented them from going almost
to a single dance. Poor Sophie and poor Lucy! They must go, and we
shall hear no more about them. It was thought well that Nora should not
go down with them to Southampton. What good would her going do? 'God
bless you, my darling,' said the mother, as she held her child in her
arms.

'Good-bye, dear mamma.'

'Give my best love to Hugh, and tell him that I pray him with my last
word to be good to you.' Even then she was thinking of Lord
Peterborough, but the memory of what might have been was buried deep in
her mind.

'Nora, tell me all about it,' said Lucy.

'There will be nothing to tell,' said Nora.

'Tell it all the same,' said Lucy. 'And bring Hugh out to write a book
of travels about the Mandarins. Nobody has ever written a book about
the Mandarins.' So they parted; and when Sir Marmaduke and his party
were taken off in two cabs to the Waterloo Station, Nora was taken in
one cab to Eccleston Square.

It may be doubted whether any old lady since the world began ever did a
more thoroughly Christian and friendly act that this which was now
being done by Lady Milborough. It was the end of July, and she would
already have been down in Dorsetshire, but for her devotion to this
good deed. For, in truth, what she was doing was not occasioned by any
express love for Nora Rowley. Nora Rowley was all very well, but Nora
Rowley towards her had been flippant, impatient, and, indeed, not
always so civil as a young lady should be to the elderly friends of her
married sister. But to Lady Milborough it had seemed to be quite
terrible that a young girl should be left alone in the world, without
anybody to take care of her. Young ladies, according to her views of
life, were fragile plants that wanted much nursing before they could be
allowed to be planted out in the gardens of the world as married women.
When she heard from Lady Rowley that Nora was engaged to marry Hugh
Stanbury 'You know all about Lord Peterborough, Lady Milborough; but it
is no use going back to that now is it? And Mr Stanbury has behaved so
exceedingly well in regard to poor Louis,' when Lady Milborough heard
this, and heard also that Nora was talking of going to live by herself
in lodgings! she swore to herself, like a goodly Christian woman, as
she was, that such a thing must not be. Eccleston Square in July and
August is not pleasant, unless it be to an inhabitant who is interested
in the fag-end of the parliamentary session. Lady Milborough had no
interest in politics had not much interest even in seeing the social
season out to its dregs. She ordinarily remained in London till the
beginning or middle of July, because the people with whom she lived
were in the habit of doing so but as soon as ever she had fixed the
date of her departure, that day to her was a day of release. On this
occasion the day had been fixed and it was unfixed, and changed, and
postponed, because it was manifest to Lady Milborough that she could do
good by remaining for another fortnight. When she made the offer she
said nothing of her previous arrangements. 'Lady Rowley, let her come
to me. As soon as her friend Lady Peterborough is at Monkhams, she can
go there.'

Thus it was that Nora found herself established in Eccleston Square. As
she took her place in Lady Milborough's drawing-room, she remembered
well a certain day, now two years ago, when she had first heard of the
glories of Monkhams in that very house. Lady Milborough, as
good-natured then as she was now, had brought Mr Glascock and Nora
together, simply because she had heard that the gentleman admired the
young lady. Nora, in her pride, had resented this as interference had
felt that the thing had been done, and, though she had valued the
admiration of the man, had ridiculed the action of the woman. As she
thought of it now she was softened by gratitude. She had not on that
occasion been suited with a husband, but she had gained a friend. 'My
dear,' said Lady Milborough, as at her request Nora took off her hat,
'I am afraid that the parties are mostly over that is, those I go to;
but we will drive out every day, and the time won't be so very long.'

'It won't be long for me, Lady Milborough but I cannot but know how
terribly I am putting you out.'

'I am never put out, Miss Rowley,' said the old lady, 'as long as I am
made to think that what I do is taken in good part.'

'Indeed, indeed it shall be taken in good part,' said Nora 'indeed it
shall.' And she swore a solemn silent vow of friendship for the dear
old woman.

Then there came letters and telegrams from Chambery, Dijon, and Paris,
and the joint expedition in search of the cottage was made to
Twickenham. It was astonishing how enthusiastic and how loving the
elder and the younger lady were together before the party from Italy
had arrived in England. Nora had explained everything about herself how
impossible it had been for her not to love Hugh Stanbury; how essential
it had been for her happiness and self-esteem that she should refuse Mr
Glascock; how terrible had been the tragedy of her sister's marriage.
Lady Milborough spoke of the former subject with none of Lady Rowley's
enthusiasm, but still with an evident partiality for her own rank,
which almost aroused Nora to indignant eloquence. Lady Milborough was
contented to acknowledge that Nora might be right, seeing that her
heart was so firmly fixed; but she was clearly of opinion that Mr
Glascock, being Mr Glascock, had possessed a better right to the prize
in question than could have belonged to any man who had no recognised
position in the world. Seeing that her heart had been given away, Nora
was no doubt right not to separate her hand from her heart; but Lady
Milborough was of opinion that young ladies ought to have their hearts
under better control, so that the men entitled to the prizes should get
them. It was for the welfare of England at large that the eldest sons
of good families should marry the sweetest, prettiest, brightest, and
most lovable girls of their age. It is a doctrine on behalf of which
very much may be said.

On that other matter, touching Emily Trevelyan, Lady Milborough frankly
owned that she had seen early in the day that he was the one most in
fault. 'I must say, my dear,' she said, 'that I very greatly dislike
your friend, Colonel Osborne.'

'I am sure that he meant not the slightest harm no more than she did.'

'He was old enough, and ought to have known better. And when the first
hint of an uneasiness in the mind of Louis was suggested to him, his
feelings as a gentleman should have prompted him to remove himself. Let
the suspicion have been ever so absurd, he should have removed himself.
Instead of that, he went after her into Devonshire.'

'He went to see other friends, Lady Milborough.'

'I hope it may have been so I hope it may have been so. But he should
have cut off his hand before he rang at the door of the house in which
she was living. You will understand, my dear, that I acquit your sister
altogether. I did so all through, and said the same to poor Louis when
he came to me. But Colonel Osborne should have known better. Why did he
write to her? Why did he go to St. Diddulph's? Why did he let it be
thought that that she was especially his friend. Oh dear; oh dear; oh
dear! I am afraid he is a very bad man.'

'We had known him so long, Lady Milborough.'

'I wish you had never known him at all. Poor Louis! If be had only done
what I told him at first, all might have been well. "Go to Naples, with
your wife," I said. "Go to Naples." If he had gone to Naples, there
would have been no journeys to Siena, no living at Casalunga, no
separation. But he didn't seem to see it in the same light. Poor dear
Louis. I wish he had gone to Naples when I told him.'

While they were going backwards and forwards, looking at the cottage at
Twickenham and trying to make things comfortable there for the sick
man, Lady Milborough hinted to Nora that it might be distasteful to
Trevelyan, in his present condition, to have even a sister-in-law
staying in the house with him. There was a little chamber which Nora
had appropriated to herself, and at first it seemed to be taken for
granted that she should remain there at least till the 10th of August,
on which day Lady Peterborough had signified that she and her husband
would be ready to receive their visitor. But Lady Milborough slept on
the suggestion, and on the next morning hinted her disapprobation. 'You
shall take them down in the carriage, and their luggage can follow in a
cab but the carriage can bring you back. You will see how things are
then.'

'Dear Lady Milborough, you would go out of town at once if I left you.'

'And I shall not go out of town if you don't leave me, What difference
does it make to an old woman like me? I have got no lover coming to
look for me, and all I have to do is to tell my daughter-in-law that I
shall not be there for another week or so. Augusta is very glad to have
me, but she is the wisest woman in the world, and can get on very well
without me.'

'And as I am the silliest, I cannot.'

'You shall put it in that way if you like it, my dear. Girls in your
position often do want assistance. I dare say you think me very
straight-laced, but I am quite sure Mr Stanbury will be grateful to me.
As you are to be married from Monkhams, it will be quite well that you
should pass thither through my house as an intermediate resting-place,
after leaving your father and mother.' By all which Lady Milborough
intended to express an opinion that the value of the article which Hugh
Stanbury would receive at the altar would be enhanced by the
distinguished purity of the hands through which it had passed before it
came into his possession in which opinion she was probably right as
regarded the price put upon the article by the world at large, though
it may perhaps be doubted whether the recipient himself would be of the
same opinion.

'I hope you know that I am grateful, whatever he may be,' said Nora,
after a pause.

'I think that you take it as it is meant, and that makes me quite
comfortable.'

'Lady Milborough, I shall love you for ever and ever. I don't think I
ever knew anybody so good as you are or so nice.'

'Then I shall be more than comfortable,' said Lady Milborough. After
that there was an embrace, and the thing was settled.





CHAPTER XCV - TREVELYAN BACK IN ENGLAND

Nora, with Lady Milborough's carriage, and Lady Milborough's coach and
footman, and with a cab ready for the luggage close behind the
carriage, was waiting at the railway station when the party from Dover
arrived. She soon saw Hugh upon the platform, and ran to him with her
news. They had not a word to say to each other of themselves, so
anxious were they both respecting Trevelyan. 'We got a bed-carriage for
him at Dover,' said Hugh; 'and I think he has borne the journey pretty
well but he feels the heat almost as badly as in Italy. You will hardly
know him when you see him.' Then, when the rush of passengers was gone,
Trevelyan was brought out by Hugh and the courier, and placed in Lady
Milborough's carriage. He just smiled as his eye fell upon Nora, but he
did not even put out his hand to greet her.

'I am to go in the carriage with him,' said his wife.

'Of course you are and so will I and Louey. I think there will be room:
it is so large. There is a cab for all the things. Dear Emily, I am so
glad to see you.'

'Dearest Nora! I shall be able to speak to you by-and-by, but you must
not be angry with me now. How good you have been.'

'Has not she been good? I don't understand about the cottage. It
belongs to some friend of hers; and I have not been able to say a word
about the rent. It is so nice and looks upon the river. I hope that he
will like it.'

'You will be with us?'

'Not just at first. Lady Milborough thinks I had better not  that he
will like it better. I will come down almost every day, and will stay
if you think he will like it.'

These few words were said while the men were putting Trevelyan into the
carriage. And then another arrangement was made. Hugh hired a second
cab, in which he and the courier made a part of the procession; and so
they all went to Twickenham together. Hugh had not yet learned that he
would be rewarded by coming back alone with Nora in the carriage.

The cottage by the River Thames, which, as far as the party knew, was
nameless, was certainly very much better than the house on the top of
the hill at Casalunga. And now, at last, the wife would sleep once more
under the same roof with her husband, and the separation would be over.
'I suppose that is the Thames,' said Trevelyan; and they were nearly
the only words he spoke in Nora's hearing that evening. Before she
started on her return journey, the two sisters were together for a few
minutes, and each told her own budget of news in short, broken
fragments. There was not much to tell. 'He is so weak,' said Mrs
Trevelyan, 'that he can do literally nothing. He can hardly speak. When
we give him wine, he will say a few words, and his mind seems then to
be less astray than it was. I have told him just simply that it was all
my doing that I have been in fault all through, and every now and then
he will say a word, to shew me that he remembers that I have
confessed.'

'My poor Emily!'

'It was better so. What does it all matter? He had suffered so, that I
would have said worse than that to give him relief. The pride has gone
out of me so, that I do not regard what anybody may say. Of course, it
will be said that I went astray, and that he forgave me.'

'Nobody will say that, dearest; nobody. Lady Milborough is quite aware
how it all was.'

'What does it signify? There are things in life worse even than a bad
name.'

'But he does not think it?'

'Nora, his mind is a mystery to me. I do not know what is in it.
Sometimes I fancy that all facts have been forgotten, and that he
merely wants the childish gratification of being assured that he is the
master. Then, again, there come moments, in which I feel sure that
suspicion is lurking within him, that he is remembering the past, and
guarding against the future. When he came into this house, a quarter of
an hour ago, he was fearful lest there was a mad doctor lurking about
to pounce on him. I can see in his eye that he had some such idea. He
hardly notices Louey though there was a time, even at Casalunga, when
he would not let the child out of his sight.'

'What will you do now?'

'I will try to do my duty that is all.'

'But you will have a doctor?'

'Of course. He was content to see one in Paris, though he would not let
me be present. Hugh saw the gentleman afterwards, and he seemed to
think that the body was worse than the mind.' Then Nora told her the
name of a doctor whom Lady Milborough had suggested, and took her
departure along with Hugh in the carriage.

In spite of all the sorrow that they had witnessed and just left, their
journey up to London was very pleasant. Perhaps there is no period so
pleasant among all the pleasant periods of love-making as that in which
the intimacy between the lovers is so assured, and the coming event so
near, as to produce and to endure conversation about the ordinary
little matters of life what can be done with the limited means at their
mutual disposal; how that life shall be begun which they are to lead
together; what idea each has of the other's duties; what each can do
for the other; what each will renounce for the other. There was a true
sense of the delight of intimacy in the girl who declared that she had
never loved her lover so well as when she told him how many pairs of
stockings she had got. It is very sweet to gaze at the stars together;
and it is sweet to sit out among the haycocks. The reading of poetry
together, out of the same book, with brows all close, and arms all
mingled, is very sweet. The pouring out of the whole heart in written
words, which the writer knows would be held to be ridiculous by any
eyes, and any ears, and any sense, but the eyes and ears and sense of
the dear one to whom they are sent, is very sweet but for the girl who
has made a shirt for the man that she loves, there has come a moment in
the last stitch of it, sweeter than any that stars, haycocks, poetry,
or superlative epithets have produced. Nora Rowley had never as yet
been thus useful on behalf of Hugh Stanbury. Had she done so, she might
perhaps have been happier even than she was during this journey but,
without the shirt, it was one of the happiest moments of her life.
There was nothing now to separate them but their own prudential
scruples and of them it must be acknowledged that Hugh Stanbury had
very few. According to his shewing, he was as well provided for
matrimony as the gentleman in the song, who came out to woo his bride
on a rainy night. In live stock he was not so well provided as the
Irish gentleman to whom we allude; but in regard to all other
provisions for comfortable married life, he had, or at a moment's
notice could have, all that was needed. Nora could live just where she
pleased not exactly in Whitehall Gardens or Belgrave Square; but the
New Road, Lupus Street, Montague Place, the North Bank, or Kennington
Oval, with all their surrounding crescents, terraces, and rows,
offered, according to him, a choice so wide, either for lodgings or
small houses, that their only embarrassment was in their riches. He had
already insured his life for a thousand pounds, and, after paying
yearly for that, and providing a certain surplus for saving, five
hundred a year was the income on which they were to commence the world.
'Of course, I wish it were five thousand for your sake,' he said; 'and
I wish I were a Cabinet Minister, or a duke, or a brewer; but, even in
heaven, you know all the angels can't be archangels.' Nora assured him
that she would be quite content with virtues simply angelic. 'I hope
you like mutton-chops and potatoes; I do,' he said. Then she told him
of her ambition about the beef-steak, acknowledging that, as it must
now be shared between two, the glorious idea of putting a part of it
away in a cupboard must be abandoned. 'I don't believe in beef-
steaks,' he said. 'A beef-steak may mean anything. At our club, a
beef-steak is a sumptuous and expensive luxury. Now, a mutton-chop
means something definite, and must be economical.'

'Then we will have the mutton-chops at home,' said Nora, 'and you shall
go to your club for the beef-steak.'

When they reached Eccleston Square, Nora insisted on taking Hugh
Stanbury up to Lady Milborough. It was in vain that he pleaded that he
had come all the way from Dover on a very dusty day all the way from
Dover, including a journey in a Hansom cab to Twickenham and back,
without washing his hands and face. Nora insisted that Lady Milborough
was such a dear, good, considerate creature, that she would understand
all that, and Hugh was taken into her presence. 'I am delighted to see
you, Mr Stanbury,' said the old lady, 'and hope you will think that
Nora is in good keeping.'

'She has been telling me how very kind you have been to her. I do not
know where she could have bestowed herself if you had not received
her.'

'There, Nora I told you he would say so. I won't tell tales, Mr
Stanbury; but she had all manner of wild plans which I knew you
wouldn't approve. But she is very amiable, and if she will only submit
to you as well as she does to me.'

'I don't mean to submit to him at all, Lady Milborough of course not. I
am going to marry for liberty.'

'My dear, what you say, you say in joke; but a great many young women
of the present day do, I really believe, go up to the altar and
pronounce their marriage vows, with the simple idea that as soon as
they have done so, they are to have their own way in everything. And
then people complain that young men won't marry! Who can wonder at it?'

'I don't think the young men think much about the obedience,' said
Nora.'some marry for money, and some for love. But I don't think they
marry to get a slave.'

'What do you say, Mr Stanbury?' asked the old lady.

'I can only assure you that I shan't marry for money,' said he.

Two or three days after this Nora left her friend in Eccleston Square,
and domesticated herself for awhile with her sister. Mrs Trevelyan
declared that such an arrangement would be comfortable for her, and
that it was very desirable now, as Nora would so soon be beyond her
reach. Then Lady Milborough was enabled to go to Dorsetshire, which she
did not do, however, till she had presented Nora with the veil which
she was to wear on the occasion of her wedding. 'Of course I cannot see
it, my dear, as it is to take place at Monk-hams; but you must write
and tell me the day and I will think of you. And you, when you put on
the veil, must think of me.' So they parted, and Nora knew that she had
made a friend for life.

When she first took her place in the house at Twickenham as a resident,
Trevelyan did not take much notice of her but, after awhile, he would
say a few words to her, especially when it might chance that she was
with him in her sister's absence. He would speak of dear Emily, and
poor Emily, and shake his head slowly, and talk of the pity of it. 'The
pity of it, Iago; oh, the pity of it,' he said once. The allusion to
her was so terrible that she almost burst out in anger, as she would
have done formerly. She almost told him that he had been as wrong
throughout as was the jealous husband in the play whose words he
quoted, and that his jealousy, if continued, was likely to be as
tragical. But she restrained herself, and kept close to her needle
making, let us hope, an auspicious garment for Hugh Stanbury.'she has
seen it now,' he continued;'she has seen it now.' Still she went on
with her hemming in silence. It certainly could not be her duty to
upset at a word all that her sister had achieved. 'You know that she
has confessed?' he asked.

'Pray, pray do not talk about it, Louis.'

'I think you ought to know,' he said. Then she rose from her seat and
left the room. She could not stand it, even though he were mad even
though he were dying!

She went to her sister and repeated what had been said. 'You had better
not notice it,' said Emily. 'It is only a proof of what I told you.
There are times in which his mind is as active as ever it was, but it
is active in so terrible a direction!'

'I cannot sit and hear it. And what am I to say when he asks me a
question as he did just now? He said that you had confessed.'

'So I have. Do none confess but the guilty? What is all that we have
read about the Inquisition and the old tortures? I have had to learn
that torturing has not gone out of the world that is all.'

'I must go away if he says the same thing to me so again.'

'That is nonsense, Nora. If I can bear it, cannot you? Would you have
me drive him into violence again by disputing with him on such a
subject?'

'But he may recover and then he will remember what you have said.'

'If he recovers altogether he will suspect nothing. I must take my
chance of that. You cannot suppose that I have not thought about it. I
have often sworn to myself that though the world should fall around me,
nothing should make me acknowledge that I had ever been untrue to my
duty as a married woman, either in deed, or word, or thought. I have no
doubt that the poor wretches who were tortured in their cells used to
make the same resolutions as to their confessions. But yet, when their
nails were dragged out of them, they would own to anything. My nails
have been dragged out, and I have been willing to confess anything.
When he talks of the pity of it, of course I know what he means. There
has been something, some remainder of a feeling, which has still kept
him from asking me that question. May God, in his mercy, continue to
him that feeling!'

'But you would answer truly?'

'How can I say what I might answer when the torturer is at my nails? If
you knew how great was the difficulty to get him away from that place
in Italy and bring him here; and what it was to feel that one was bound
to stay near him, and that yet one was impotent and to know that even
that refuge must soon cease for him, and that he might have gone out
and died on the road-side, or have done anything which the momentary
strength of madness might have dictated if you could understand all
this, you would not be surprised at my submitting to any degradation
which would help to bring him here.'

Stanbury was often down at the cottage, and Nora could discuss the
matter better with him than with her sister. And Stanbury could learn
more thoroughly from the physician who was now attending Trevelyan what
was the state of the sick man, than Emily could do. According to the
doctor's idea there was more of ailment in the body than in the mind.
He admitted that his patient's thoughts had been forced to dwell on one
subject till they had become distorted, untrue, jaundiced, and perhaps
mono-maniacal; but he seemed to doubt whether there had ever been a
time at which it could have been decided that Trevelyan was so mad as
to make it necessary that the law should interfere to take care of him.
A man so argued the doctor need not be mad because he is jealous, even
though his jealousy be ever so absurd. And Trevelyan, in his jealousy,
had done nothing cruel, nothing wasteful, nothing infamous. In all this
Nora was very little inclined to agree with the doctor, and thought
nothing could be more infamous than Trevelyan's conduct at the present
moment unless, indeed, he could be screened from infamy by that plea of
madness. But then there was more behind. Trevelyan had been so wasted
by the kind of life which he had led, and possessed by nature stamina
so insufficient to resist such debility, that it was very doubtful
whether he would not sink altogether before he could be made to begin
to rise. But one thing was clear. He should be contradicted in nothing.
If he chose to say that the moon was made of green cheese, let it be
conceded to him that the moon was made of green cheese. Should he make
any other assertion equally removed from the truth, let it not be
contradicted. Who would oppose a man with one foot in the grave?

'Then, Hugh, the sooner I am at Monkhams the better,' said Nora, who
had again been subjected to inuendoes which had been unendurable to
her. This was on the 7th of August, and it still wanted three days to
that on which the journey to Monkhams was to be made.

'He never says anything to me on the subject,' said Hugh.

'Because you have made him afraid of you. I almost think that Emily and
the doctor are wrong in their treatment, and that it would be better to
stand up to him and tell him the truth.' But the three days passed
away, and Nora was not driven to any such vindication of her sister's
character towards her sister's husband.



CHAPTER XCVI - MONKHAMS

On the 10th of August Nora Rowley left the cottage by the river-side at
Twickenham, and went down to Monkhams. The reader need hardly be told
that Hugh brought her up from Twickenham and sent her off in the
railway carriage. They agreed that no day could be fixed for their
marriage till something further should be known of Trevelyan's state.
While he was in his present condition such a marriage could not have
been other than very sad. Nora, when she left the cottage, was still
very bitter against her brother-in-law, quoting the doctor's opinion as
to his sanity, and expressing her own as to his conduct under that
supposition.

She also believed that he would rally in health, and was therefore, on
that account, less inclined to pity him than was his wife. Emily
Trevelyan of course saw more of him than did her sister, and understood
better how possible it was that a man might be in such a condition as
to be neither mad nor sane not mad, so that all power over his own
actions need be taken from him; nor sane, so that he must be held to be
accountable for his words and thoughts. Trevelyan did nothing, and
attempted to do nothing, that could injure his wife and child. He
submitted himself to medical advice. He did not throw away his money.
He had no Bozzle now waiting at his heels. He was generally passive in
his wife's hands as to all outward things. He was not violent in
rebuke, nor did he often allude to their past unhappiness. But he still
maintained, by a word spoken every now and then, that he had been right
throughout in his contest with his wife and that his wife had at last
acknowledged that it was so. She never contradicted him, and he became
bolder and bolder in his assertions, endeavouring on various occasions
to obtain some expression of an assent from Nora. But Nora would not
assent, and he would scowl at her, saying words, both in her presence
and behind her back, which implied that she was his enemy. 'Why not
yield to him?' her sister said the day before she went. 'I have
yielded, and your doing so cannot make it worse.'

'I can't do it. It would be false. It is better that I should go away.
I cannot pretend to agree with him, when I know that his mind is
working altogether under a delusion.' When the hour for her departure
came, and Hugh was waiting for her, she thought that it would be better
that she should go, without seeing Trevelyan. 'There will only be more
anger,' she pleaded. But her sister would not be contented that she
should leave the house in this fashion, and urged at last, with tears
running down her cheeks, that this might possibly be the last interview
between them.

'Say a word to him in kindness before you leave us,' said Mrs
Trevelyan. Then Nora went up to her brother-in-law's bed-side, and told
him that she was going, and expressed a hope that he might be stronger
when she returned. And as she did so she put her hand upon the
bed-side, intending to press his in token of affection. But his face
was turned from her, and he seemed to take no notice of her. 'Louis,'
said his wife, 'Nora is going to Monkhams. You will say good-bye to her
before she goes?'

'If she be not my enemy, I will,' said he.

'I have never been your enemy, Louis,' said Nora, 'and certainly I am
not now.'

'She had better go,' he said. 'It is very little more that I expect of
any one in this world but I will recognise no one as my friend who will
not acknowledge that I have been sinned against during the last two
years sinned against cruelly and utterly.' Emily, who was standing at
the bed-head, shuddered as she heard this, but made no reply. Nor did
Nora speak again, but crept silently out of the room and in half a
minute her sister followed her.

'I feared how it would be,' said Nora.

'We can only do our best. God knows that I try to do mine.'

'I do not think you will ever see him again,' said Hugh to her in the
train.

'Would you have had me act otherwise? It is not that it would have been
a lie. I would not have minded that to ease the shattered feelings of
one so infirm and suffering as he. In dealing with mad people I suppose
one must be false. But I should have been accusing her; and it may be
that he will get well, and it might be that he would then remember what
I had said.'

At the station near Monkhams she was met by Lady Peterborough in the
carriage. A tall footman in livery came on to the platform to shew her
the way and to look after her luggage, and she could not fail to
remember that the man might have been her own servant, instead of being
the servant of her who now sat in Lord Peterborough's carriage. And
when she saw the carriage, and her ladyship's great bay horses, and the
glittering harness, and the respectably responsible coachman, and the
arms on the panel, she smiled to herself at the sight of these first
outward manifestations of the rank and wealth of the man who had once
been her lover. There are men who look as though they were the owners
of bay horses and responsible coachmen and family blazons from whose
outward personal appearance, demeanour, and tone of voice, one would
expect a following of liveries and a magnificence of belongings; but Mr
Glascock had by no means been such a man. It had suited his taste to
keep these things in abeyance, and to place his pride in the oaks and
elms of his park rather than in any of those appanages of grandeur
which a man may carry about with him. He could talk of his breed of
sheep on an occasion, but he never talked of his horses; and though he
knew his position and all its glories as well as any nobleman in
England, he was ever inclined to hang back a little in going out of a
room, and to bear himself as though he were a small personage in the
world. Some perception of all this came across Nora's mind as she saw
the equipage, and tried to reflect, at a moment's notice, whether the
case might have been different with her, had Mr Glascock worn a little
of his tinsel outside when she first met him. Of course she told
herself that had he worn it all on the outside, and carried it ever so
gracefully, it could have made no difference.

It was very plain, however, that, though Mr Glascock did not like
bright feathers for himself, he chose that his wife should wear them.
Nothing could be prettier than the way in which Caroline Spalding, whom
we first saw as she was about to be stuck into the interior of the
diligence, at St. Michael, now filled her carriage as Lady
Peterborough. The greeting between them was very affectionate, and
there was a kiss in the carriage, even though the two pretty hats,
perhaps, suffered something. 'We are so glad to have you at last,' said
Lady Peterborough. 'Of course we are very quiet; but you won't mind
that.' Nora declared that no house could be too quiet for her, and then
said something of the melancholy scene which she had just left. 'And no
time is fixed for your own marriage? But of course it has not been
possible. And why should you be in a hurry? We quite understand that
this is to be your home till everything has arranged itself.' There was
a drive of four or five miles before they reached the park gates, and
nothing could be kinder or more friendly than was the new peeress; but
Nora told herself that there was no forgetting that her friend was a
peeress. She would not be so ill-conditioned as to suggest to herself
that her friend patronised her and, indeed, had she done so, the
suggestion would have been false but she could not rid herself of a
certain sensation of external inferiority, and of a feeling that the
superiority ought to be on her side, as all this might have been hers
only that she had not thought it worth her while to accept it. As these
ideas came into her mind, she hated herself for entertaining them; and
yet, come they would. While she was talking about her emblematic
beef-steak with Hugh, she had no regret, no uneasiness, no conception
that any state of life could be better for her than that state in which
an emblematic beef-steak was of vital importance; but she could not
bring her mind to the same condition of unalloyed purity while sitting
with Lady Peterborough in Lord Peterborough's carriage. And for her
default in this respect she hated herself.

'This is the beginning of the park,' said her friend.

'And where is the house?'

'You can't see the house for ever so far yet; it is two miles off.
There is about a mile before you come to the gates, and over a mile
afterwards. One has a sort of feeling when one is in that one can't get
out it is so big.' In so speaking, it was Lady Peterborough's special
endeavour to state without a boast facts which were indifferent, but
which must be stated.

'It is very magnificent,' said Nora. There was in her voice the
slightest touch of sarcasm, which she would have given the world not to
have uttered but it had been irrepressible.

Lady Peterborough understood it instantly, and forgave it, not
attributing to it more than its true meaning, acknowledging to herself
that it was natural. 'Dear Nora,' she said not knowing what to say,
blushing as she spoke 'the magnificence is nothing; but the man's love
is everything.'

Nora shook herself, and determined that she would behave well. The
effort should be made, and the required result should be produced by
it. 'The magnificence, as an adjunct, is a great deal,' she said; 'and
for his sake, I hope that you enjoy it.'

'Of course I enjoy it.'

'Wallachia's teachings and preachings have all been thrown to the wind,
I hope.'

'Not quite all. Poor dear Wally! I got a letter from her the other day,
which she began by saying that she would attune her correspondence to
my changed condition in life. I understood the reproach so thoroughly!
And, when she told me little details of individual men and women, and
of things she had seen, and said not a word about the rights of women,
or even of politics generally, I felt that I was a degraded creature in
her sight. But, though you laugh at her, she did me good and will do
good to others. Here we are inside Monk-hams, and now you must look at
the avenue.'

Nora was now rather proud of herself. She had made the effort, and it
had been successful; and she felt that she could speak naturally, and
express her thoughts honestly. 'I remember his telling me about the
avenue the first time I ever saw him and here it is. I did not think
then that I should ever live to see the glories of Monkhams. Does it go
all the way like this to the house?'

'Not quite where you see the light at the end the road turns to the
right, and the house is just before you. There are great iron gates,
and terraces, and wondrous paraphernalia before you get up to the door.
I can tell you Monkhams is quite a wonder. I have to shut myself up
every Wednesday morning, and hand the house over to Mrs Crutch, the
housekeeper, who comes out in a miraculous brown silk gown, to shew it
to visitors. On other days, you'll find Mrs Crutch quite civil and
useful but on Wednesdays, she is majestic. Charles always goes off
among his sheep on that day, and I shut myself up with a pile of books
in a little room. You will have to be imprisoned with me. I do so long
to peep at the visitors.'

'And I dare say they want to peep at you.'

'I proposed at first to shew them round myself but Charles wouldn't let
me.'

'It would have broken Mrs Crutch's heart.'

'That's what Charles said. He thinks that Mrs Crutch tells them that
I'm locked up somewhere, and that that gives a zest to the search. Some
people from Nottingham once did break into old Lady Peterborough's
room, and the shew was stopped for a year. There was such a row about
it! It prevented Charles coming up for the county. But he wouldn't have
got in; and therefore it was lucky, and saved money.'

By this time Nora was quite at her ease; but still there was before her
the other difficulty, of meeting Lord Peterborough. They were driven
out of the avenue, and round to the right, and through the iron gate,
and up to the huge front door. There, upon the top step, was standing
Lord Peterborough, with a billycock hat and a very old shooting coat,
and nankeen trousers, which were considerably too short for him. It was
one of the happinesses of his life to dress just as he pleased as he
went about his own place; and it certainly was his pleasure to wear
older clothes than any one else in his establishment. 'Miss Rowley,' he
said, coming forward to give her a hand out of the carriage, 'I am
delighted that you should see Monkhams at last.'

'You see I have kept you to your promise. Caroline has been telling me
everything about it; but she is not quite a complete guide as yet. She
does not know where the seven oaks are. Do you remember telling me of
the seven oaks?'

'Of course I do. They are five miles off at Clatton farm, Carry. I
don't think you have been near Clatton yet. We will ride there
tomorrow.' And thus Nora Rowley was made at home at Monkhams.

She was made at home, and after a week or two she was very happy. She
soon perceived that her host was a perfect gentleman, and as such, a
man to be much loved. She had probably never questioned the fact,
whether Mr Glascock was a gentleman or not, and now she did not analyse
it. It probably never occurred to her, even at the present time, to say
to herself that he was certainly that thing, so impossible of
definition, and so capable of recognition; but she knew that she had to
do with one whose presence was always pleasant to her, whose words and
acts towards her extorted her approbation, whose thoughts seemed to her
to be always good and manly. Of course she had not loved him, because
she had previously known Hugh Stanbury. There could be no comparison
between the two men. There was a brightness about Hugh which Lord
Peterborough could not rival. Otherwise except for this reason it
seemed to her to be impossible that any young woman should fail to love
Lord Peterborough when asked to do so.

About the middle of September there came a very happy time for her,
when Hugh was asked down to shoot partridges in the doing of which,
however, all his brightness did not bring him near in excellence to his
host. Lord Peterborough had been shooting partridges all his life, and
shot them with a precision which excited Hugh's envy. To own the truth,
Stanbury did not shoot well, and was treated rather with scorn by the
gamekeeper; but in other respects he spent three or four of the
happiest days of his life. He had his work to do, and after the second
day over the stubbles, declared that the exigencies of the D. R. were
too severe to enable him to go out with his gun again; but those
rambles about the park with Nora, for which, among the exigencies of
the D. R., he did find opportunity, were never to be forgotten.

'Of course I remember that it might have been mine,' she said, sitting
with him under an old, hollow, withered sloping stump of an oak, which
still, however, had sufficient of a head growing from one edge of the
trunk to give them the shade they wanted; 'and if you wish me to own to
regrets I will.'

'It would kill me, I think, if you did; and yet I cannot get it out of
my head that if it had not been for me your rank and position in life
might have been so so suitable to you.'

'No, Hugh; there you're wrong. I have thought about it a good deal,
too; and I know very well that the cold beef-steak in the cupboard is
the thing for me. Caroline will do very well here. She looks like a
peeress, and bears her honours grandly; but they will never harden her.
I, too, could have been magnificent with fine feathers. Most birds are
equal to so much as that. I fancy that I could have looked the part of
the fine English lady, and could have patronised clergymen's wives in
the country, could have held my own among my peers in London, and could
have kept Mrs Crutch in order; but it would have hardened me, and I
should have learned to think that to be a lady of fashion was
everything.'

'I do not believe a bit of it.'

'It is better as it is, Hugh for me at least. I had always a sort of
conviction that it would be better, though I had a longing to play the
other part. Then you came, and you have saved me. Nevertheless, it is
very nice, Hugh, to have the oaks to sit under.' Stanbury declared that
it was very nice.

But still nothing was settled about the wedding. Trevelyan's condition
was so uncertain that it was very difficult to settle anything. Though
nothing was said on the subject between Stanbury and Mrs Trevelyan, and
nothing written between Nora and her sister, it could not but be
remembered that should Trevelyan die, his widow would require a home
with them. They were deterred from choosing a house by this reflection,
and' were deterred from naming a day also by the consideration that
were they to do so, Trevelyan's state might still probably prevent it.
But this was arranged, that if Trevelyan lived through the winter, or
even if he should not live, their marriage should not be postponed
beyond the end of March. Till that time Lord Peterborough would remain
at Monkhams, and it was understood that Nora's invitation extended to
that period.

'If my wife does not get tired of you, I shall not,' Lord Peterborough
said to Nora. 'The thing is that when you do go we shall miss you so
terribly.' In September, too, there happened another event which took
Stanbury to Exeter, and all needful particulars as to that event shall
be narrated in the next chapter.



CHAPTER XCVII - MRS BROOKE BURGESS

It may be doubted whether there was a happier young woman in England
than Dorothy Stanbury when that September came which was to make her
the wife of Mr Brooke Burgess, the new partner in the firm of Cropper
and Burgess. Her early aspirations in life had been so low, and of late
there had come upon her such a succession of soft showers of success
mingled now and then with slight threatenings of storms which had
passed away that the Close at Exeter seemed to her to have become a
very Paradise. Her aunt's temper had sometimes been to her as the
threat of a storm, and there had been the Gibson marriage treaty, and
the short-lived opposition to the other marriage treaty which had
seemed to her to be so very preferable; but everything had gone at last
as though she had been Fortune's favourite and now had come this
beautiful arrangement about Cropper and Burgess, which would save her
from being carried away to live among strangers in London! When she
first became known to us on her coming to Exeter, in compliance with
her aunt's suggestion, she was timid, silent, and altogether without
self-reliance. Even they who knew her best had never guessed that she
possessed a keen sense of humour, a nice appreciation of character, and
a quiet reticent wit of her own, under that staid and frightened
demeanour. Since her engagement with Brooke Burgess it seemed to those
who watched her that her character had become changed, as does that of
a flower when it opens itself in its growth. The sweet gifts of nature
within became visible, the petals sprang to view, and the leaves spread
themselves, and the sweet scent was felt upon the air. Had she remained
at Nuncombe, it is probable that none would ever have known her but her
sister. It was necessary to this flower that it should be warmed by the
sun of life, and strengthened by the breezes of opposition, and filled
by the showers of companionship, before it could become aware of its
own loveliness. Dorothy was one who, had she remained ever unseen in
the retirement of her mother's village cottage, would have lived and
died ignorant of even her own capabilities for enjoyment. She had not
dreamed that she could win a man's love had hardly dreamed till she had
lived at Exeter that she had love of her own to give back in return.
She had not known that she could be firm in her own opinion, that she
could laugh herself and cause others to laugh, that she could be a lady
and know that other women were not so, that she had good looks of her
own and could be very happy when told of them by lips that she loved.
The flower that blows the quickest is never the sweetest. The fruit
that ripens tardily has ever the finest flavour. It is often the same
with men and women. The lad who talks at twenty as men should talk at
thirty, has seldom much to say worth the hearing when he is forty; and
the girl who at eighteen can shine in society with composure, has
generally given over shining before she is a full-grown woman. With
Dorothy the scent and beauty of the flower, and the flavour of the
fruit, had come late; but the fruit will keep, and the flower will not
fall to pieces with the heat of an evening.

'How marvellously your bride has changed since she has been here,' said
Mrs MacHugh to Miss Stanbury. 'We thought she couldn't say boo to a
goose at first; but she holds her own now among the best of 'em.'

'Of course she does why shouldn't she? I never knew a Stanbury yet that
was a fool.'

They are a wonderful family, of course,' said Mrs MacHugh; 'but I think
that of all of them she is the most wonderful. Old Barty said something
to her at my house yesterday that wasn't intended to be kind.'

'When did he ever intend to be kind?'

'But he got no change out of her. "The Burgesses have been in Exeter a
long time," she said, "and I don't see why we should not get on at any
rate as well as those before us." Barty grunted and growled and slunk
away. He thought she would shake in her shoes when he spoke to her.'

'He has never been able to make a Stanbury shake in her shoes yet,'
said the old lady.

Early in September, Dorothy went to Nuncombe Putney to spend a week
with her mother and sister at the cottage. She had insisted on this,
though Priscilla had hinted, somewhat unnecessarily, that Dorothy, with
her past comforts and her future prospects, would find the
accommodation at the cottage very limited. 'I suppose you and I, Pris,
can sleep in the same bed, as we always did,' she said, with a tear in
each eye. Then Priscilla had felt ashamed of herself, and had bade her
come.

'The truth is, Dolly,' said the elder sister, 'that we feel so unlike
marrying and giving in marriage at Nuncombe, that I'm afraid you'll
lose your brightness and become dowdy, and grim, and misanthropic, as
we are. When mamma and I sit down to what we call dinner, I always feel
that there is a grace hovering in the air different to that which she
says.'

'And what is it, Pris?'

'"Pray, God, don't quite starve us, and let everybody else have
indigestion." We don't say it out loud, but there it is; and the spirit
of it might damp the orange blossoms.'

She went of course, and the orange blossoms were not damped. She had
long walks with her sister round by Niddon and Ridleigh, and even as
far distant as Cockchaffington, where much was said about that wicked
Colonel as they stood looking at the porch of the church. 'I shall be
so happy,' said Dorothy, 'when you and mother come to us. It will be
such a joy to me that you should be my guests.'

'But we shall not come.'

'Why not, Priscilla?'

'I know it will be so. Mamma will not care for going, if I do not go.'

'And why should you not come?'

'For a hundred reasons, all of which you know, Dolly. I am stiff,
impracticable, ill-conditioned, and very bad at going about visiting. I
am always thinking that other people ought to have indigestion, and
perhaps I might come to have some such feeling about you and Brooke.'

'I should not be at all afraid of that.'

'I know that my place in the world is here, at Nuncombe Putney. I have
a pride about myself, and think that I never did wrong but once when I
let mamma go into that odious Clock House. It is a bad pride, and yet
I'm proud of it. I hav'n't got a gown fit to go and stay with you, when
you become a grand lady in Exeter. I don't doubt you'd give me any sort
of gown I wanted.'

'Of course I would. Ain't we sisters, Pris?'

'I shall not be so much your sister as he will be your husband.
Besides, I hate to take things. When Hugh sends money, and for mamma's
sake it is accepted, I always feel uneasy while it lasts, and think
that that plague of an indigestion ought to come upon me also. Do you
remember the lamb that came when you went away? It made me so sick.'

'But, Priscilla isn't that morbid?'

'Of course it is. You don't suppose I really think it grand. I am
morbid. But I am strong enough to live on, and not get killed by the
morbidity. Heaven knows how much more there may be of it forty years,
perhaps, and probably the greater portion of that absolutely alone.'

'No you'll be with us then if it should come.'

'I think not, Dolly. Not to have a hole of my own would be intolerable
to me. But, as I was saying, I shall not be unhappy. To enjoy life, as
you do, is I suppose out of the question for me. But I have a
satisfaction when I get to the end of the quarter and find that there
is not half-a-crown due to any one. Things get dearer and dearer, but I
have a comfort even in that. I have a feeling that I should like to
bring myself to the straw a day.' Of course there were offers made of
aid offers which were rather prayers and plans suggested of what might
be done between Brooke and Hugh; but Priscilla declared that all such
plans were odious to her. 'Why should you be unhappy about us?' she
continued. 'We will come and see you at least I will perhaps once in
six months, and you shall pay for the railway ticket; only I won't
stay, because of the gown.'

'Is not that nonsense, Pris?'

'Just at present it is, because mamma and I have both got new gowns for
the wedding. Hugh sent them, and ever so much money to buy bonnets and
gloves.'

'He is to be married himself soon down at a place called Monkhams. Nora
is staying there.'

'Yes with a lord,' said Priscilla. 'We sha'n't have to go there, at any
rate.'

'You liked Nora when she was here?'

'Very much though I thought her self-willed. But she is not worldly,
and she is conscientious. She might have married that lord herself if
she would. I do like her. When she comes to you at Exeter, if the
wedding gown isn't quite worn out, I shall come and see her. I knew she
liked him when she was here, but she never said so.'

'She is very pretty, is she not? He sent me her photograph.'

'She is handsome rather than pretty. I wonder why it is that you two
should be married, and so grandly married, and that I shall never,
never have any one to love.'

'Oh, Priscilla, do not say that. If I have a child will you not love
it?'

  'It will be your child not mine. Do you suppose that I complain. I
  know that it is right. I know that you ought to be married and I ought
  not. I know that there is not a man in Devonshire who would take me,
  or a man in Devonshire whom I would accept. I know that I am quite
  unfit for any other kind of life than this. I should make any man
  wretched, and any man would make me wretched. But why is it so? I
  believe that you would make any man happy.'

'I hope to make Brooke happy.'

'Of course you will, and therefore you deserve it. We'll go home now,
dear, and get mamma's things ready. for the great day.'

On the afternoon before the great day all the visitors were to come,
and during the forenoon old Miss Stanbury was in a great fidget.
Luckily for Dorothy, her own preparations were already made, so that
she could give her time to her aunt without injury to herself. Miss
Stanbury had come to think of herself as though all the reality of her
life had passed away from her. Every resolution that she had formed had
been broken. She had had the great enemy of her life, Barty Burgess, in
the house with her upon terms that were intended to be amicable, and
had arranged with him a plan for the division of the family property.
Her sister-in-law, whom in the heyday of her strength she had chosen to
regard as her enemy, and with whom even as yet there had been no
reconciliation, was about to become her guest, as was also Priscilla
whom she had ever disliked almost as much as she had respected. She had
quarrelled utterly with Hugh in such a manner as to leave no possible
chance of a reconciliation and he also was about to be her guest. And
then, as to her chosen heir, she was now assisting him in doing the
only thing, as to which she had declared that if he did do it, he
should not be her heir. As she went about the house, under an idea that
such a multiplicity of persons could not be housed and fed without
superhuman exertion, she thought of all this, and could not help
confessing to herself that her life had been very vain. It was only
when her eyes rested on Dorothy, and she saw how supremely happy was
the one person whom she had taken most closely to her heart, that she
could feel that she had done anything that should not have been left
undone. 'I think I'll sit down now, Dorothy,' she said, 'or I sha'n't
be able to be with you tomorrow.'

'Do, aunt. Everything is all ready, and nobody will be here for an hour
yet. Nothing can be nicer than the rooms, and nothing ever was done so
well before. I'm only thinking how lonely you'll be when we're gone.'

'It'll be only for six weeks.'

'But six weeks is such a long time.'

'What would it have been if he had taken you up to London, my pet? Are
you sure your mother wouldn't like a fire in her room, Dorothy?'

'A fire in September, aunt?'

'People live so differently. One never knows.'

'They never have but one fire at Nuncombe, aunt, summer or winter.'

'That's no reason they shouldn't be comfortable here.' However, she did
not insist on having the fire lighted.

Mrs Stanbury and Priscilla came first, and the meeting was certainly
very uncomfortable. Poor Mrs Stanbury was shy, and could hardly speak a
word. Miss Stanbury thought that her visitor was haughty, and, though
she endeavoured to be gracious, did it with a struggle. They called
each other ma'am, which made Dorothy uneasy. Each of them was so dear
to her, that it was a pity that they should glower at each other like
enemies. Priscilla was not at all shy; but she was combative, and, as
her aunt said of her afterwards, would not keep her prickles in. 'I
hope, Priscilla, you like weddings,' said Miss Stanbury to her, not
knowing where to find a subject for conversation.

'In the abstract I like them,' said Priscilla. Miss Stanbury did not
know what her niece meant by liking weddings in the abstract, and was
angry.

'I suppose you do have weddings at Nuncombe Putney sometimes,' she
said.

'I hope they do,' said Priscilla, 'but I never saw one. Tomorrow will
be my first experience.'

'Your own will come next, my dear,' said Miss Stanbury.

'I think not,' said Priscilla. 'It is quite as likely to be yours,
aunt.' This, Miss Stanbury thought, was almost an insult, and she said
nothing more on the occasion.

Then came Hugh and the bridegroom. The bridegroom, as a matter of
course, was not accommodated in the house, but he was allowed to come
there for his tea. He and Hugh had come together; and for Hugh a
bedroom had been provided. His aunt had not seen him since he had been
turned out of the house, because of his bad practices, and Dorothy had
anticipated the meeting between them with alarm. It was, however, much
more pleasant than had been that between the ladies. 'Hugh,' she said
stiffly, 'I am glad to see you on such an occasion as this.'

'Aunt,' he said, 'I am glad of any occasion that can get me an entrance
once more into the dear old house. I am so pleased to see you.' She
allowed her hand to remain in his a few moments, and murmured something
which was intended to signify her satisfaction. 'I must tell you that I
am going to be married myself, to one of the dearest, sweetest, and
loveliest girls that ever were seen, and you must congratulate me.'

'I do, I do; and I hope you may be happy.'

'We mean to try to be; and some day you must let me bring her to you,
and shew her. I shall not be satisfied, if you do not know my wife.'
She told Martha afterwards that she hoped that Mr Hugh had sown his
wild oats, and that matrimony would sober him. When, however, Martha
remarked that she believed Mr Hugh to be as hardworking a young man as
any in London, Miss Stanbury shook her head sorrowfully. Things were
being very much changed with her; but not even yet was she to be
brought to approve of work done on behalf of a penny newspaper.

On the following morning, at ten o'clock, there was a procession from
Miss Stanbury's house into the Cathedral, which was made entirely on
foot indeed, no assistance could have been given by any carriage, for
there is a back entrance to the Cathedral, near to the Lady Chapel,
exactly opposite Miss Stanbury's house. There were many of the
inhabitants of the Close there, to see the procession, and the
cathedral bells rang out their peals very merrily. Brooke, the
bridegroom, gave his arm to Miss Stanbury, which was, no doubt, very
improper as he should have appeared in the church as coming from some
quite different part of the world. Then came the bride, hanging on her
brother, then two bridesmaids friends of Dorothy's, living in the town;
and, lastly, Priscilla with her mother, for nothing would induce
Priscilla to take the part of a bridesmaid. 'You might as well ask an
owl to sing to you,' she said. 'And then all the frippery would be
thrown away upon me.' But she stood close to Dorothy, and when the
ceremony had been performed, was the first, after Brooke, to kiss her.

Everybody acknowledged that the bride was a winsome bride. Mrs MacHugh
was at the breakfast, and declared afterwards that Dorothy Burgess as
she then was pleased to call her was a girl very hard to be
understood.'she came here,' said Mrs MacHugh, 'two years ago, a plain,
silent, shy, dowdy young woman, and we all said that Miss Stanbury
would be tired of her in a week. There has never come a time in which
there was any visible difference in her, and now she is one of our city
beauties, with plenty to say to everybody, with a fortune in one pocket
and her aunt in the other, and everybody is saying what a fortunate
fellow Brooke Burgess is to get her. In a year or two she'll be at the
top of everything in the city, and will make her way in the county
too.'

The compiler of this history begs to add his opinion to that of
'everybody,' as quoted above by Mrs MacHugh. He thinks that Brooke
Burgess was a very fortunate fellow to get his wife.



CHAPTER XCVIII - ACQUITTED

During this time, while Hugh was sitting with his love under the oak
trees at Monkhams, and Dorothy was being converted into Mrs Broo