ging down the pier on which it hung, and which was so
crazy, the groom said, "he was afraid, if he shook it never so little,
all would come down together."

"Let it alone," said the general, in the tone of one resolved to be
patient; "there is room enough for us to get in one by one--Miss
Stanley, do not be in a hurry, if you please; follow me quietly."

In they filed. The avenue, overgrown with grass, would have been
difficult to find, but for deep old cart-ruts which still marked the
way. But soon, fallen trees, and lopped branches, dragged many a rood
and then left there, made it difficult to pass. And there lay exposed
the white bodies of many a noble tree, some wholly, some half, stripped
of their bark, some green in decay, left to the weather--and every here
and there little smoking pyramids of burning charcoal.

As they approached the house--"How changed," said the general, "from
that once cheerful hospitable mansion!"--It was a melancholy example of
a deserted home: the plaster dropping off, the cut stone green, the
windows broken, the shutters half shut, the way to the hall-door steps
blocked up. They were forced to go round through the yards. Coach-houses
and stables, grand ranges, now all dilapidated. Only one yelping cur in
the great kennel. The back-door being ajar, the general pushed it open,
and they went in, and on to the great kitchen, where they found in the
midst of wood smoke one little old woman, whom they nearly scared out of
her remaining senses. She stood and stared. Beauclerc stepped towards
her to explain; but she was deaf: he raised his voice--in vain. She was
made to comprehend by the general, whose voice, known in former times,
reached her heart--"that they only came to see the place."

"See the place! ah! a sad sight to see." Her eyes reverted to Beauclerc,
and, conceiving that he was the young lord himself, she waxed pale, and
her head shook fearfully; but, when relieved from this mistake, she went
forward to show them over the house.

As they proceeded up the great staircase, she confided to her friend,
the general, that she was glad it was not the young lord, for she was
told he was a fiery man, and she dreaded his coming unawares.

Lady Cecilia asked if she did not know him?

No, she had never seen him since he was a little fellow: "he has been
always roaming about, like the rest, in foreign parts, and has never set
foot in the place since he came to man's estate."

As the general passed a window on the landing-place, he looked out.--
"You are missing the great elm, Sir. Ah! I remember you here, a boy; you
was always good. It was the young lord ordered specially the cutting of
that, which I could not stomach; the last of the real old trees! Well,
well! I'm old and foolish--I'm old and foolish, and I should not talk."

But still she talked on, and as this seemed her only comfort, they would
not check her garrulity. In the hope that they were come to take the
house, she now bustled as well as she could, to show all to the best
advantage, but bad was the best now, as she sorrowfully said. She was
very unwilling that the gentlemen should go up to inspect the roof. They
went, however; and the general saw and estimated, and Beauclerc saw and
hoped.

The general, recollecting the geography of the house, observed that she
had not shown them what used to be the picture-gallery, which looked out
on the terrace; he desired to see it. She reluctantly obeyed; and, after
trying sundry impossible keys, repeating all the while that her heart
was broke, that she wished it had pleased God never to give her a heart,
unlock the door she could not in her trepidation. Beauclerc gently took
the keys from her, and looked so compassionately upon her, that she God-
blessed him, and thought it a pity her young lord was not like him; and
while he dealt with the lock, Lady Cecilia, saying they would trouble
her no further, slipped into her hand what she thought would be some
comfort. The poor old creature thanked her ladyship, but said gold could
be of no use to her now in life; she should soon let the parish bury
her, and be no cost to the young lord. She could forgive many things,
she said, but she could never forgive him for parting with the old
pictures. She turned away as the gallery-door opened.

One only old daub of a grandmother was there; all the rest had been
sold, and their vacant places remained discoloured on the walls. There
were two or three dismembered old chairs, the richly dight windows
broken, the floor rat-eaten. The general stood and looked, and did not
sigh, but absolutely groaned. They went to the shattered glass door,
which looked out upon the terrace--that terrace which had cost thousands
of pounds to raise, and he called Cecilia to show her the place where
the youngsters used to play, and to point out some of his favourite
haunts.

"It is most melancholy to see a family-place so gone to ruin," said
Beauclerc; "if it strikes us so much, what must it be to the son of this
family, to come back to the house of his ancestors, and find it thus
desolate! Poor Beltravers!"

The expression of the general's eye changed.

"I am sure you must pity him, my dear general," continued Beauclerc.

"I might, had he done any thing to prevent, or had he done less to
hasten, this ruin."

"How? he should not have cut down the trees, do you mean?--but it was to
pay his father's debts----" "And his own," said the general.

"He told me his father's, sir."

"And I tell you his own."

"Even so," said Beauclerc, "debts are not crimes for which we ought to
shut the gates of mercy on our fellow-creatures--and so young a man as
Beltravers, left to himself, without a home, his family abroad, no
parent, no friend--no guardian friend."

"But what is it you would do, Beauclerc?" said the general.

"What you must wish to be done," said Beauclerc. "Repair this ruin,
restore this once hospitable mansion, and put it in the power of the son
to be what his ancestors have been."

"But how--my dear Beauclerc? Tell me plainly--how?"

"Plainly, I would lend him money enough to make this house fit to live
in."

"And he would never repay you, and would never live in it."

"He would, sir--he promised me he would."

"Promised you!"

"And I promised him that I would lend him the money."

"Promised! Beauclerc? Without your guardian's knowledge? Pray, how much--"

"Confound me, if I remember the words. The sense was, what would do the
business; what would make the house fit for him and his sisters to live
in."

"Ten thousand!--fifteen thousand would not do."

"Well, sir. You know what will be necessary better than I do. A few
thousands more or less, what signifies, provided a friend be well
served. The superfluous money accumulated during my long minority cannot
be better employed."

"All that I have been saving for you with such care from the time your
father died!"

"My dear guardian, my dear friend, do not think me ungrateful; but the
fact is,--in short, my happiness does not depend, never can depend, upon
money; as my friend, therefore, I beseech you to consider my moneyed
interest less, and my happiness more."

"Beauclerc, you do not know what your happiness is. One hour you tell me
it is one thing, the next another. What is become of the plan for the
new house you wanted to build for yourself? I must have common sense for
you, Beauclerc, as you have none for yourself. I shall not give you this
money for Lord Beltravers."

"You forget sir, that I told you I had promised."

"You forget, Beauclerc, that I told you that such a promise, vague and
absurd in itself, made without your guardian's concurrence or consent,
is absolutely null and void."

"Null and void in law, perhaps it may be," cried Beauclerc; "but for
that very reason, in honour, the stronger the more binding, and I am
speaking to a man of honour."

"To one who can take care of his own honour," said the general.

"And of mine, I trust."

"You do well to trust it, as your father did, to me: it shall not he
implicated--"

"When once I am of age," interrupted Beauclerc.

"You will do as you please," said the general. "In the mean time I shall
do my duty."

"But, sir, I only ask you to let me _lend_ this money."

"Lend--nonsense! lend to a man who cannot give any security."

"Security!" said Beauclerc, with a look of unutterable contempt. "When a
friend is in distress, to talk to him like an attorney, of security! Do,
pray, sir, spare me that. I would rather give the money at once."

"I make no doubt of it; then at once I say No, sir."

"No, sir! and why do you say no?"

"Because I think it my duty, and nothing I have heard has at all shaken
my opinion."

"Opinion! and so I am to be put down by opinion, without any reason!"
cried Beauclerc. Then trying to command his temper, "But tell me, my
dear general, why I cannot have this cursed money?"

"Because, my dear Beauclerc, I am your guardian, and can say _no_, and
can adhere to a refusal as firmly as any man living, when it is
necessary."

"Yes, and when it is unnecessary. General Clarendon, according to your
own estimate, fifteen thousand pounds is the utmost sum requisite to put
this house in a habitable state--by that sum I abide!" "Abide!"

"Yes, I require it, to keep my promise to Beltraver's, and have it I
MUST."

"Not from me."

"From some one else then, for have it I WILL.

"Dearest Clarendon," whispered Lady Cecilia, "let him have it, since he
has promised----"

Without seeming to hear her whisper, without a muscle of his countenance
altering, General Clarendon repeated, "Not from me."

"From some one else then--I can."

"Not while I have power to prevent."

"Power! power! power! Yes, that is what you love, above all things and
all persons, and I tell you plainly, General Clarendon," pursued
Beauclerc, too angry to heed or see Lady Cecilia's remonstrating looks,
"at once I tell you that you have not the power. You had it. It is past
and gone. The power of affection you had, if not of reason; but force,
General Clarendon, despotism, can never govern me. I submit to no man's
mere will, much less to any man's sheer obstinacy."

At the word obstinacy, the general's face, which was before rigid, grew
hard as iron. Beauclerc walked up and down the room with great strides,
and as he strode he went on talking to himself.

"To be kept from the use of my own money, treated like a child--an
idiot--at my time of life! Not considered at years of discretion, when
other men of the meanest capacity, by the law of the land, can do what
they please with their own property! By heavens!--that will of my
father's----"

"Should be respected, my dear Granville, since it was your father's
will," said Lady Cecilia, joining him as he walked. "And respect----" He
stopped short.

"My dear Lady Cecilia, for your sake----" he tried to restrain himself.

"Till this moment never did I say one disrespectful word to General
Clarendon. I always considered him as the representative of my father;
and when most galled I have borne the chains in which it was my father's
pleasure to leave me. Few men of my age would have so submitted to a
guardian not many years older than himself." "Yes, and indeed that
should be considered," said Lady Cecilia, turning to the general.

"I have always considered General Clarendon more as my friend than my
guardian."

"And have found him so, I had hoped," said the general, relaxing in tone
hut not in looks.

"I have never treated you, sir, as some wards treat their guardians. I
have dealt openly, as man of honour to man of honour, gentleman to
gentleman, friend to friend."

"Acknowledged, and felt by me, Beauclerc."

"Then now, my dear Clarendon, grant the only request of any consequence
I ever made you--say yes." Beauclerc trembled with impatience.

"No," said the general, "I have said it--No."

The gallery rung with the sound.

"No!" repeated Beauclerc.

Each walked separately up and down the room, speaking without listening
to what the other said. Helen heard an offer from Beauclerc, to which
she extremely wished that the general had listened. But he was deaf with
determination not to yield to any thing Beauclerc could say further: the
noise of passion in their ears was too great for either of them to hear
the other.

Suddenly turning, Beauclerc exclaimed,--

"Borne with me, do you say? 'Tis I that have to bear--and by heavens!"
cried he, "more than I can--than I will--bear. Before to-morrow's sun
goes down I will have the money."

"From whom?"

"From any money-lending Jew--usurer--extortioner--cheat--rascal--
whatever he be. You drive me to it--you--you my friend--you, with whom I
have dealt so openly; and to the last it shall be open. To no vile
indirections will I stoop. I tell you, my guardian, that if you deny me
my own, I will have what I want from the Jews."

"Easily," said his guardian. "But first, recollect that a clause in your
father's will, in such case, sends his estates to your cousin Venables."

"To my cousin Venables let them go--all--all; if such be your pleasure,
sir, be it so. The lowest man on earth that has feeling keeps his
promise. The slave has a right to his word! Ruin me if you will, and as
soon as you please; disgrace me you cannot; bend my spirit you cannot;
ruin in any shape I will meet, rather than submit to such a guardian,
such a----"

Tyrant he was on the point of saying, but Lady Cecilia stopped that word
by suddenly seizing upon his arm: forcibly she carried him off, saying
"Come out with me on the terrace, Granville, and recover your senses."

"My senses! I have never lost them; never was cooler in my life," said
he, kicking open the glass door upon its first resistance, and
shattering its remaining panes to fragments. Unnoticing, not hearing the
crash, the general stood leaning his elbow on the mantel-piece, and
covering his eyes with his hand. Helen remained near him, scarce
breathing loud enough to be heard; he did not know she was there, and he
repeated aloud, in an accent of deep feeling, "Tyrant! from Beauclerc!"

A sigh from Helen made him aware of her presence, and, as he removed his
hand from his eyes, she saw his look was more in sorrow than in anger:
she said softly, "Mr. Beauclerc was wrong, very wrong, but he was in a
passion, he did not know what he meant."

There was silence for a few moments. "You are right, I believe," said
the general, "it was heat of anger----"

"To which the best are subject," said Helen, "and the best and kindest
most easily forgive."

"But Beauclerc said some things which were----"

"Unpardonable--only forget them; let all be forgotten."

"Yes," said the general, "all but my determination; that, observe, is
fixed. My mind, Miss Stanley, is made up, and, once made up, it is not
to be changed."

"I am certain of that," said Helen, "but I am not clear that your mind
is made up."

The general looked at her with astonishment.

"Your refusal is not irrevocable."

"You do not know me, Miss Stanley."

"I think I do."

"Better than I know myself."

"Yes, better, if you do yourself the injustice to think that you would
not yield, if it were right to do so. At this very instant," pursued
Helen, disregarding his increasing astonishment, "you would yield if
you could reasonably, honourably--would not you? If you could without
injury to your ward's fortune or character, would you not? Surely it is
for his good only that you are so resolute?"

"Certainly!" He waited with eyes fixed, bending forward, but with
intensity of purpose in his calmness of attention.

"There was something which I heard Mr. Beauclerc say, which, I think,
escaped your attention," said Helen. "When you spoke of the new house he
intended to build for himself, which was to cost so much, he offered to
give that up."

"I never heard that offer."

"I heard him," said Helen, "I assure you: it was when you were both
walking up and down the room."

"This may be so, I was angry _then_," said the general.

"But you are not angry now," said Helen.

He smiled, and in truth he desired nothing more than an honourable
loophole--a safe way of coming off without injury to his ward--without
hurting his own pride, or derogating from the dignity of guardian. Helen
saw this, and, thanking him for his condescension, his kindness, in
listening to her, she hastened as quickly as possible, lest the
relenting moment might not be seized; and running out on the terrace,
she saw Beauclerc, his head down upon his arms, leaning upon an old
broken stone lion, and Lady Cecilia standing beside him, commiserating;
and as she approached, she beard her persuading him to go to the
general, and speak to him again, and say _so_--only say so.

Whatever it was, Helen did not stay to inquire, but told Cecilia, in as
few words as she could, all that she had to say; and ended with "Was I
right?"

"Quite right, was not she, Granville?"

Beauclerc looked up--a gleam of hope and joy came across his face, and,
with one grateful look to Helen, he darted forward. They followed, but
could not keep pace with him; and when they reached the gallery, they
found him appealing, as to a father, for pardon.

"Can you forgive, and will you?"

"Forgive my not hearing you, not listening to you, as your father would?
My dear Beauclerc, you were too hot, and I was too cold; and there is an
end of it." This reconciliation was as quick, as war, as the quarrel had
been. And then explanations were made, as satisfactorily as they are
when the parties are of good understanding, and depend on each other's
truth, past, present, and future.

Beauclerc, whose promise all relied on, and for reasons good, none more
implicitly than the general, promised that he would ask for no more than
just what would do to put this Old Forest house in habitable trim; he
said he would give up the new house for himself, till as many thousands
as he now lent, spent, or wasted--take which word you will--should be
again accumulated from his income. It was merely a sacrifice of his own
vanity, and perhaps a little of his own comfort, he said, to save a
friend, a human being, from destruction.

"Well, well, let it rest so."

It was all settled, witness present--"two angels to witness," as
Beauclerc quoted from some old play.

And now in high good-humour, up again to nonsense pitch, they all felt
that delightful relief of spirits, of which friends, after perilous
quarrel, are sensible in perfect reconciliation. They left this
melancholy mansion now, with Beauclerc the happiest of the happy, in the
generous hope that he should be the restorer of its ancient glories and
comfort. The poor old woman was not forgotten as they passed, she
courtesying, hoping, and fearing: Lady Cecilia whispered, and the deaf
ear heard.

"The roof will not fall--all will be well: and there is the man that
will do it all."

"Well, well, my heart inclined to him from the first--at least from the
minute I knew him not to be my young lord."

They were to go home by water. The boat was in readiness, and, as
Beauclerc carefully handed Helen into it, the general said:--"Yes, you
are right to take care of Miss Stanley, Beauclerc; she is a good friend
in need, at least, as I have found this morning," added he, as he seated
himself beside her.

Lady Cecilia was charming, and every thing was delightful, especially
the cold chicken.




CHAPTER XI.


No two people could be more unlike in their habits of mind than this
guardian and ward. General Clarendon referred in all cases to old
experience, and dreaded innovation; Beauclerc took for his motto, "My
mind leadeth me to new things." General Clarendon was what is commonly
called a practical man; Granville Beauclerc was the flower of theorists.
The general, fit for action, prompt and decided in all his judgments,
was usually right and just in his conclusions--but if wrong, there was
no setting him right; for he not only would not, but could not go back
over the ground--he could not give in words any explanation of his
process of reasoning--it was enough for him that it was right, and that
it was _his_; while Beauclerc, who cared not for any man's opinion, was
always so ingeniously wrong, and could show all the steps of his
reasoning so plausibly, that it was a pity he should be quite out of the
right road at last. The general hated metaphysics, because he considered
them as taking a flight beyond the reach of discipline, as well as of
common sense: he continually asked, of what use are they?--While Lady
Davenant answered,--

"To invigorate and embellish the understanding. 'This turning the soul
inward on itself concentrates its forces, and fits it for the strongest
and boldest flights; and in such pursuits, whether we take or whether we
lose the game, the chase is certainly of service.'"

Possibly, the general said; he would not dispute the point with Lady
Davenant, but a losing chase, however invigorating, was one in which he
never wished to engage: as to the rest, he altogether hated discussions,
doubts, and questionings. He had "made up his fagot of opinions," and
would not let one be drawn out for examination, lest he should loosen
the bundle.

Beauclerc, on the contrary, had his dragged out and scattered about
every day, and each particular stick was tried, and bent, and twisted,
this way and that, and peeled, and cut, and hacked; and unless they
proved sound to the very core, not a twig of them should ever go back
into his bundle, which was to be the bundle of bundles, the best that
ever was seen, when once tied so that it would hold together--of which
there seemed little likelihood, as every knot slipped, and all fell to
pieces at each pull.

While he was engaged in this analysis, he was, as his guardian thought,
in great moral peril, for not a principle had he left to bless himself
with; and, in any emergency, if any temptation should occur, what was to
become of him? The general, who was very fond of him, but also strongly
attached to his own undeviating rule of right, was upon one occasion
about peremptorily to interpose, not only with remonstrances as a
friend, but with authority as a guardian.

This occurred when Beauclerc was with them at Florence, and when the
general's love for Lady Cecilia, and intimacy with her mother,
commenced. Lady Davenant being much interested for young Beauclerc,
begged that the patient might be left to her, and that his guardian
would refrain from interference. This was agreed to the more readily by
the general, as his thoughts and feelings were then more agreeably
engrossed, and Beauclerc found in Lady Davenant the very friend he
wanted and wished for most ardently--one whose mind would not blench at
any moral danger, would never shrink from truth in any shape, but, calm
and self-possessed, would examine whether it were indeed truth, or only
a phantom assuming her form. Besides, there was in Lady Davenant towards
Beauclerc a sort of maternal solicitude and kindness, of which the
effect was heightened by her dignified manner and pride of character.
She, in the first place, listened to him patiently; she, who could talk,
would listen: this was, as she said, her first merit in his estimation.
To her he poured forth all those doubts, of which she was wise enough
not to make crimes: she was sure of his honourable intentions, certain
that there was no underhand motive, no bad passion, no concealed vice,
or disposition to vice, beneath his boasted freedom from prejudice, to
be justified or to be indulged by getting rid of the restraints of
principle. Had there been any danger of this sort, which with young men
who profess themselves _ultra-liberal_ is usually the case, she would
have joined in his guardian's apprehensions; but in fact Beauclerc,
instead of being "le philosophe sans le savoir," was "le bon enfant sans
le savoir;" for, while he questioned the rule of right in all his
principles, and while they were held in abeyance, his good habits, and
good natural disposition held fast and stood him in stead; while Lady
Davenant, by slow degrees, brought him to define his terms, and
presently to see that he had been merely saying old things in new words,
and that the systems which had dazzled him as novelties were old to
older eyes; in short, that he was merely a resurrectionist of obsolete
heresies, which had been gone over and over again at various long-past
periods, and over and over again abandoned by the common sense of
mankind: so that, after puzzling and wandering a weary way in the dark
labyrinth he had most ingeniously made for himself, he saw light,
followed it, and at length, making his way out, was surprised, and sorry
perhaps to perceive that it was the common light of day.

It is of great consequence to young enthusiastic tyros, like Beauclerc,
to have safe friends to whom they can talk of their opinions privately,
otherwise they will talk their ingenious nonsense publicly, and so they
bind themselves, or are bound, to the stake, and live or die martyrs to
their own follies.

From these and all such dangers Lady Davenant protected him, and she
took care that nobody hurt him in his defenceless state, before his
shell was well formed and hardened. She was further of peculiar service
in keeping all safe and smooth between the ward and guardian. All
Beauclerc's romance the general would have called by the German word
"_Schwaermerey_,"--not fudge--not humbug--literally "sky-rocketing"--
visionary enthusiasm; and when it came to arguments, they might have
turned to quarrels, but for Lady Davenant's superior influence, while
Lady Cecilia's gentleness and gaiety usually succeeded in putting all
serious dangerous thoughts to flight.

Nature never having intended Lady Cecilia for a manoeuvrer, she was now
perpetually on the point of betraying herself; and one day, when she was
alone with Helen, she exclaimed, "Never was any thing better managed
than I managed this, my dear Helen! I am so glad I told you----"
Recollecting herself just in time, she ended with, "so glad I told you
the truth."

"Oh yes! thank you," said Helen. "My uncle used to say no one could be a
good friend who does not tell the whole truth." "That I deny," thought
Cecilia. The twinge of conscience was felt but very slightly; not
visible in any change of countenance, except by a quick twinkling motion
of the eyelashes, not noticed by unsuspicious Helen.

Every thing now went on as happily as Cecilia could have desired; every
morning they rode or booted to Old Forest to see what was doing. The
roof was rather hastily taken off; Lady Cecilia hurried forward that
measure, aware that it would prevent the possibility of any of the
ladies of the family coming there for some time. Delay was all she
wanted, and she would now, as she promised herself, leave the rest to
time. She would never interfere further in word or look, especially when
her mother might be by. One half of this promise she kept faithfully,
the other she broke continually.

There were plans to be made of all the alterations and improvements at
Old Forest. Beauclerc applied to Lady Cecilia for her advice and
assistance. Her advice she gave, but her assistance she ingeniously
contrived to leave to Helen; for whenever Beauclerc brought to her a
sketch or a plan of what was to be done, Lady Cecilia immediately gave
it to Helen, repeating, "Never drew a regular plan in my life, you know,
my dear, you must do this;" so that Helen's pencil and her patience were
in constant requisition. Then came apologies from Beauclerc, and regrets
at taking up her time, all which led to an intimacy that Lady Cecilia
took care to keep up by frequent visits to Old Forest, so that Helen was
necessarily joined in all his present pursuits.

During one of these visits, they were looking over some old furniture
which Lord Beltravers had commissioned Beauclerc to have disposed of at
some neighbouring auction. There was one curiously carved oak arm-chair,
belonging to "the old old gentleman of all" which the old woman
particularly regretted should go. She had sewn it up in a carpet, and
when it came out, Helen was struck with its likeness to a favourite
chair of her uncle's; many painful recollections occurred to her, and
tears came into her eyes. Ashamed of what appeared so like affectation,
she turned away, that her tears might not be seen, and when Cecilia,
following her, insisted on knowing what was the matter, she left Helen
immediately to the old woman, and took the opportunity of telling
Beauclerc all about Dean Stanley, and how Helen was an heiress and no
heiress, and her having determined to give up all her fortune to pay her
uncle's debts. There was a guardian, too, in the case, who would not
consent; and, in short, a parallelism of circumstances, a similarity of
generous temper, and all this she thought must interest Beauclerc--and
so it did. But yet its being told to him would have gone against his
nice notions of delicacy, and Helen would have been ruined in his
opinion had he conceived that it had been revealed to him with her
consent or connivance. She came back before Lady Cecilia had quite
finished, and a few words which she heard, made her aware of the whole.
The blush of astonishment--the glance of indignation--which she gave at
Lady Cecilia, settled Beauclerc's opinion; and Cecilia was satisfied
that she had done her friend good service against her will; and as to
the means thought she--what signifies going back to consider when they
succeed.

The Collingwoods gladly availed themselves of Lady Cecilia Clarendon's
kind invitation, as they were both most anxious to take leave of Helen
Stanley before their departure. They were to sail very soon, so that
their visit was but short; a few days of painful pleasure to Helen--a
happy meeting, but enjoyed with the mournful sense that they were so
soon to separate, and for so long a time; perhaps, for ever.

Mr. Collingwood told Helen that if she still agreed to his conditions,
he would arrange with Mr. James, the solicitor, that all the money left
to her by her uncle should be appropriated to the payment of his debts.
"But," continued he, "pause and consider well, whether you can do
without this money, which is still yours; you are, you know, not bound
by any promise, and it is not yet too late to say you have altered your
decision."

Helen smiled and said, "You cannot be serious in saying this, I am
sure?"

Mr. Collingwood assured her that he was. Helen simply said that her
determination was unalterable. He looked pleased yet his last words in
taking leave of her were, "Remember, my dear, that when you have given
away your fortune, you cannot live as if you had it."

The Collingwoods departed; and, after a decent time had elapsed, or what
she deemed a decent time, Lady Cecilia was anxious to ascertain what
progress had been made; how relatively to each other, Lady Blanche
Forrester and Helen stood in Beauclerc's opinion, or rather in his
imagination. But this was not quite so easy a matter to determine as she
had conceived it would be, judging from the frankness of Beauclerc's
temper, and from the terms of familiarity on which they had lived while
abroad. His confidence was not to be won, surprised, or forced. He was
not only jealous of his free will, as most human beings are in love
affairs, but, like all men of true feeling, he desired in these matters
perfect mental privacy.

When Pysche is awakened, it should be by Cupid alone. Beauclerc did not
yet wish that she should be awakened. He admired, he enjoyed that
repose; he was charmed by the perfect confiding simplicity of Helen's
mind, so unlike what he had seen in others--so real. The hope of that
pure friendship which dawned upon him he wished to prolong, and dreaded
lest, by any doubt raised, all might be clouded and changed. Lady
Cecilia was, however, convinced that, without knowing it, he was falling
comfortably in love through friendship; a very easy convenient way.

And Helen, had she too set out upon that easy convenient road of
friendship? She did not think about the road, but she felt that it was
very agreeable, and thought it was quite safe, as she went on so
smoothly and easily. She could not consider Mr. Beauclerc as a new
acquaintance, because she had heard so much about him. He was completely
one of the family, so that she, as part of that family, could not treat
him as a stranger. Her happiness, she was sensible, had much increased
since his arrival; but so had everybody's. He gave a new spring, a new
interest, to everything; added so much to the life of life; his sense
and his nonsense were each of them good in their kind; and they were of
various kinds, from the high sublime of metaphysics to the droll
realities of life. But everybody blaming, praising, scolding, laughing
_at_, or _with_ him, he was necessary to all and with all, for some
reason or other, a favourite.

But the general was always as impatient as Lady Cecilia herself both of
his hypercriticism and of his never-ending fancies, each of which
Beauclerc purused with an eagerness and abandoned with a facility which
sorely tried the general's equanimity. One day, after having ridden to
Old Forest, General Clarendon returned chafed. He entered the library,
talking to Cecilia, as Helen thought, about his horse.

"No managing him! Curb him ever so little, and he is on his hind-legs
directly. Give him his head, put the bridle on his neck, and he stands
still; does not know which way he would go, or what he would do. The
strangest fellow for a rational creature."

Now it was clear it was of Beauclerc that he spoke. "So rash and yet so
resolute," continued the general.

"How is that?" said Lady Davenant.

"I do not know how, but so it is," said the general. "As you know,"
appealing to Helen and to Lady Cecilia, "he was ready to run me through
till he had his own way about that confounded old house; and now there
are all the workmen at a stand, because Mr. Beauclerc cannot decide what
he will have done or undone."

"Oh, it is my fault!" cried Helen, with the guilty recollection of the
last alteration not having been made yesterday in drawing the working
plan, and she hastened to look for it directly; but when she found it,
she saw to her dismay that Beauclerc had scribbled it all over with
literary notes; it was in no state to meet the general's eye; she set
about copying it as fast as possible.

"Yes," pursued the general; "forty alterations--shuffling about
continually. Cannot a man be decided?"

"Always with poor Beauclerc," said Lady Cecilia, "le mieux est l'ennemi
du bien."

"No, my dear Cecilia, it is all his indolence; there he sat with a book
in his hand all yesterday! with all his impetuosity, too indolent to
stir in his own business," said the general.

"His mind is too active sometimes to allow his body to stir," said Lady
Davenant; "and because he cannot move the universe, he will not stir his
little finger."

"He is very fond of paradoxes, and your ladyship is very fond of him,"
said the general; "but indolent he is; and as to activity of mind, it is
only in pursuit of his own fancies."

"And your fancies and his differ," said Lady Davenant.

"Because he never fancies any thing useful," said the general. "C'est
selon! c'est selon!" cried Lady Cecilia gaily; "he thinks his fancies
useful, and especially all he is doing at Old Forest; but I confess he
tends most to the agreeable. Certainly he is a most agreeable creature."

"Agreeable! satisfied to be called an agreeable man!" cried the general
indignantly; "yes, he has no ambition."

"There I differ from you, general," said Lady Davenant; "he has too
much: have patience with him; he is long-sighted in his visions of
glory."

"Visions indeed!" said the general.

"Those who are really ambitious," continued Lady Davenant, "must think
before they act. 'What shall I do to be for ever known?' is a question
which deserves at least a little more thought than those which most
young men ask themselves, which commonly are, 'What shall I do to be
known to-morrow--on the Turf or at Brook's--or in Doctors' Commons--or
at some exclusive party at charming Lady Nobody's?'"

"What will you do for the plan for these workmen in the mean time, my
dear Clarendon?" said Lady Cecilia, afraid that some long discussion
would ensue.

"Here it is!" said Helen, who had managed to get it ready while they
were talking. She gave it to the general, who thanked her, and was off
directly. Cecilia then came to divert herself with looking at
Beauclerc's scribbled plan, and she read the notes aloud for her
mother's amusement. It was a sketch of a dramatical, metaphysical,
entertainment, of which half a dozen proposed titles had been scratched
out, and there was finally left 'Tarquin the Optimist, or the Temple of
Destiny.' It was from an old story begun by Laurentius Valla, and
continued by Leibnitz;--she read,

_"Act I. Scene 1. Sextus Tarquin goes to consult the Oracle, who
foretells the crime he is to commit.'_

"And then," cried Lady Cecilia, "come measures of old and new front of
Old Forest house, wings included."--Now he goes on with his play.

_"'Tarquin's complaint to Jupiter of the Oracle--Modern Predestination
compared to Ancient Destiny.'_

"And here," continued Cecilia, "come prices of Norway deal and a great
blot, and then we have _'Jupiter's answer that Sextus may avoid his doom
if he pleases, by staying away from Rome; but he does not please to do
so, because he must then_ _renounce the crown. Good speech here on
vanity, and inconsistency of human wishes.'_

"'Kitchen 23 ft. by 21. Query with hobs?'

"I cannot conceive, my dear Helen," continued Lady Cecilia, "how you
could make the drawing out through all this," and she continued to read.

_"'Scene 3rd._

_"'High Priest of Delphi asks Jupiter why he did not give Sextus a
better WILL?--why not MAKE him choose to give up the crown, rather than
commit the crime? Jupiter refuses to answer, and sends the High Priest
to consult Minerva at Athens.'_

"'N.B. Old woman at Old Forest, promised her an oven,'--'_Leibnitz
gives_----'

"Oh! if he goes to Leibnitz," said Lady Cecilia, "he will be too grand
for me, but it will do for you, mamma.

_"'Leibnitz gives in his Temple of the Destinies a representation of
every possible universe from the worst to the best--This could not be
done on the stage.'_

"Very true indeed," said Lady Cecilia; 'but, Helen, listen, Granville
has really found an ingenious resource.

_"'By Ombres Chinoises, suppose; or a gauze curtain, as in Zemire et
Azore, the audience might be made to understand the main point, that
GOOD resulted from Tarquin's BAD choice. Brutus, Liberty, Rome's
grandeur, and the Optimist right at last. Q.E.D.'_

"Well, well," continued Lady Cecilia, "I don't understand it; but I
understand this,--'Bricks wanting.'"

Lady Davenant smiled at this curious specimen of Beauclerc's
versatility, but said, "I fear he will fritter away his powers on a
hundred different petty objects, and do nothing at last worthy of his
abilities. He will scatter and divide the light of his genius, and show
us every change of the prismatic colours--curious and beautiful to
behold, but dispersing, wasting the light he should concentrate on some
one, some noble object."

"But if he has light enough for little objects and great too?" said Lady
Cecilia, "I allow, 'qu'il faudrait plus d'un coeur pour aimer tant de
choses a la fois;' but as I really think Granville has more heart than
is necessary, he can well afford to waste some of it, even on the old
woman at Old Forest."




CHAPTER XII.


One evening, Helen was looking over a beautiful scrap-book of Lady
Cecilia's. Beauclerc, who had stood by for some time, eyeing it in
rather scornful silence, at length asked whether Miss Stanley was a
lover of albums and autographs?

Helen had no album of her own, she said, but she was curious always to
see the autographs of celebrated people.

"Why?" said Beauclerc.

"I don't know. It seems to bring one nearer to them. It gives more
reality to our imagination of them perhaps," said Helen.

"The imagination is probably in most cases better than the reality,"
replied he.

Lady Davenant stooped over Helen's shoulder to look at the handwriting
of the Earl of Essex--the writing of the gallant Earl of Essex, at sight
of which, as she observed, the hearts of queens have beat high. "What a
crowd of associated ideas rise at the sight of that autograph! who can
look at it without some emotion?"

Helen could not. Beauclerc in a tone of raillery said he was sure, from
the eager interest Miss Stanley took in these autographs, that she would
in time become a collector herself; and he did not doubt that he should
see her with a valuable museum, in which should be preserved the old
pens of great men, that of Cardinal Chigi, for instance, who boasted
that he wrote with the same pen for fifty years.

"And by that boast you know," said Lady Davenant, "convinced the
Cardinal de Retz that he was not a great, but a very little man. We will
not have that pen in Helen's museum."

"Why not?" Beauclerc asked, "it was full as well worth having as many of
the relics to be found in most young ladies' and even old gentlemen's
museums. It was quite sufficient whether a man had been great or little
that he had been talked of,--that he had been something of a _lion_--to
make any thing belonging to him valuable to collectors, who preserve and
worship even 'the parings of lions' claws.'"

That class of indiscriminate collectors Helen gave up to his ridicule;
still he was not satisfied. He went on to the whole class of 'lion-
hunters,' as he called them, condemning indiscriminately all those who
were anxious to see celebrated people; he hoped Miss Stanley was not one
of that class.

"No, not a lion-hunter," said Helen; she hoped she never should be one
of that set, but she confessed she had a great desire to see and to know
distinguished persons, and she hoped that this sort of curiosity, or as
she would rather call it enthusiasm, was not ridiculous, and did not
deserve to be confounded with the mere trifling vulgar taste for sight-
seeing and lion-hunting.

Beauclerc half smiled, but, not answering immediately, Lady Davenant
said, that for her part she did not consider such enthusiasm as
ridiculous; on the contrary, she liked it, especially in young people.
"I consider the warm admiration of talent and virtue in youth as a
promise of future excellence in maturer age."

"And yet," said Beauclerc, "the maxim 'not to admire,' is, I believe,
the most approved in philosophy, and in practice is the great secret of
happiness in this world."

"In the _fine_ world, it is a fine air, I know," said Lady Davenant.
"Among a set of fashionable young somnambulists it is doubtless the only
art they know to make men happy or to keep them so; but this has nothing
to do with philosophy, Beauclerc, though it has to do with conceit or
affectation."

Mr. Beauclerc, now piqued, with a look and voice of repressed feeling,
said, that he hoped her ladyship did not include him among that set of
fashionable somnambulists.

"I hope you will not include yourself in it," answered Lady Davenant:
"it is contrary to your nature, and if you join the _nil admirari_
coxcombs, it can be only for fashion's sake--mere affectation."

Beauclerc made no reply, and Lady Davenant, turning to Helen, told her
that several celebrated people were soon to come to Clarendon Park, and
congratulated her upon the pleasure she would have in seeing them.
"Besides being a great pleasure, it is a real advantage," continued she,
"to see and be acquainted early in life with superior people. It enables
one to form a standard of excellence, and raises that standard high and
bright. In men, the enthusiasm becomes glorious ambition to excel in
arts or arms; in women, it refines and elevates the taste, and is so far
a preventive against frivolous, vulgar company, and all their train of
follies and vices. I can speak from my own recollection, of the great
happiness it was to me, when I early in life became acquainted with some
of the illustrious of my day."

"And may I ask," said Beauclerc, "if any of them equalled the
expectations you had formed of them?"

"Some far exceeded them," said Lady Davenant.

"You were fortunate. Every body cannot expect to be so happy," said
Beauclerc. "I believe, in general it is found that few great men of any
times stand the test of near acquaintance. No man----"

"Spare me!" cried Lady Davenant, interrupting him, for she imagined she
knew what he was going to say; "Oh! spare me that old sentence, 'No man
is a hero to his valet de chambre.' I cannot endure to hear that for the
thousandth time; I heartily wish it had never been said at all."

"So do I," replied Beauclerc; but Lady Davenant had turned away, and he
now spoke in so low a voice, that only Helen heard him. "So do I detest
that quotation, not only for being hackneyed, but for having been these
hundred years the comfort both of lean-jawed envy and fat mediocrity."

He took up one of Helen's pencils and began to cut it--he looked vexed,
and low to her observed, "Lady Davenant did not do me the honour to let
me finish my sentence."

"Then," said Helen, "if Lady Davenant misunderstood you, why do not you
explain?"

"No, no it is not worth while, if she could so mistake me."

"But any body may be mistaken; do explain."

"No, no," said he, very diligently cutting the pencil to pieces; "she is
engaged, you see, with somebody--something else."

"But now she has done listening."

"No, no, not now; there are too many people, and it's of no
consequence."

By this time the company were all eagerly talking of every remarkable
person they had seen, or that they regretted not having seen. Lady
Cecilia now called upon each to name the man among the celebrated of
modern days, whom they should most liked to have seen. By acclamation
they all named Sir Walter Scott, 'The Ariosto of the North!'

All but Beauclerc; he did not join the general voice; he said low to
Helen with an air of disgust--"How tired I am of hearing him called 'The
Ariosto of the North!'"

"But by whatever name," said Helen, "surely you join in that general
wish to have seen him?"

"Yes, yes, I am sure of your vote," cried Lady Cecilia, coming up to
them, "You, Granville, would rather have seen Sir Walter Scott than any
author since Shakespeare--would not you?"

"Pardon me, on the contrary, I am glad that I have never seen him."

"Glad not to have seen him!--_not_?"

The word _not_ was repeated with astonished incredulous emphasis by all
voices. "Glad not to have seen Sir Walter Scott! How extraordinary! What
can Mr. Beauclerc mean?"

"To make us all stare," said Lady Davenant, "so do not gratify him. Do
not wonder at him; we cannot believe what is impossible, you know, only
because it is impossible. But," continued she, laughing, "I know how it
is. The spirit of contradiction--the spirit of singularity--two of your
familiars, Granville, have got possession of you again, and we must have
patience while the fit is on."

"But I have not, and will not have patience," said Lord Davenant, whose
good-nature seldom failed, but who was now quite indignant.

"I wonder you are surprised, my dear Lord," said Lady Davenant, "for Mr.
Beauclerc likes so much better to go wrong by himself than to go right
with all the world, that you could not expect that he would join the
loud voice of universal praise."

"I hear the loud voice of universal execration," said Beauclerc; "you
have all abused me, but whom have I abused? What have I said?"

"Nothing." replied Lady Cecilia; "that is what we complain of. I could
have better borne any abuse than indifference to Sir Walter Scott."

"Indifference!" exclaimed Beauclerc--"what did I say Lady Cecilia, from
which you could infer that I felt indifference? Indifferent to him
whose name I cannot pronounce without emotion! I alone, of all the
world, indifferent to that genius, pre-eminent and unrivalled, who has
so long commanded the attention of the whole reading public, arrested at
will the instant order of the day by tales of other times, and in this
commonplace, this every-day existence of ours, created a holiday world,
where, undisturbed by vulgar cares, we may revel in a fancy region of
felicity, peopled with men of other times--shades of the historic dead,
more illustrious and brighter than in life!"

"Yes, the great Enchanter," cried Cecilia.

"Great and good Enchanter," continued Beauclerc, "for in his magic there
is no dealing with unlawful means. To work his ends, there is never aid
from any one of the bad passions of our nature. In his writings there is
no private scandal--no personal satire--no bribe to human frailty--no
libel upon human nature. And among the lonely, the sad, and the
suffering, how has he medicined to repose the disturbed mind, or
elevated the dejected spirit!--perhaps fanned to a flame the unquenched
spark, in souls not wholly lost to virtue. His morality is not in purple
patches, ostentatiously obtrusive, but woven in through the very texture
of the stuff. He paints man as he is, with all his faults, but with his
redeeming virtues--the world as it goes, with all its compensating good
and evil, yet making each man better contented with his lot. Without our
well knowing how, the whole tone of our minds is raised--for, thinking
nobly of our kind, he makes us think more nobly of ourselves!"

Helen, who had sympathised with Beauclerc in every word he had said,
felt how true it is that

"----Next to genius, is the power Of feeling where true genius lies."

"Yet after all this, Granville," said Lady Cecilia, "you would make us
believe you never wished to have seen this great man?"

Beauclerc made no answer.

"Oh! how I wish I had seen him!" said Helen to Lady Davenant, the only
person present who had had that happiness.

"If you have seen Raeburn's admirable pictures, or Chantrey's speaking
bust," replied Lady Davenant, "you have as complete an idea of Sir Walter
Scott as painting or sculpture can give. The first impression of his
appearance and manner was surprising to me, I recollect, from its quiet,
unpretending good nature; but scarcely had that impression been made before
I was struck with something of the chivalrous courtesy of other times. In
his conversation you would have found all that is most delightful in all
his works--the combined talent and knowledge of the historian, novelist,
antiquary, and poet. He recited poetry admirably, his whole face and figure
kindling as he spoke: but whether talking, reading, or reciting, he never
tired me, even with admiring; and it is curious that, in conversing with
him, I frequently found myself forgetting that I was speaking to Sir Walter
Scott; and, what is even more extraordinary, forgetting that Sir Walter
Scott was speaking to me, till I was awakened to the conviction by his
saying something which no one else could have said. Altogether he was
certainly the most perfectly agreeable and perfectly amiable great man I
ever knew."

"And now, mamma," said Lady Cecilia, "do make Granville confess honestly he
would give the world to have seen him."

"Do, Lady Davenant," said Helen, who saw, or thought she saw, a singular
emotion in Beauclerc's countenance, and fancied he was upon the point of
yielding; but Lady Davenant, without looking at him, replied,--"No, my
dear, I will not ask him--I will not encourage him in _affectation_."

At that word dark grew the brow of Beauclerc, and he drew back, as it were,
into his shell, and out of it came no more that night, nor the next morning
at breakfast. But, as far as could be guessed, he suffered internally, and
no effort made to relieve did him any good, so every one seemed to agree
that it was much better to let him alone, or let him be moody in peace,
hoping that in time the mood would change; but it changed not till the
middle of that day, when, as Helen was sitting working in Lady Davenant's
room, while she was writing, two quick knocks were heard at the door.

"Come in!" said Lady Davenant.

Mr. Beauclerc stood pausing on the threshold----

"Do not go, Miss Stanley," said he, looking very miserable and ashamed, and
proud, and then ashamed again.

"What is the matter, Granville?" said Lady Davenant.

"I am come to have a thorn taken out of my mind," said he--"two thorns
which have sunk deep, kept me awake half the night. Perhaps, I ought to
he ashamed to own I have felt pain from such little things. But so it
is; though, after all, I am afraid they will be invisible to you, Lady
Davenant."

"I will try with a magnifying-glass," said she; "lend me that of your
imagination, Granville--a high power, and do not look so very miserable, or
Miss Stanley will laugh at you."

"Miss Stanley is too good to laugh."

"That is being too good indeed," said Lady Davenant. "Well, now to the
point."

"You were very unjust to me, Lady Davenant, yesterday, and unkind."

"Unkind is a woman's word; but go on."

"Surely man may mark 'unkindness' altered eye' as well as woman," said
Beauclerc; "and from a woman and a friend he may and must feel it, or he is
more or less than man."

"Now what can you have to say, Granville, that will not be anticlimax to
this exordium?"

"I will say no more if you talk of exordiums and anti-climaxes," cried
he. "You accused me yesterday of affectation--twice, when I was no more
affected than you are."

"Oh! is that my crime? Is that, what has hurt you so dreadfully? Here is
the thorn that has gone in so deep! I am afraid that, as is usual, the
accusation hurt the more because it was----"

"Do not say 'true,'" interrupted Beauclerc, "for you really cannot believe
it, Lady Davenant. You know me, and all my faults, and I have plenty; but
you need not accuse me of one that I have not, and which from the bottom of
my soul I despise. Whatever are my faults, they are at least real, and my
own."

"You may allow him that," said Helen.

"Well I will--I do," said Lady Davenant; "to appease you, poor injured
innocence; though anyone in the world might think you affected at this
moment. Yet I, who know you, know that it is pure real folly. Yes, yes, I
acquit you of affectation."

Beauclerc's face instantly cleared up.

"But you said two thorns had gone into your mind--one is out, now for the
other."

"I do not feel that other, now," said Beauclerc, "it was only a mistake.
When I began with 'No man,' I was not going to say, 'No man is a hero to
his valet de chambre.' If I had been allowed to finish my sentence, it
would have saved a great deal of trouble, I was going to say that no man
admires excellence more fervently than I do, and that my very reason for
wishing not to see celebrated people is, lest the illusion should be
dispelled.

"No description ever gives us an exact idea of any person, so that when any
one has been much described and talked of, before we see them we form in
our mind's eye some image, some notion of our own, which always proves to
be unlike the reality; and when we do afterwards see it, even if it be
fairer or better than our imagination, still at first there is a sort
of disappointment, from the non-agreement with our previously formed
conception. Every body is disappointed the first time they see Hamlet, or
Falstaff, as I think Dugald Stewart observes."

"True; and I remember," said Lady Davenant, "Madame de la Rochejaquelin
once said to me, 'I hate that people should come to see me. I know it
destroys the illusion.'"

"Yes," cried Beauclerc; "how much I dread to destroy any of those blessed
illusions, which make the real happiness of life. Let me preserve the
objects of my idolatry; I would not approach too near the shrine; I fear
too much light. I would not know that they were false!"

"Would you then be deceived?" said Lady Davenant.

"Yes," cried he; "sooner would I believe in all the fables of the Talmud
than be without the ecstasy of veneration. It is the curse of age to be
thus miserably disenchanted; to outlive all our illusions, all our hopes.
That may be my doom in age, but, in youth, the high spring-time of
existence, I will not be cursed with such a premature ossification of the
heart. Oh! rather, ten thousand times rather, would I die this instant!"

"Well! but there is not the least occasion for your dying," said Lady
Davenant, "and I am seriously surprised that you should suffer so much
from such slight causes; how will you ever get through the world if you
stop thus to weigh every light word?"

"The words of most people," replied he, "pass by me like the idle wind; but
I do weigh every word from the very few whom I esteem, admire, and love;
with my friends, perhaps, I am too susceptible, I love them so deeply."

This is an excuse for susceptibility of temper which flatters friends too
much to be easily rejected. Even Lady Davenant admitted it, and Helen
thought it was all natural.




CHAPTER XIII.


Lady Cecilia was now impatient to have the house filled with company. She
gave Helen a _catalogue raisonne_ of all who were expected at Clarendon
Park, some for a fashionable three days' visit; some for a week; some for a
fortnight or three weeks, be the same more or less. "I have but one fixed
principle," said she, "but I _have_ one,--never to have tiresome people
when it can possibly be avoided. Impossible, you know, it is sometimes.
One's own and one's husband's relations one must have; but, as for the
rest, it's one's own fault if one fails in the first and last maxim of
hospitality--to welcome the coming and speed the parting guest."

The first party who arrived were of Lady Davenant's particular friends, to
whom Cecilia had kindly given the precedence, if not the preference, that
her mother might have the pleasure of seeing them, and that they might have
the honour of taking leave of her, before her departure from England.

They were political, fashionable, and literary; some of ascendency
in society, some of parliamentary promise, and some of ministerial
eminence--the aristocracy of birth and talents well mixed.

The aristocracy of birth and the aristocracy of talents are words now used
more as a commonplace antithesis, than as denoting a real difference or
contrast. In many instances, among those now living, both are united in a
manner happy for themselves and glorious for their country. England may
boast of having among her young nobility

  "The first in birth, the first in fame."

men distinguished in literature and science, in senatorial eloquence and
statesmanlike abilities.

But in this party at Clarendon Park there were more of the literary and
celebrated than without the presence of Lady Davenant could perhaps have
been assembled, or perhaps would have been desired by the general and Lady
Cecilia. Cecilia's beauty and grace were of all societies, and the general
was glad for Lady Davenant's sake and proud for his own part, to receive
these distinguished persons at his house.

Helen had seen some of them before at Cecilhurst and at the Deanery. By her
uncle's friends she was kindly recognised, by others of course politely
noticed; but miserably would she have been disappointed and mortified, if
she had expected to fix general attention, or excite general admiration.
Past and gone for ever are the days, if ever they were, when a young lady,
on her entrance into life, captivated by a glance, overthrew by the first
word, and led in triumph her train of admirers. These things are not to be
done now-a-days.

Yet even when unnoticed Helen was perfectly happy. Her expectations were
more than gratified in seeing and in hearing these distinguished people,
and she sat listening to their conversation in delightful enjoyment,
without even wanting to have it seen how well she understood.

There is a precious moment for young people, if taken at the prime, when
first introduced into society, yet not expected, not called upon to take a
part in it, they, as standers by, may see not only all the play, but the
characters of the players, and may learn more of life and of human nature
in a few months, than afterwards in years, when they are themselves actors
upon the stage of life, and become engrossed by their own parts. There is
a time, before the passions are awakened, when the understanding, with all
the life of nature, fresh from all that education can do to develop and
cultivate, is at once eager to observe and able to judge, for a brief space
blessed with the double advantages of youth and age. This time once gone
is lost irreparably; and how often it is lost--in premature vanity, or
premature dissipation!

Helen had been chiefly educated by a man, and a very sensible man, as Dean
Stanley certainly was in all but money matters. Under his masculine care,
while her mind had been brought forward on some points, it had been kept
back on others, and while her understanding had been cultivated, it had
been done without the aid of emulation or competition; not by touching the
springs of pride, but by opening sources of pure pleasure; and this pure
pleasure she now enjoyed, grateful to that dear uncle. For the single
inimitable grace of simplicity which she possessed, how many mothers,
governesses, and young ladies themselves, willingly, when they see how
much it charms, would too late exchange half the accomplishments, all the
acquirements, so laboriously achieved!

Beauclerc, who had seen something of the London female world, was, both
from his natural taste and from contrast, pleased with Helen's fresh and
genuine character, and he sympathised with all her silent delight. He never
interrupted her in her enthusiastic contemplation of the great stars, but
he would now and then seize an interval of rest to compare her observations
with his own; anxious to know whether she estimated their relative
magnitude and distances as he did. These snatched moments of comparison and
proof of agreement in their observations, or the pleasure of examining
the causes of their difference of opinion, enhanced the enjoyment of this
brilliant fortnight; and not a cloud obscured the deep serene.

Notwithstanding all the ultra-refined nonsense Beauclerc had talked about
his wish not to see remarkable persons, no one could enjoy it more, as
Helen now perceived; and she saw also that he was considered as a man of
promise among all these men of performance. But there were some, perhaps
very slight things, which raised him still more in her mind, because they
showed superiority of character. She observed his manner towards the
general in this company, where he had himself the 'vantage ground--so
different now from what it had been in the Old-Forest battle, when only man
to man, ward to guardian. Before these distinguished persons there was a
look--a tone of deference at once most affectionate and polite.

"It is so generous," said Lady Cecilia to Helen; "is not it?" and Helen
agreed.

This brilliant fortnight ended too soon, as Helen thought, but Lady Cecilia
had had quite enough of it. "They are all to go to-morrow morning, and I
am not sorry for it," said she at night, as she threw herself into an
arm-chair, in Helen's room; and, after having indulged in a refreshing
yawn, she exclaimed, "Very delightful, very delightful! as you say, Helen,
it has all been; but I am not sure that I should not be very much tired
if I had much more of it. Oh! yes, I admired them all amazingly, but then
admiring all day long is excessively wearisome. The very attitude of
looking up fatigues both body and mind. Mamma is never tired, because she
never has to look up; she can always look down, and that's so grand and so
easy. She has no idea how the neck of my poor mind aches this minute; and
my poor eyes! blasted with excess of light. How yours have stood it so
well, Helen, I cannot imagine! how much stronger they must be than mine. I
must confess, that, without the relief of music now and then, and ecarte,
and that quadrille, bad as it was, I should never have got through it
to-night alive or awake. But," cried she, starting up in her chair, "do you
know Horace Churchill stays to-morrow. Such a compliment from him to stay
a day longer than he intended! And do you know what he says of your eyes,
Helen?--that they are the best listeners he ever spoke to. I should warn
you though, my dear, that he is something, and not a little, I believe, of
a male coquette. Though he is not very young, but he well understands all
the advantages of a careful toilette. He has, like that George Herbert in
Queen Elizabeth's time, 'a genteel humour for dress.' He is handsome still,
and his fine figure, and his fine feelings, and his fine fortune, have
broken two or three hearts; nevertheless I am delighted that he stays,
especially that he stays on your account."

"Upon my account!" exclaimed Helen. "Did not you see that, from the first
day when Mr. Churchill had the misfortune to be placed beside me at dinner,
he utterly despised me: he began to talk to me, indeed, but left his
sentence unfinished, his good story untold, the instant he caught the eye
of a grander auditor."

Lady Cecilia had seen this, and marvelled at a well-bred man so far
forgetting himself in vanity; but this, she observed, was only the first
day; he had afterwards changed his manner towards Helen completely.

"Yes, when he saw Lady Davenant thought me worth speaking to. But, after
all, it was quite natural that he should not know well what to say to me. I
am only a young lady. I acquit him of all peculiar rudeness to me, for I am
sure Mr. Churchill really could not talk for only one insignificant hearer,
could not bring out his good things, unless he felt secure of possessing
the attention of the whole dinner-table, so I quite forgive him."

"After this curse of forgiveness, my dear Helen, I will wish you a good
night," said Lady Cecilia, laughing; and she retired with a fear that there
would not be jealousy enough between the gentlemen, or that Helen would not
know how to play them one against another.

There is a pleasure in seeing a large party disperse; in staying behind
when others go:--there is advantage as well as pleasure, which is felt by
the timid, because they do not leave their characters behind them; and
rejoiced in by the satirical, because the characters of the departed and
departing are left behind, fair game for them. Of this advantage no one
could be more sensible, no one availed himself of it with more promptitude
and skill, than Mr. Churchill: for well he knew that though wit may fail,
humour may not take--though even flattery may pall upon the sense, scandal,
satire, and sarcasm, are resources never failing for the lowest capacities,
and sometimes for the highest.

This morning, in the library at Clarendon Park, he looked out of the window
at the departing guests, and, as each drove off, he gave to each his _coup
de patte_. To Helen, to whom it was new, it was wonderful to see how each,
even of those next in turn to go, enjoyed the demolition of those who were
just gone; how, blind to fate, they laughed, applauded, and licked the hand
just raised to strike themselves. Of the first who went--"Most respectable
people," said Lady Cecilia; "a _bonne mere de famille_."

"Most respectable people!" repeated Horace--"most respectable people, old
coach and all." And then, as another party drove off--"No fear of any thing
truly respectable here."

"Now, Horace, how can you say so?--she is so amiable and so clever."

"So clever? only, perhaps, a thought too fond of English liberty and French
dress. _Poissarde lien corfee."

"_Poissarde!_ of one of the best born, best bred women in England!" cried
Lady Cecilia; "bien coiffee, I allow."

"Lady Cecilia is _si coiffee de sa belle amie_, that I see I must not say
a word against her, till--the fashion changes. But, hark! I hear a voice I
never wish to hear."

"Yet nobody is better worth hearing----"

"Oh! yes, the queen of the Blues--the Blue Devils!"

"Hush!" cried the aide-de-camp, "she is coming in to take leave." Then, as
the queen of the Blue Devils entered, Mr, Churchill, in the most humbly
respectful manner, begged--"My respects--I trust your grace will do me
the favour--the justice to remember me to all your party who--do me the
honour to bear me in mind--" then, as she left the room, he turned about
and laughed.

"Oh! you sad, false man!" cried the lady next in turn to go. "I declare,
Mr. Churchill, though I laugh, I am quite afraid to go off before you."

"Afraid! what could malice or envy itself find to say of your ladyship,
_intacte_ as you are?--_Intacte!_" repeated he, as she drove off,
"_intacte!_--a well chosen epithet, I flatter myself!"

"Yes, _intacte_--untouched--above the breath of slander," cried Lady
Cecilia.

"I know it: so I say," replied Churchill: "fidelity that has stood all
temptations--to which it has ever been exposed; and her husband is----"

"A near relation of mine," said Lady Cecilia. "I am not prudish as to
scandal in general," continued she, laughing; "'a chicken, too, might do me
good,' hut then the fox must not prey at home. No one ought to stand by and
hear their own relations abused."

"A thousand pardons! I depended too much on the general maxim--that the
nearer the bone the sweeter the slander."

"Nonsense!" said Lady Cecilia.

"I meant to say, the nearer the heart the dearer the blame. A cut against
a first cousin may go wrong--but a bosom friend--oh! how I have succeeded
against best friends; scolded all the while, of course, and called a
monster. But there is Sir Stephen bowing to you." Then, as Lady Cecilia
kissed her hand to him from the window, Churchill went on: "By the
by, without any scandal, seriously I heard something--I was quite
concerned--that he had been of late less in his study and more in the
boudoir of ------. Surely it cannot be true!"

"Positively false," said Lady Cecilia.

"At every breath a reputation dies," said Beauclerc.

"'Pon my soul, that's true!" said the aide-de-camp. "Positively, hit or
miss, Horace has been going on, firing away with his wit, pop, pop, pop!
till he has bagged--how many brace?"

Horace turned away from him contemptuously, and looked to see whereabouts
Lady Davenant might be all this time.




CHAPTER XIV.


Lady Davenant was at the far end of the room engrossed, Churchill feared,
by the newspaper; as he approached she laid it down, and said,--

"How scandalous some of these papers have become, but it is the fault of
the taste of the age. 'Those who live to please, must please to live.'"

Horace was not sure whether he was cut or not, but he had the presence of
mind not to look hurt. He drew nearer to Lady Davenant, seated himself,
and taking up a book as if he was tired of folly, to which he had merely
condescended, he sat and read, and then sat and thought, the book hanging
from his hand.

The result of these profound thoughts he gave to the public, not to the
aide-de-camp; no more of the little pop-gun pellets of wits--but now was
brought out reason and philosophy. In a higher tone he now reviewed the
literary, philosophical, and political world, with touches of La Bruyere
and Rochefoucault in the characters he drew and in the reflections he made;
with an air, too, of sentimental contrition for his own penetration and
fine moral sense, which compelled him to see and to be annoyed by the
faults of such superior men.

The analysis he made of every mind was really perfect--in one respect, not
a grain of bad but was separated from the good, and held up clean and clear
to public view. And as an anatomist he showed such knowledge both of the
brain and of the heart, such an admirable acquaintance with all their
diseases and handled the probe and the scalpel so well, with such a
practised hand!

"Well, really this is comfortable," said Lord Davenant, throwing himself
back in his arm-chair--"True English comfort, to sit at ease and see all
one's friends so well dissected! Happy to feel that it is our duty to
our neighbour to see him well cut up--ably anatomised for the good of
society; and when I depart--when my time comes--as come it must, nobody
is to touch me but Professor Churchill. It will be a satisfaction to know
that I shall be carved as a dish fit for gods, not hewed as a carcase for
hounds. So now remember, Cecilia, I call on you to witness--I hereby,
being of sound mind and body, leave and bequeath my character, with all
my defects and deficiencies whatsoever, and all and any singular curious
diseases of the mind, of which I may die possessed, wishing the same many
for his sake,--to my good friend Doctor Horace Churchill, professor of
moral, philosophic, and scandalous anatomy, to be by him dissected at his
good pleasure for the benefit of society."

"Many thanks, my good lord; and I accept your legacy for the honour--not
the value of the gift, which every body must be sensible is nothing," said
Churchill, with a polite bow--"absolutely nothing. I shall never he able
to make anything of it."

"Try--try, my dear friend," answered Lord Davenant. "Try, don't be
modest."

"That would be difficult when so distinguished," said Beauclerc, with an
admirable look of proud humility.

"Distinguished Mr. Horace Churchill assuredly is," said Lady Davenant,
looking at him from behind her newspaper. "Distinguished above all his many
competitors in this age of scandal; he has really raised the art to the
dignity of a science. Satire, scandal, and gossip, now hand-in-hand--the
three new graces: all on the same elevated rank--three, formerly considered
as so different, and the last left to our inferior sex, but now, surely, to
be a male gossip is no reproach."

"O, Lady Davenant!--male gossip--what an expression!"

"What a reality!"

"Male gossip!--'_Tombe sur moi le ciel!_'" cried Churchill.

"'_Pourvu que je me venge_,' always understood," pursued Lady Davenant;
"but why be so afraid of the imputation of gossiping, Mr. Churchill? It
is quite fashionable, and if so, quite respectable, you know, and in your
style quite grand.

  "And gossiping wonders at being so fine--

"Malice, to be hated, needs but to be seen, but now when it is elegantly
dressed we look upon it without shame or consciousness of evil; we grow
to doat upon it--so entertaining, so graceful, so refined. When vice loses
half its grossness, it loses all its deformity. Humanity used to be
talked of when our friends were torn to pieces, but now there is such
a philosophical perfume thrown over the whole operation, that we are
irresistibly attracted. How much we owe to such men as Mr. Churchill, who
make us feel detraction virtue!"

He bowed low as Lady Davenant, summoned by her lord, left the room, and
there he stood as one condemned but not penitent.

"If I have not been well sentenced," said he, as the door closed, "and made
'_to feel detraction virtue_!'--But since Lady Cecilia cannot help smiling
at that, I am acquitted, and encouraged to sin again the first opportunity.
But Lady Davenant shall not be by, nor Lord Davenant either."

Lady Cecilia sat down to write a note, and Mr. Churchill walked round the
room in a course of critical observation on the pictures, of which, as of
every thing else, he was a supreme judge. At last he put his eye and his
glass down to something which singularly attracted his attention on one of
the marble tables.

"Pretty!" said Lady Cecilia, "pretty are not they?--though one's so tired
of them every where now--those doves!"

"Doves!" said Churchill, "what I am admiring are gloves, are not they, Miss
Stanley?" said he, pointing to an old pair of gloves, which, much wrinkled
and squeezed together, lay on the beautiful marble in rather an unsightly
lump.

"Poor Doctor V------," cried Helen to Cecilia; "that poor Doctor V-------is
as absent as ever! he is gone, and has forgotten his gloves!"

"Absent! oh, as ever!" said Lady Cecilia, going on with her note, "the most
absent man alive."

"Too much of that sort of thing I think there is in Doctor V-------,"
pursued Churchill: "a touch of absence of mind, giving the idea of high
abstraction, becomes a learned man well enough; but then it should only
be slight, as a _soupcon_ of rouge, which may become a pretty woman; all
depends on the measure, the taste, with which these things are managed--
put on."

"There is nothing managed, nothing _put on_ in Doctor V------," cried
Helen, eagerly, her colour rising; "it is all perfectly sincere, true in
him, whatever it be."

Beauclerc put down his hook.

"All perfectly true! You really think so, Miss Stanley?" said Churchill,
smiling, and looking superior down.

"I do, indeed," cried Helen.

"Charming--so young! How I do love that freshness of mind!"

"Impertinent fellow! I could knock him down, felt Beauclerc.

"And you think all Doctor V------'s humility true?" said Churchill. "Yes,
perfectly!" said Helen; "but I do not wonder you are surprised at it, Mr.
Churchill."

She meant no _malice_, though for a moment he thought she did; and he
winced under Beauclerc's smile.

"I do not wonder that any one who does not know Doctor V------should he
surprised by his great humility," added Helen.

"You are sure that it is not pride that apes humility?" asked Churchill.

"Yes, quite sure!"

"Yet--" said Churchill (putting his malicious finger through a great hole
in the thumb of the doctor's glove) "I should have fancied that I saw
vanity through the holes in these gloves, as through the philosopher's
cloak of old."

"Horace is a famous fellow for picking holes and making much of them, Miss
Stanley, you see," said the aide-de-camp.

"Vanity! Doctor V----has no vanity!" said Helen, "if you knew him."

"No vanity! Whom does Miss Stanley mean?" cried the aide-de-camp. "No
vanity? that's good. Who? Horace?"

"_Mauvais plaisant_!" Horace put him by, and, happily not easily put out of
countenance, he continued to Helen,--

"You give the good doctor credit, too, for all his _naivete_?" said
Churchill.

"He does not want credit for it," said Helen, "he really has it."

"I wish I could see things as you do, Miss Stanley."

"Show him that, Helen," cried Lady Cecilia, looking at a table beside them,
on which lay one of those dioramic prints which appear all a confusion
of lines till you look at them in their right point of view. "Show him
that--it all depends, and so does seeing characters, on getting the right
point of view."

"Ingenious!" said Churchill, trying to catch the right position; "but I
can't, I own--" then abruptly resuming, "Naviete charms me at fifteen," and
his eye glanced at Helen, then was retracted, then returning to his point
of view, "at eighteen perhaps may do," and his eyes again turned to Helen,
"at eighteen--it captivates me quite," and his eye dwelt. "But naivete at
past fifty, verging to sixty, is quite another thing, really rather too
much for me. I like all things in season, and above all, simplicity will
not bear long keeping. I have the greatest respect possible for our learned
and excellent friend, but I wish this could be any way suggested to him,
and that he would lay aside this out-of-season simplicity."

"He cannot lay aside his nature," said Helen, "and I am glad of it, it is
such a good nature."

"Kind-hearted creature he is, I never heard him say a severe word of any
one," said Lady Cecilia.

"What a sweet man he must he!" said Horace, making a face at which none
present, not even Helen, could forbear to smile. "His heart, I am sure, is
in the right place always. I only wish one could say the same of his wig.
And would it be amiss if he sometimes (I would not be too hard upon him,
Miss Stanley), once a fortnight, suppose--brushed, or caused to be brushed,
that coat of his?"

"You have dusted his jacket for him famously, Horace, I think," said the
aide-de-camp.

At this instant the door opened, and in came the doctor himself.

Lady Cecilia's hand was outstretched with her note, thinking, as the door
opened, that she should see the servant come in, for whom she had rung.

"What surprises you all so, my good friends," said the doctor, stopping and
looking round in all his native simplicity.

"My dear doctor" said Lady Cecilia, "only we all thought you were
gone--that's all."

"And I am not gone, that's all. I stayed to write a letter, and am come
here to look for--but I cannot find-my--"

"Your gloves, perhaps, doctor, you are looking for," said Churchill, going
forward, and with an air of the greatest respect and consideration, both
for the gloves and for their owner, he presented them; then shook the
doctor by the hand, with a cordiality which the good soul thought truly
English, and, bowing him out, added, "How proud he had been to make his
acquaintance,--_au revoir_, he hoped, in Park Lane."

"Oh you treacherous--!" cried Lady Cecilia, turning to Horace, as soon as
the unsuspecting philosopher was fairly gone. "Too bad really! If he were
not the most simple-minded creature extant, he must have seen, suspected,
something from your look; and what would have become of you if the doctor
had come in one moment sooner, and had heard you--I was really frightened."

"Frightened! so was I, almost out of my wits," said Churchill. "_Les
revenans_ always frighten one; and they never hear any good of themselves,
for which reason I make it a principle, when once I have left a room, full
of friends especially, never--never to go back. My gloves, my hat, my coat,
I'd leave, sooner than lose my friends. Once I heard it said, by one who
knew the world and human nature better than any of us--once I heard it said
in jest, but in sober earnest I say, that I would not for more than I am
worth be placed, without his knowing it, within earshot of my best friend."

"What sort of a best friend can yours he?" cried Beauclerc.

"Much like other people's, I suppose," replied Horace, speaking with
perfect nonchalance--"much like other people's best friends. Whosoever
expects to find better, I guess, will find worse, if he live in the world
we live in."

"May I go out of the world before I believe or suspect any such thing?"
cried Beauclerc. "Rather than have the Roman curse light upon me, 'May you
survive all your friends and relations!' may I die a thousand times!"

"Who talks of dying, in a voice so sweet--a voice so loud?" said provoking
Horace, in his calm, well-bred tone; "for my part, I who have the honour of
speaking to you, can boast, that never since I was of years of discretion
(counting new style, beginning at thirteen, of course)--never have I lost a
friend, a sincere friend--never, for this irrefragable reason--since that
nonage, never was I such a neophyte as to fancy I had found that _lusus
natures_, a friend perfectly sincere."

"How I pity you!" cried Beauclerc, "if you are in earnest; but in earnest
you can't be."

"Pardon me, I can, and I am. And in earnest you will oblige me, Mr.
Beauclerc, if you will spare me your pity: for, all things in this world
considered," said Horace Churchill, drawing himself up, "I do not conceive
that I am much an object of pity." Then, turning upon his heel, he walked
away, conscious, however, half an instant afterwards, that he had drawn
himself up too high, and that for a moment his temper had spoiled his tone,
and betrayed him into a look and manner too boastful, bordering on the
ridiculous. He was in haste to repair the error.

Not Garrick, in the height of his celebrity and of his susceptibility, was
ever more anxious than Horace Churchill to avert the stroke of ridicule--to
guard against the dreaded smile. As he walked away, he felt behind his back
that those he left were smiling in silence.

Lady Cecilia had thrown herself on a sofa, resting, after the labour of
_l'eloquence de billet_. He stopped, and, leaning over the back of the
sofa on which she reclined, repeated an Italian line in which was the word
"_pavoneggiarsi_."

"My dear Lady Cecilia, you, who understand and feel Italian so well, how
expressive are some of their words! _Pavoneggiarsi!_--untranslatable. One
cannot say well in English, to peacock oneself. To make oneself like unto a
peacock is flat; but _pavoneggiarsi_--action, passion, picture, all in one!
To plume oneself comes nearest to it; but the word cannot be given, even by
equivalents, in English; nor can it be naturalised, because, in fact, we
have not the feeling. An Englishman is too proud to boast--too bashful to
strut; if ever he _peacocks himself_, it is in a moment of anger, not in
display. The language of every country," continued he, raising his voice,
in order to reach Lady Davenant, who just then returned to the room, as he
did not wish to waste a philosophical observation on Lady Cecilia,--"the
language of every country is, to a certain degree, evidence, record,
history of its character and manners." Then, lowering his voice almost to a
whisper, but very distinct, turning while he spoke so as to make sure that
Miss Stanley heard--"Your young friend this morning quite captivated me by
her nature--nature, the thing that now is most uncommon, a real natural
woman; and when in a beauty, how charming! How delicious when one meets
with _effusion de coeur_: a young lady, too, who speaks pure English, not
a leash of languages at once; and cultivated, too, your friend is, for one
does not like ignorance, if one could have knowledge without pretension--so
hard to find the golden mean!--and if one could find it, one might not be
nearer to----"

Lady Cecilia listened for the finishing word, but none came. It all ended
in a sigh, to be interpreted as she pleased. A look towards the ottoman,
where Beauclerc had now taken his seat beside Miss Stanley, seemed to point
the meaning out: but Lady Cecilia knew her man too well to understand him.

Beauclerc, seated on the ottoman, was showing to Helen some passages in the
book he was reading; she read with attention, and from time to time looked
up with a smile of intelligence and approbation. What either said Horace
could not hear, and he was the more curious, and when the book was put
down, after carelessly opening others he took it up. Very much surprised
was he to find it neither novel nor poem: many passages were marked
with pencil notes of approbation, he took it for granted these were
Bleauclerc's; there he was mistaken, they were Lady Davenant's. She was at
her work-table. Horace, book in hand, approached; the book was not in his
line, it was more scientific than literary--it was for posterity more
than for the day; he had only turned it over as literary men turn over
scientific books, to seize what may serve for a new simile or a good
allusion; besides, among his philosophical friends, the book being talked
of, it was well to know enough of it to have something to say, and he had
said well, very _judiciously_ he had praised it among the elect; but now it
was his fancy to depreciate it with all his might; not that he disliked
the author or the work now more than he had done before, but he was in the
humour to take the opposite side from Beauclerc, so he threw the book from
him contemptuously "Rather a slight hasty thing, in my opinion," said he.
Beauclerc's eyes took fire as he exclaimed, "Slight! hasty! this most
noble, most solid work!"

"Solid in your opinion," said Churchill, with a smile deferential, slightly
sneering.

"Our own opinion is all that either of us can give," said Beauclerc; "in my
opinion it is the finest view of the progress of natural philosophy, the
most enlarged, the most just in its judgments of the past, and in its
prescience of the future; in the richness of experimental knowledge, in its
theoretic invention, the greatest work by any one individual since the time
of Bacon."

"And Bacon is under your protection, too?"

"Protection! my protection?" said Beauclerc.

"Pardon me, I simply meant to ask if you are one of those who swear by Lord
Verulam."

"I swear by no man, I do not swear at all, not on philosophical subjects
especially; swearing adds nothing to faith," said Beauclerc.

"I stand corrected," said Churchill, "and I would go further, and add that
in argument enthusiasm adds nothing to reason--much as I admire, as we
all admire," glancing at Miss Stanley, "that enthusiasm with which this
favoured work has been advocated!"

"I could not help speaking warmly," cried Beauclerc; "it is a book to
inspire enthusiasm; there is such a noble spirit all through it, so pure
from petty passions, from all vulgar jealousies, all low concerns! Judge of
a book, somebody says, by the impression it leaves on your mind when you
lay it down; this book stands that test, at least with me, I lay it down
with such a wish to follow--with steps ever so unequal still to follow,
where it points the way."

"Bravo! bravissimo! hear him, hear him! print him, print him! hot-press
from the author to the author, hot-press!" cried Churchill, and he laughed.

Like one suddenly awakened from the trance of enthusiasm by the cold touch
of ridicule, stood Beauclerc, brought down from heaven to earth, and by
that horrid little laugh, not the heart's laugh.

"But my being ridiculous does not make my cause so, and that is a comfort."
"And another comfort you may have, my dear Granville," said Lady Davenant,
"that ridicule is not the test of truth; truth should be the test of
ridicule."

"But where is the book?" continued Beauclerc.

Helen gave it to him.

"Now, Mr. Churchill," said Beauclerc; "I am really anxious, I know you are
such a good critic, will you show me these faults? blame as well as praise
must always he valuable from those who themselves excel."

"You are too good," said Churchill.

"Will you then be good enough to point out the errors for me?"

"Oh, by no means," cried Churchill, "don't note me, do not quote me, I am
nobody, and I cannot give up my authorities."

"But the truth is all I want to get at," said Beauclerc.

"Let her rest, my dear sir, at the bottom of her well; there she is,
and there she will be for ever and ever, and depend upon it none of our
windlassing will ever bring her up."

"Such an author as this," continued Beauclerc, "would have been so glad to
have corrected any error."

"So every author tells you, but I never saw one of them who did not look
blank at a list of errata--if you knew how little one is thanked for them!"

"But you would be thanked now," said Beauclerc:--"the faults in style, at
least."

"Nay, I am no critic," said Churchill, confident in his habits of literary
detection; "but if you ask me," said he, as he disdainfully flirted the
leaves back and forward with a "There now!" and a "Here now!" "We should
not call that good writing--you could not think this correct? I may be
wrong, but I should not use this phrase. Hardly English that--colloquial, I
think; and this awkward ablative absolute--never admitted now."

"Thank you," said Beauclerc, "these faults are easily mended."

"Easily mended, say you? I say, better make a new one."

"WHO COULD?" said Beauclerc.

"How many faults you see," said Helen, "which I should never have perceived
unless you had pointed them out, and I am sorry to know them now." Smiling
at Helen's look of sincere mortification, in contrast at this moment with
Mr. Churchill's air of satisfied critical pride, Lady Davenant said,--

"Why sorry, my dear Helen? No human work can be perfect; Mr. Churchill may
be proud of that strength of eye which in such a powerful light can count
the spots. But whether it be the best use to make of his eyes, or the best
use that can be made of the light, remains to be considered."




CHAPTER XV.


Beyond measure was Churchill provoked to find Lady Davenant against him and
on the same side as Granville Beauclerc--all unused to contradiction in
his own society, where he had long been supreme, he felt a difference of
opinion so sturdily maintained as a personal insult.

For so young a man as Beauclerc, yet unknown to fame, not only to challenge
the combat but to obtain the victory, was intolerable; and the more so,
because his young opponent appeared no ways elated or surprised, but seemed
satisfied to attribute his success to the goodness of his cause.

Churchill had hitherto always managed wisely his great stakes and
pretensions in both the fashionable and literary world. He had never
actually published any thing except a clever article or two in a review, or
an epigram, attributed to him but not acknowledged. Having avoided giving
his measure, it was believed he was above all who had been publicly
tried--it was always said--"If Horace Churchill would but publish, he would
surpass every other author of our times."

Churchill accordingly dreaded and hated all who might by possibility
approach the throne of fashion, or interfere with his dictatorship in a
certain literary set in London, and from this moment he began cordially to
detest Beauclerc--he viewed him with a scornful, yet with jealous eyes; but
his was the jealousy of vanity, not of love; it regarded Lady Davenant and
his fashionable reputation in the first place--Helen only in the second.

Lady Davenant observed all this, and was anxious to know how much or how
little Helen had seen, and what degree of interest it excited in her mind.
One morning, when they were alone together, looking over a cabinet of
cameos, Lady Davenant pointed to one which she thought like Mr. Beauclerc.
Helen did not see the likeness.

"People see likenesses very differently," said Lady Davenant. "But you and
I, Helen, usually see characters, if not faces, with the same eyes. I
have been thinking of these two gentlemen, Mr. Churchill and Mr.
Beauclerc--which do you think the most agreeable?"

"Mr. Churchill is amusing certainly," said Helen, "but I think Mr.
Beauclerc's conversation much more interesting--though Mr. Churchill is
agreeable, sometimes--when--"

"When he flatters you," said Lady Davenant.

"When he is not satirical--I was going to say," said Helen.

"There is a continual petty brilliancy, a petty effort too," continued Lady
Davenant, "in Mr. Churchill, that tires me--sparks struck perpetually, but
then you hear the striking of the flints, the clink of the tinder-box."

Helen, though she admitted the tinder-box, thought it too low a comparison.
She thought Churchill's were not mere sparks.

"Well, fireworks, if you will," said Lady Davenant, "that rise, blaze,
burst, fall, and leave you in darkness, and with a disagreeable smell too;
and it's all _feu d'artifice_ after all. Now in Beauclerc there is too
little art and too ardent nature. Some French friends of mine who knew
both, said of Mr. Churchill, '_De l'esprit on ne peut pas plus meme a
Paris_,' the highest compliment a Parisian can pay, but they allowed that
Beauclerc had '_beaucoup plus d'ame_.'"

"Yes," said Helen; "how far superior!"

"It has been said," continued Lady Davenant, "that it is safer to judge of
men by their actions than by their words, but there are few actions and
many words in life; and if women would avail themselves of their daily,
hourly, opportunities of judging people by their words, they would get at
the natural characters, or, what is of just as much consequence, they would
penetrate through the acquired habits; and here Helen, you have two good
studies before you."

Preoccupied as Helen was with the certainty of Beauclerc being an engaged,
almost a married man, and looking, as she did, on Churchill as one who must
consider her as utterly beneath his notice, she listened to Lady Davenant's
remarks as she would have done to observations about two characters in a
novel or on the stage.

As Churchill could not immediately manifest his hatred of Beauclerc, it
worked inwardly the more. He did not sleep well this night, and when he
got up in the morning, there was something the matter with him. Nervous,
bilious--cross it could not be;--_journalier_ (a French word settles
everything)--_journalier_ he allowed he was; he rather gloried in it,
because his being permitted to be so proved his power,--his prerogative of
fortune and talent combined.

In the vast competition of the London world, it is not permitted to every
man to be in his humour or out of his humour at pleasure; but, by an
uncommon combination of circumstances, Churchill had established his
privilege of caprice; he was allowed to have his bad and his good days, and
the highest people and the finest smiled, and submitted to his "_cachet de
faveur et de disgrace_;" and when he was sulky, rude, or snappish, called
it only Horace Churchill's way. They even prided themselves on his
preferences and his aversions. "Horace is always charming when he is with
us."--"With me you have no idea how delightful he is."--"Indeed I must do
him the justice to say, that I never found him otherwise."--While the less
favoured permitted him to be as rude as he pleased, and only petted him,
and told of his odd ways to those who sighed in vain to have him at their
parties. But Lady Davenant was not a person to pet or spoil a child of any
age, and to the general, Mr. Churchill was not particularly agreeable--not
his sort; while to Lady Cecilia, secure in grace, beauty, and fashion, his
humours were only matter of amusement, and she bore with him pleasantly and
laughingly.

"Such weather!" cried he in a querulous tone; "how can a man have any sense
in such weather? Some foreigner says, that the odious climate of England is
an over-balance for her good constitution. The sun of the south is in truth
well worth the liberty of the north. It is a sad thing," said he, with a
very sentimental air, "that a free-born Briton should be servile to these
skyey influences;" and, grumbling on, he looked out of the window as cross
as he pleased, and nobody minded him. The aide-de-camp civilly agreed with
him that it was horrid weather, and likely to rain, and it did rain; and
every one knows how men, like children, are in certain circumstances
affected miserably by a rainy day. There was no going out; horses at the
door, and obliged to be dismissed. Well, since there could be no riding,
the next best thing the aide-de-camp thought, was to talk of horses, and
the officers all grew eager, and Churchill had a mind to exert himself so
far as to show them that he knew more of the matter than they did; that he
was no mere book-man; but on this unlucky day, all went wrong. It happened
that Horace fell into some grievous error concerning the genealogy of a
famous race-horse, and, disconcerted more than he would have been at being
convicted of any degree of moral turpitude, vexed and ashamed, he talked no
more of Newmarket or of Doncaster, left the race-ground to those who prided
themselves on the excellences of their four-footed betters, and lounged
into the billiard-room.

He found Lady Cecilia playing with Beauclerc; Miss Stanley was looking on.
Churchill was a famous billiard-player, and took his turn to show how much
better than Beauclerc he performed, but this day his hand was out, his eye
not good; he committed blunders of which a novice might have been ashamed.
And there was Miss Stanley and there was Beauclerc by to see! and Beauclerc
pitied him!

  O line extreme of human misery!

He retreated to the book-room, but there the intellectual Horace, with all
the sages, poets, and novelists of every age within his reach, reached them
not; but, with his hands in his pockets, like any squire or schoolboy
under the load of ignorance or penalties of idleness, stood before the
chimney-piece, eyeing the pendule, and verily believing that this morning
the hands went backward. Dressing-time at last came, and dinner-time,
bringing relief how often to man and child ill-tempered; but, this day to
Churchill dinner brought only discomfiture worse discomfited.

Some of the neighbouring families were to dine at Clarendon Park. Mr.
Churchill abhorred country neighbours and country gentlemen. Among these,
however, were some not unworthy to be perceived by him; and besides these,
there were some foreign officers; one in particular, from Spain, of high
rank and birth, of the _sangre azul_, the _blue blood_, who have the
privilege of the silken cord if they should come to be hanged. This
Spaniard was a man of distinguished talent, and for him Horace might have
been expected to shine out; it was his pleasure, however, this day to
disappoint expectations, and to do "the dishonours of his country." He
would talk only of eating, of which he was privileged not only to speak but
to judge, and pronounce upon _en dernier ressort_, though this was only an
air, for he was not really a gourmand; but after ogling through his glass
the distant dishes, when they with a wish came nigh, he, after a cursory
glance or a close inspection, made them with a nod retire.

At last he thought an opportunity offered for bringing in a well-prepared
anecdote which he had about Cambaceres, and a hot blackbird and white feet,
but unluckily a country gentleman would tell some history of a battle
between poachers and gamekeepers, which fixed the attention of the company
till the moment for the anecdote was past.

Horace left his tale untold, and spoke word never more till a subject was
started on which he thought he could come out unrivalled. General Clarendon
had some remarkably good wines. Churchill was referred to as a judge, and
he allowed them to be all good, but he prided himself on possessing a
certain Spanish wine, esteemed above all price, because not to be had for
money--_amontillado_ is its name. Horace appealed to the Spanish officer,
who confirmed all he said of this vinous phenomenon. "No cultivator can be
certain of producing it. It has puzzled, almost to death, all the _growers_
of Xeres:--it is a variety of sherry, almost as difficult to judge of as to
procure."

But Mr. Churchill boasted he had some, undoubtedly genuine; he added, "that
Spanish judges had assured him his taste was so accurate he might venture
to pronounce upon the difficult question of amontillado or not!"

While he yet spoke, General Clarendon, unawares, placed before him some of
this very fine wine, which, as he finished speaking, Churchill swallowed
without knowing it from some other sherry which he had been drinking. He
would have questioned that it was genuine, but the Spaniard, as far as he
could pretend to judge, thought it unquestionable.

Churchill's countenance fell in a manner that quite surprised Helen, and
exceedingly amused Lady Cecilia. He was more mortified and vexed by this
failure than by all the rest, for the whole table smiled.

The evening of this day of misfortune was not brighter than the morning,
everything was wrong--even at night--at night when at last the dinner
company, the country visitors, relieved him from their presence, and when
some comfort might be had, he thought, stretched in a good easy-chair--Lord
Davenant had set him the example. But something had happened to all the
chairs,--there was a variety of fashionable kinds; he tried them by turns,
but none of them this night would suit him. Yet Lady Cecilia maintained
(for the general had chosen them) that they were each and all of them
in their way comfortable, in the full English spirit of the word, and
according to the French explanation of _comfortable_, given to us by
the Duchess d'Abrantes, _convenablement bon_; but in compassion to Mr.
Churchill's fastidious restlessness, she would now show him a perfection of
a chair which she had just had made for her own boudoir. She ordered that
it should be brought, and in it rolled, and it was looked at in every
direction and sat in, and no fault could be found with it, even by the
great faultfinder; but what was it called? It was neither a lounger, nor
a dormeuse, nor a Cooper, nor a Nelson, nor a kangaroo: a chair without a
name would never do; in all things fashionable the name is more than half.
Such a happy name as kangaroo Lady Cecilia despaired of finding for her new
favourite, but she begged some one would give it a good one; whoever gave
her the best name should be invited to the honours and pleasures of the
sitting in this chair for the rest of the night.

Her eyes, and all eyes, turned upon Mr. Churchill, but whether the occasion
was too great, or that his desire to satisfy the raised expectation of the
public was too high strained, or that the time was out of joint, or that he
was out of sorts, the fact was, he could find no name.

Beauclerc, who had not yet tried the chair, sank into its luxurious depth,
and leaning back, asked if it might not be appropriately called the
"Sleepy-hollow."

"Sleepy-hollow!" repeated Lady Cecilia, "excellent!" and by acclammation
"Sleepy-hollow" was approved; but when Beauclerc was invited to the honours
of the sitting, he declined, declaring that the name was not his invention,
only his recollection; it had been given by a friend of his to some such
easy chair.

This magnanimity was too much for Horace; he looked at his watch, found it
was bed-time, pushed the chair out of his way, and departed; Beauclerc, the
first and last idea in this his day of mortifications.

Seeing a man subject to these petty irritations lowers him in the eyes of
woman. For that susceptibility of temper arising from the jealousy of love,
even when excited by trifles, woman makes all reasonable, all natural
allowance; but for the jealousy of self-love she has no pity. Unsuited to
the manly character!--so Helen thought, and so every woman thinks.




CHAPTER XVI.


It was expected by all who had witnessed his discomfiture and his
parting push to the chair, that Mr. Churchill would be off early in
the morning--such was his wont when he was disturbed in vanity: but he
reappeared at breakfast.

This day was a good day with Horace; he determined it should be so, and
though it was again a wet day, he now showed that he could rule the weather
of his own humour, when intensity of will was wakened by rivalry. He
made himself most agreeable, and the man of yesterday was forgotten or
remembered only as a foil to the man of to-day. The words he so much loved
to hear, and to which he had so often surreptitiously listened, were now
repeated, 'No one can be so agreeable as Horace Churchill is on his good
days!'

Bright he shone out, all gaiety and graciousness; the _cachet de faveur_
was for all, but its finest impression was for Helen. He tried flattery,
and wit, each playing on the other with reflected and reflecting lustre,
for a woman naturally says to herself, "When this man has so much wit, his
flattery even must be worth something."

And another day came, and another, and another party of friends filled the
house, and still Mr. Churchill remained, and was now the delight of all. As
far as concerned his successes in society, no one was more ready to join in
applause than Beauclerc; but when Helen was in question he was different,
though he had reasoned himself into the belief that he could not yet love
Miss Stanley, therefore he could not be jealous. But he had been glad to
observe that she had from the first seemed to see what sort of a person Mr.
Churchill was. She was now only amused, as everybody must be, but she would
never be interested by such a man as Horace Churchill, a wit without a
soul. If she were--why he could never feel any further interest about
her--that was all!

So it went on; and now Lady Cecilia was as much amused as she expected
by these daily jealousies, conflicts, and comparisons, the feelings
perpetually tricking themselves out, and strutting about, calling
themselves judgments, like the servants in Gil Blas in their masters'
clothes, going about as counts dukes, and grandees.

"Well, really," said Lady Cecilia to Helen, one day, as she was standing
near her tambour frame, "you are an industrious creature, and the only very
industrious person I ever could bear. I have myself a natural aversion to
a needle, but that tambour needle I can better endure than a common one,
because, in the first place, it makes a little noise in the world; one not
only sees but hears it getting on; one finds, that without dragging it
draws at every link a lengthened chain."

"It is called chainstitch, is it not?" said the aide-de-camp; "and Miss
Stanley is working on so famously fast at it she will have us all in her
chains by and by."

"Bow, Miss Stanley," said Lady Cecilia; "that pretty compliment deserves at
least a bow, if not a look-up."

"I should prefer a look-down, if I were to choose," said Churchill.

"Beggars must not be choosers," said the aide-de-camp.

"But the very reason I can bear to look at you working, Helen," continued
Lady Cecilia, "is, because you do look up so often--so refreshingly. The
professed _Notables_ I detest--those who never raise their eyes from their
everlasting work; whatever is said, read, thought, or felt, is with them of
secondary importance to that bit of muslin in which they are making holes,
or that bit of canvass on which they are perpetrating such figures or
flowers as nature scorns to look upon. I did not mean anything against you
mamma, I assure you," continued Cecilia, turning to her mother, who was
also at her embroidering frame, "because, though you do work, or have work
before you, to do you justice, you never attend to it in the least."

"Thank you! my dear Cecilia," said Lady Davenant, smiling; "I am, indeed, a
sad bungler, but still I shall always maintain a great respect for work and
workers, and I have good reasons for it."

"And so have I," said Lord Davenant. "I only wish that men who do not know
what to do with their hands, were not ashamed to sew. If custom had but
allowed us this resource, how many valuable lives might have been saved,
how many rich ennuyes would not have hung themselves, even in November!
What years of war, what overthrow of empires, might have been avoided, if
princes and sultans, instead of throwing handkerchiefs, had but hemmed
them!"

"No, no," said Lady Davenant, "recollect that the race of Spanish kings has
somewhat deteriorated since they exchanged the sword for the tambour-frame.
We had better have things as they are: leave us the privilege of the
needle, and what a valuable resource it is; sovereign against the root of
all evil--an antidote both to love in idleness and hate in idleness--which
is most to be dreaded, let those who have felt both decide. I think we
ladies must be allowed to keep the privilege of the needle to ourselves,
humble though it be, for we must allow it is a good one."

"Good at need," said Churchill. "There is an excellent print, by Bouck, I
believe, of an old woman beating the devil with a distaff; distaffs have
been out of fashion with spinsters ever since, I fancy."

"But as she was old, Churchill," said Lord Davenant, "might not your lady
have defied his black majesty, without her distaff?"

"His _black_ majesty! I admire your distinction, my lord," said Churchill,
"but give it more emphasis; for all kings are not black in the eyes of the
fair, it is said, you know." And here he began an anecdote of regal scandal
in which Lady Cecilia stopped him----

"Now, Horace, I protest against your beginning with scandal so early in the
morning. None of your _on dits_, for decency's sake, before luncheon; wait
till evening."

Churchill coughed, and shrugged, and sighed, and declared he would be
temperate; he would not touch a character, upon his honour; he would
only indulge in a few little personalities; it could not hurt any lady's
feelings that he should criticise or praise absent beauties. So he just
made a review of all he could recollect, in answer to a question one of the
officers, Captain Warmsley, had asked him, and which, in an absent fit,
he had had the ill-manners yesterday, as now he recollected, not to
answer--Whom he considered as altogether the handsomest woman of his
acquaintance? Beauclerc was now in the room, and Horace was proud to
display, before him in particular, his infinite knowledge of all the fair
and fashionable, and all that might be admitted fashionable without being
fair--all that have the _je ne sais quoi_, which is than beauty dearer.
As one conscious of his power to consecrate or desecrate, by one look
of disdain or one word of praise, he stood; and beginning at the lowest
conceivable point, his uttermost notion of want of beauty--his _laid
ideal_, naming one whose image, no doubt, every charitable imagination will
here supply, Horace next fixed upon another for his mediocrity point--what
he should call "just well enough"--_assez bien, assez_--just up to the
Bellasis motto, "_Bonne et belle assez_." Then, in the ascending scale, he
rose to those who, in common parlance, may be called charming, fascinating;
and still for each he had his fastidious look and depreciating word. Just
keeping within the verge, Horace, without exposing himself to the ridicule
of coxcombry, ended by sighing for that being 'made of every creature's
best'--perfect, yet free from the curse of perfection. Then, suddenly
turning to Beauclerc, and tapping him on the shoulder--"Do, give us your
notions--to what sort of a body or mind, now, would you willingly bend the
knee?"

Beauclerc could not or would not tell--"I only know that whenever I bend
the knee," said he, "it will be because I cannot help it!"

Beauclerc could not be drawn out either by Churchill's persiflage or
flattery, and he tried both, to talk of his tastes or opinions of women.
He felt too much perhaps about love to talk much about it. This all agreed
well in Helen's imagination with what Lady Cecilia had told her of his
secret engagement. She was sure he was thinking of Lady Blanche, and that
he could not venture to describe her, lest he should betray himself and his
secret. Then, leaving Churchill and the talkers, he walked up and down the
room alone, at the further side, seeming as if he were recollecting some
lines which he repeated to himself, and then stopping before Lady Cecilia,
repeated to her, in a very low voice, the following:--

  "I saw her upon nearer view,
  A spirit, yet a woman too!
  Her household motions light and free,
  And steps of virgin liberty;
  A countenance in which did meet
  Sweet records, promises as sweet;
  A creature not too bright or good
  For human nature's daily food;
  For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
  Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles."

Helen thought Lady Blanche must be a charming creature if she was like this
picture; but somehow, as she afterwards told Lady Cecilia, she had formed a
different idea of Lady Blanche Forrester--Cecilia smiled and asked, "How?
different how?"

Helen did not exactly know, but altogether she had imagined that she must
be more of a heroine, or perhaps more of a woman of rank and fashion.
She had not formed any exact idea--but different altogether from this
description. Lady Cecilia again smiled, and said, "Very natural; and after
all not very certain that the Lady Blanche is like this picture, which was
not drawn for her or from her assuredly--a resemblance found only in the
imagination, to which we are, all of us, more or less, dupes; and _tant
mieux_ say I--_tant pis_ says mamma--and all mothers."

"There is one thing I like better in Mr. Beauclerc's manners than in Mr.
Churchill," said Helen.

"There are a hundred I like better," said Lady Cecilia, "but what is your
one thing?"

"That he always speaks of women in general with respect--as if he had more
confidence in them, and more dependence upon them for his happiness. Now
Mr. Churchill, with all the adoration he professes, seems to look upon them
as idols that he can set up or pull down, bend the knee to or break to
pieces, at pleasure--I could not like a man for a friend who had a bad, or
even a contemptuous, opinion of women--could you, Cecilia?"

"Certainly not," Lady Cecilia said; "the general had always, naturally, the
greatest respect for women. Whatever prejudices he had taken up had been
only caught from others, and lasted only till he had got rid of the
impression of certain 'untoward circumstances.'" Even a grave, serious
dislike, both Lady Cecilia and Helen agreed that they could bear better
than that persiflage which seemed to mock even while it most professed to
admire.

Horace presently discovered the mistakes he had made in his attempts, and
repaired them as fast as he could by his infinite versatility. The changes
shaded off with a skill which made them run easily into each other. He
perceived that Mr. Beauclerc's respectful air and tone were preferred, and
he now laid himself out in the respectful line, adding, as he flattered
himself, something of a finer point, more polish in whatever he said, and
with more weight of authority.

But he was mortified to find that it did not produce the expected effect,
and, after having done the respectful one morning, as he fancied, in the
happiest manner, he was vexed to perceive that he not only could not raise
Helen's eyes from her work, but that even Lady Davenant did not attend to
him: and that, as he was rounding one of his best periods, her looks were
directed to the other side of the room, where Beauclerc sat apart; and
presently she called to him, and begged to know what it was he was reading.
She said she quite envied him the power he possessed of being rapt into
future times or past, completely at his author's bidding, to be transported
how and where he pleased.

Beauclerc brought the book to her, and put it into her hand. As she took it
she said, "As we advance in life, it becomes more and more difficult to
find in any book the sort of enchanting, entrancing interest which we
enjoyed when life, and, books, and we ourselves were new. It were vain to
try and settle whether the fault is most in modern books, or in our ancient
selves; probably not in either: the fact is, that not only does the
imagination cool and weaken as we grow older, but we become, as we live on
in this world, too much engrossed by the real business and cares of life,
to have feeling or time for factitious, imaginary interests. But why do I
say factitious? while they last, the imaginative interests are as real
as any others."

"Thank you," said Beauclerc, "for doing justice to poor imagination, whose
pleasures are surely, after all, the highest, the most real, that we
have, unwarrantably as they have been decried both by metaphysicians and
physicians."

The book which had so fixed Beauclerc's attention, was Segur's History of
Napoleon's Russian Campaign. He was at the page where the burning of Moscow
is described--the picture of Buonaparte's despair, when he met resolution
greater than his own, when he felt himself vanquished by the human mind, by
patriotism, by virtue--virtue in which he could not believe, the existence
of which, with all his imagination, he could not conceive: the power which
his indomitable will could not conquer.

Beauclerc pointed to the account of that famous inscription on the iron
gate of a church which the French found still standing, the words written
by Rostopchin after the burning of his "delightful home."

"_Frenchmen, I have been eight years in embellishing this residence; I have
lived in it happily in the bosom of my family. The inhabitants of this
estate (amounting to seventeen hundred and twenty) have quitted it at your
approach; and I have, with my own hands, set fire to my own house, to
prevent it from being polluted by your presence._"

"See what one, even one, magnanimous individual can do for his country,"
exclaimed Beauclerc. "How little did this sacrifice cost him! Sacrifice do
I say? it was a pride--a pleasure."

Churchill did not at all like the expression of Helen's countenance, for he
perceived she sympathised with Beauclerc's enthusiasm. He saw that romantic
enthusiasm had more charm for her than wit or fashion; and now he meditated
another change of style. He would try a noble style. He resolved that the
first convenient opportunity he would be a little romantic, and perhaps,
even take a touch at chivalry, a burst like Beauclerc, but in a way of his
own, at the degeneracy of modern times. He tried it--but it was quite a
failure; Lady Cecilia, as he overheard, whispered to Helen what was once
so happily said--"_Ah! le pauvre homme! comme il se batte les flancs d'un
enthousiasme de commande._"

Horace was too clever a man to persist in a wrong line, or one in which his
test of right _success_ did not crown his endeavours. If this did not do,
something else would--should, It was impossible that with all his spirit of
resource he should ultimately fail. To please, and to make an impression on
Helen, a greater impression than Beauclerc--to annoy Beauclerc, in short,
was still, independently of all serious thoughts, the utmost object of
Churchill's endeavours.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.






VOLUME THE SECOND.


CHAPTER I.


About this time a circumstance occurred, which seemed to have nothing to
do with Churchill, or Beauclerc, but which eventually brought both their
characters into action and passion.

Lord Davenant had purchased, at the sale of Dean Stanley's pictures,
several of those which had been the dean's favourites, and which,
independently of their positive merit, were peculiarly dear to Helen. He
had ordered that they should be sent down to Clarendon Park; at first, he
only begged house-room for them from the general while he and Lady Davenant
were in Russia; then he said that in case he should never return he wished
the pictures should be divided between his two dear children, Cecilia and
Helen; and that, to prevent disputes, he would make the distribution of
them himself now, and in the kindest and most playful manner he allotted
them to each, always finding some excellent reason for giving to Helen
those which he knew she liked best; and then there was to be a _hanging
committee_, for hanging the pictures, which occasioned a great deal of
talking, Beauclerc always thinking most of Helen, or of what was really
best for the paintings; Horace most of himself and his amateurship.

Among these pictures were some fine Wouvermans, and other hunting and
hawking pieces, and one in particular of the duchess and her ladies, from
Don Quixote. Beauclerc, who had gone round examining and admiring, stood
fixed when he came to this picture, in which he fancied he discovered in
one of the figures some likeness to Helen; the lady had a hawk upon her
wrist. Churchill came up eagerly to the examination, with glass at eye. He
could not discern the slightest resemblance to Miss Stanley; but he was in
haste to, bring out an excellent observation of his own, which he had made
his own from a Quarterly Review, illustrating the advantage it would be to
painters to possess knowledge, even of kinds seemingly most distant from
the line of their profession.

"For instance, now _a priori_, one should not insist upon a great painter's
being a good ornithologist, and yet, for want of being something of a
bird-fancier, look here what he has done--quite absurd, a sort of hawk
introduced, such as never was or could be at any hawking affair in nature:
would not sit upon lady's wrist or answer to her call--would never fly at a
bird. Now you see this is a ridiculous blunder."

While Churchill plumed himself on this critical remark Captain Warmsley
told of who still kept hawks in England, and of the hawking parties he had
seen and heard of--"even this year, that famous hawking in Wiltshire, and
that other in Norfolk."

Churchill asked Warmsley if he had been at Lord Berner's when Landseer was
there studying the subject of his famous hawking scene. "Have you seen
it, Lady Cecilia?" continued he; "it is beautiful; the birds seem to be
absolutely coming out of the picture;" and he was going on with some of
his connoisseurship, and telling of his mortification in having missed the
purchase of that picture; but Warmsley got back to the hawking he had seen,
and he became absolutely eloquent in describing the sport.

Churchill, though eager to speak, listened with tolerably polite patience
till Warmsley came to what he had forgot to mention,--to the label with
the date of place and year that is put upon the heron's leg; to the heron
brought from Denmark, where it had been caught, with the label of having
been let fly from Lord Berner's; "for," continued he, "the heron is always
to be saved if possible, so, when it is down, and the hawk over it, the
falconer has some raw beef ready minced, and lays it on the heron's back,
or a pigeon, just killed, is sometimes used; the hawk devours it, and the
heron, quite safe, as soon as it recovers from its fright, mounts slowly
upward and returns to its heronry."

Helen listened eagerly, and so did Lady Cecilia, who said, "You know,
Helen, our favourite Washington Irving quotes that in days of yore, 'a lady
of rank did not think herself completely equipped in riding forth, unless
she had her tassel-gentel held by jesses on her delicate hand.'"

Before her words were well finished, Beauclerc had decided what he would
do, and the business was half done that is well begun. He was at the
library table, writing as fast as pen could go, to give carte blanche to a
friend, to secure for him immediately a whole hawking establishment which
Warmsley had mentioned, and which was now upon public sale, or privately to
be parted with by the present possessor.

At the very moment when Beauclerc was signing and sealing at one end of the
room, at the other Horace Churchill, to whom something of the same plan
had occurred, was charming Lady Cecilia Clarendon, by hinting to her his
scheme--anticipating the honour of seeing one of his hawks borne upon her
delicate wrist.

Beauclerc, after despatching his letter, came up just in time to catch the
sound and the sense, and took Horace aside to tell him what he had done.
Horace looked vexed, and haughtily observed, that he conceived his place
at Erlesmede was better calculated for a hawking party than most places in
England; and he had already announced his intentions to the ladies. The way
was open to him--but Beauclerc did not see why he should recede; the same
post might carry both their letters--both their orders!"

"How far did your order go, may I ask?" said Churchill.

"Carte blanche."

Churchill owned, with a sarcastic smile, that he was not prepared to go
quite so far. He was not quite so young as Granville; he, unfortunately,
had arrived at years of discretion--he said unfortunately; without ironical
reservation, he protested from the bottom of his heart he considered it as
a misfortune to have become that slow circumspect sort of creature which
looks before it leaps. Even though this might save him from the fate of the
man who was in Sicily, still he considered it as unfortunate to have lost
so much of his natural enthusiasm.

"Natural enthusiasm!" Beauclerc could not help repeating to himself, and he
went on his own way. It must be confessed, as even Beauclerc's best friends
allowed, counting among them Lady Davenant and his guardian, that never
was man of sense more subject to that kind of temporary derangement of the
reasoning powers which results from being what is called bit by a fancy;
he would then run on straight forward, without looking to the right or the
left, in pursuit of his object, great or small. That hawking establishment
now in view, completely shut out, for the moment, all other objects; "of
tercels and of lures he talks;" and before his imagination were hawking
scenes, and Helen with a hawk on her wrist, looking most graceful--a hawk
of his own training it should be. Then, how to train a hawk became the
question. While he was waiting for the answer to his carte blanche, nothing
better, or so good, could be done, as to make himself master of the whole
business, and for this purpose he found it essential to consult every book
on falconry that could be found in the library, and a great plague he
became to everybody in the course of this book-hunt.

"What a bore!" Warmsley might be excused for muttering deep and low between
the teeth. General Clarendon sighed and groaned. Lady Davenant bore and
forebore philosophically--it was for Beauclerc; and to her great philosophy
she gave all the credit of her indulgent partiality. Lady Cecilia,
half-annoyed yet ever good-natured, carried her complaisance so far as to
consult the catalogue and book-shelves sundry times in one hour; but
she was not famous for patience, and she soon resigned him to a better
friend--Helen, the most indefatigable of book-hunters. She had been well
trained to it by her uncle; had been used to it all her life; and really
took pleasure in the tiresome business. She assured Beauclerc it was not
the least trouble, and he thought she looked beautiful when she said so.
Whosoever of the male kind, young, and of ardent, not to say impatient,
spirit, has ever been aided and abetted in a sudden whim, assisted,
forwarded, above all, sympathised with, through all the changes and chances
of a reigning fancy, may possibly conceive how charming, and more charming
every hour, perhaps minute, Helen became in Beauclerc's eyes. But, all in
the way of friendship observe. Perfectly so--on her part, for she could not
have another idea, and it was for this reason she was so much at her ease.
He so understood it, and, thoroughly a gentleman, free from coxcombry, as
he was, and interpreting the language and manners of women with instinctive
delicacy, they went on delightfully. Churchill was on the watch, but he was
not alarmed; all was so undisguised and frank, that now he began to feel
assured that love on her side not only was, but ever would be, quite out of
the question.

Beauclerc was, indeed, in the present instance, really and truly intent
upon what he was about; and he pursued the History of Falconry, with all
its episodes, from the olden time of the Boke of St. Alban's down to the
last number of the Sporting Magazine, including Colonel Thornton's latest
flight, with the adventures of his red falcons, Miss M'Ghee and Lord
Townsend, and his red tercels, Messrs. Croc Franc and Craignon;--not
forgetting that never-to-be forgotten hawking of the Emperor
Arambombamboberus with Trebizonian eagles, on the authority of a manuscript
in the Grand Signior's library.

Beauclerc had such extraordinary dependence upon the sympathy of his
friends, that, when he was reading any thing that interested him, no matter
what they might be doing, he must have their admiration for what charmed
him. He brought his book to Lord Davenant, who was writing a letter."
Listen, oh listen! to this pathetic lament of the falconer,--'Hawks,
heretofore the pride of royalty, the insignia of nobility, the ambassador's
present, the priest's indulgence, companion of the knight, and nursling of
the gentle mistress, are now uncalled-for and neglected.'"

"Ha! very well that," said good-natured Lord Davenant, stopping his pen,
dipping again, dotting, and going on.

Then Beauclerc passaged to Lady Davenant, and, interrupting her in Scott's
Lives of the Novelists, on which she was deeply intent, "Allow me, my dear
Lady Davenant, though you say you are no great topographer, to show you
this, it is so curious; this royal falconer's proclamation--Henry the
Eighth's--to preserve his partridges, pheasants, and herons, from his
palace at Westminster to St. Giles's _in the Fields_, and from thence to
Islington, Hampstead, and Highgate, under penalty for every bird killed of
imprisonment, or whatever other punishment to his highness may seem meet."

Lady Davenant vouchsafed some suitable remark, consonant to expectation, on
the changes of times and places, and men and manners, and then motioned the
quarto away with which motion the quarto reluctantly complied; and then
following Lady Cecilia from window to window, as she _tended_ her flowers,
he would insist upon her hearing the table of precedence for hawks. She,
who never cared for any table of precedence in her life, even where the
higher animals were concerned, would only undertake to remember that the
merlin was a lady's hawk, and this only upon condition, that she should
have one to sit upon her wrist like the fair ladies in Wouvermans'
pictures. But further, as to Peregrine, Gerfalcon, or Gerkin, she would
hear nought of them, nor could she listen, though Granville earnestly
exhorted, to the several good reasons which make a falcon dislike her
master--

1st. If he speak rudely to her. 2nd. If he feed her carelessly.

Before he could get thirdly out, Lady Cecilia stopped him, declaring that
in all her life she never could listen to any thing that began with _first_
and _secondly_--reasons especially.

Horace, meanwhile, looked superior down, and thought with ineffable
contempt of Beauclerc's little skill in the arts of conversation, thus upon
unwilling ears to squander anecdotes which would have done him credit at
some London dinner.

"What I could have made of them! and may make of them yet," thought he;
"but some there are, who never can contrive, as other some cleverly do, to
ride their hobby-horses to good purpose and good effect;--now Beauclerc's
hobbies, I plainly see, will always run away with him headlong, cost him
dear certainly, and, may be, leave him in the mire at last."

What this fancy was to cost him, Beauclerc did not yet know. Two or three
passages in the Sporting Magazine had given some hints of the expense
of this "most delectable of all country contentments," which he had not
thought it necessary to read aloud. And he knew that the late Lord Orford,
an ardent pursuer of this "royal and noble" sport, had expended one hundred
a-year on every hawk he kept, each requiring a separate attendant, and
being moreover indulged in an excursion to the Continent every season
during moulting-time: but Beauclerc said to himself he had no notion of
humouring his hawks to that degree; they should, aristocratic birds though
they be, content themselves in England, and not pretend to "damn the
climate like a lord." And he flattered himself that he should be able to
pursue his fancy more cheaply than any of his predecessors; but as he had
promised his guardian that, after the indulgence granted him in the
Beltravers' cause, he would not call upon him for any more extraordinary
supplies, he resolved, in case the expense exceeded his ways and means, to
sell his hunters, and so indulge in a new love at the expense of an old
one.

The expected pleasure of the first day's hawking was now bright in his
imagination; the day was named, the weather promised well, and the German
cadgers and trainers who had been engaged, and who, along with the whole
establishment, were handed over to Beauclerc, were to come down to
Clarendon Park, and Beauclerc was very happy teaching the merlins to sit on
Lady Cecilia's and on Miss Stanley's wrist. Helen's voice was found to be
peculiarly agreeable to the hawk, who, as Beauclerc observed, loved, like
Lear, that excellent thing in woman, a voice ever soft, gentle, and low.

The ladies were to wear some pretty dresses for the occasion, and all was
gaiety and expectation; and Churchill was mortified when he saw how well
the thing was likely to take, that he was not to be the giver of the fete,
especially as he observed that Helen was particularly pleased--when, to his
inexpressible surprise, Granville Beauclerc came to him, a few days before
that appointed for the hawking-party, and said that he had changed his
mind, that he wished to get rid of the whole concern--that he should be
really obliged to Churchill if he would take his engagement off his hands.
The only reason he gave was, that the establishment would altogether be
more than he could afford, he found he had other calls for money, which
were incompatible with his fancy, and therefore he would give it up.

Churchill obliged him most willingly by taking the whole upon himself,
and he managed so to do in a very ingenious way, without incurring any
preposterous expense. He was acquainted with a set of rich, fashionable
young men, who had taken a sporting lodge in a neighbouring county, who
desired no better than to accede to the terms proposed, and to distinguish
themselves by giving a fete out of the common line, while Churchill, who
understood, like a true man of the world, the worldly art of bargaining,
contrived, with off-hand gentleman-like jockeying, to have every point
settled to his own convenience, and he was to be the giver of the
entertainment to the ladies at Clarendon Park. When this change in affairs
was announced, Lady Cecilia, the general, Lady Davenant, and Helen, were
all, in various degrees, surprised, and each tried to guess what could have
been the cause of Beauclerc's sudden relinquishment of his purpose. He
was--very extraordinary for him--impenetrable: he adhered to the words
"I found I could not afford it." His guardian could not believe in this
wonderful prudence, and was almost certain "there must be some imprudence
at the bottom of it all."

Granville neither admitted nor repelled that accusation. Lady Cecilia
worked away with perpetual little strokes, hoping to strike out the truth,
but, as she said, you might as well have worked at an old flint. Nothing
was elicited from him, even by Lady Davenant; nor did the collision of all
their opinions throw any light upon the matter.

Meanwhile the day for the hawking-party arrived. Churchill gave the fete,
and Beauclerc, as one of the guests, attended and enjoyed it without
the least appearance even of disappointment; and, so far from envying
Churchill, he assisted in remedying any little defects, and did all he
could to make the whole go off well.

The party assembled on a rising ground; a flag was displayed to give notice
of the intended sport; the falconers appeared, picturesque figures in their
green jackets and their long gloves, and their caps plumed with herons'
feathers--some with the birds on their wrists--one with the frame over his
shoulder upon which to set the hawk. _Set_, did we say?--no: "_cast_ your
hawk on the perch" is, Beauclerc observed, the correct term; for, as Horace
sarcastically remarked, Mr. Beauclerc might be detected as a novice in the
art by his over-exactness; his too correct, too attic, pronunciation of the
hawking language. But Granville readily and gaily bore all this ridicule
and raillery, sure that it would neither stick nor stain, enjoying with all
his heart the amusement of the scene--the assembled ladies, the attendant
cavaliers; the hood-winked hawks, the ringing of their brass bells; the
falconers anxiously watching the clouds for the first appearance of the
bird; their skill in loosening the hoods, as, having but one hand at
liberty, they used their teeth to untie the string:----And now the hoods
are off, and the hawks let fly.

They were to fly many castes of hawks this day; the first flight was after
a curlew; and the riding was so hard, so dangerous, from the broken nature
of the ground, that the ladies gave it up, and were contented to view the
sport from the eminence where they remained.

And now there was a question to be decided among the sportsmen as to
the comparative rate of riding at a fox chase, and in "the short, but
terrifically hard gallop, with the eyes raised to the clouds, which is
necessary for the full enjoyment of hawking;" and then the gentlemen,
returning, gathered round the ladies, and the settling the point, watches
in hand, and bets depending, added to the interest of flight the first, and
Churchill, master of the revels, was in the highest spirits.

But presently the sky was overcast, the morning lowered, the wind rose, and
changed was Churchill's brow; there is no such thing as hawking against the
wind--that capricious wind!

"Curse the wind!" cried Churchill; "and confusion seize the fellow who says
there is to be no more hawking to-day!"

The chief falconer, however, was a phlegmatic German, and proper-behaved,
as good falconers should be, who, as "Old Tristram's booke" has it, even
if a bird should be lost, he should never swear, and only say, "_Dieu soit
loue_," and "remember that the mother of hawks is not dead."

But Horace, in the face of reason and in defiance of his German
counsellors, insisted upon letting fly the hawks in this high wind; and it
so fell out that, in the first place, all the terms he used in his haste
and spleen were wrong; and in the next, that the quarry taking down the
wind, the horsemen could not keep up with the hawks: the falconers in great
alarm, called to them by the names they gave them--"Miss Didlington," "Lord
Berners." "Ha! Miss Didlington's off;--off with Blucher, and Lady Kirby,
and Lord Berners, and all of 'em after her." Miss Didlington flew fast
and far, and further still, till she and all the rest were fairly out of
sight--lost, lost, lost!

"And as fine a caste of hawks they were as ever came from Germany!"--the
falconers were in despair, and Churchill saw that the fault was his; and
it looked so like cockney sportsmanship! If Horace had been in a towering
rage, it would have been well enough; but he only grew pettish, snappish,
waspish: now none of those words ending in _ish_ become a gentleman; ladies
always think so, and Lady Cecilia now thought so, and Helen thought so too,
and Churchill saw it, and he grew pale instead of red, and that looks ugly
in an angry man.

But Beauclerc excused him when he was out of hearing; and when others said
he had been cross, and crosser than became the giver of a gala, Beauclerc
pleaded well for him, that falconry has ever been known to be "an extreme
stirrer-up of the passions, being subject to mischances infinite."

However, a cold and hot collation under the trees for some, and under a
tent for others, set all to rights for the present. Champagne sparkled, and
Horace pledged and was pledged, and all were gay; even the Germans at their
own table, after their own fashion, with their Rhenish and their foaming
ale, contrived to drown the recollection of the sad adventure of the truant
hawks.

And when all were refreshed and renewed in mind and body, to the hawking
they went again. For now that

  "The wind was laid, and all their fears asleep,"

there was to be a battle between heron and hawk, one of the finest sights
that can be in all falconry.

"Look! look! Miss Stanley," cried Granville; "look! follow that high-flown
hawk--that black speck in the clouds. Now! now! right over the heron; and
now she will _canceleer_--turn on her wing, Miss Stanley, as she comes
down, whirl round, and balance herself--_chanceler_. Now! now look!
cancelleering gloriously!"

But Helen at this instant recollected what Captain Warmsley had said of the
fresh-killed pigeon, which the falconer in the nick of time is to lay upon
the heron's back; and now, even as the cancelleering was going on--three
times most beautifully, Helen saw only the dove, the white dove, which that
black-hearted German held, his great hand round the throat, just raised to
wring it. "Oh, Beauclerc, save it, save it!" cried Lady Cecilia and Helen
at once.

Beauclerc sprang forward, and, had it been a tiger instead of a dove, would
have done the same no doubt at that moment; the dove was saved, and the
heron killed. If Helen was pleased, so was not the chief falconer, nor any
of the falconers, the whole German council in combustion! and Horace
Churchill deeming it "Rather extraordinary that any gentleman should so
interfere with other gentlemen's hawks."

Lady Cecilia stepped between, and never stepped in vain. She drew a ring
from her finger--a seal; it was the seal of peace--no great value--but
a well-cut bird--a bird for the chief falconer--a guinea-hen, with its
appropriate cry, its polite motto, "Come back, come back;" and she gave it
as a pledge that the ladies would come back another day, and see another
hawking; and the gentlemen were pleased, and the aggrieved attendant
falconers pacified by a promise of another heron from the heronry at
Clarendon Park; and the clouded faces brightened, and "she smoothed the
raven down of darkness till it smiled," whatever that may mean; but, as
Milton said it, it must be sense as well as sound.

At all events, in plain prose, be it understood that every body was
satisfied, even Mr. Churchill; for Beauclerc had repaired for him, just in
time, an error which would have been a blot on his gallantry of the day. He
had forgotten to have some of the pretty grey hairs plucked from the heron,
to give to the ladies to ornament their bonnets, but Beauclerc had secured
them for him, and also two or three of those much-valued, smooth, black
feathers, from the head of the bird, which are so much prized that a plume
of them is often set with pearls and diamonds. Horace presented these most
gracefully to Lady Cecilia and Helen, and was charmed with Lady Cecilia's
parting compliments, which finished with the words "Quite chivalrous."

And so, after all the changes and chances of weather, wind, and humour, all
ended well, and no one rued the hawking of this day.




CHAPTER II.


"But all this time," said Lady Davenant, "you have not told me whether you
have any of you found out what changed Granville's mind about this falconry
scheme--why he so suddenly gave up the whole to Mr. Churchill. Such a
point-blank weathercock turn of fancy in most young men would no more
surprise me than the changes of those clouds in the sky, now shaped and now
unshaped by the driving wind; but in Granville Beauclerc there is always
some reason for apparent caprice, and the reason is often so ingeniously
wrong that it amuses me to hear it; and even as a study in human nature, I
am curious to know the simple fact."

But no one could tell the simple fact, no one could guess his reason, and
from him it never would have been known--never could have been found out,
but from a mistake--from a letter of thanks coming to a wrong person.

One morning, when Helen was sitting in Lady Davenant's room with her, Lord
Davenant came in, reading a letter, like one walking in his sleep.

"What is all this, my dear? Can you explain it to me? Some good action of
yours, I suppose, for which I am to be thanked."

Lady Davenant looked at the letter. She had nothing to do with the
matter, she said; but, on second thoughts, exclaimed, "This is Granville
Beauclerc's doing, I am clear!"

The letter was from Count Polianski, one of the poor banished Poles; now
poor, but who had been formerly master of a property estimated at about one
hundred and sixty-five thousand _available individuals_. In attempting
to increase the happiness and secure the liberty of these available
individuals, the count had lost every thing, and had been banished from his
country--a man of high feeling as well as talents, and who had done all he
could for that unhappy country, torn to pieces by demagogues from within
and tyrants from without.

Lady Davenant now recollected that Beauclerc had learned from her all this,
and had heard her regretting that the circumstances in which Lord Davenant
was placed at this moment, prevented the possibility of his affording this
poor count assistance for numbers of his suffering fellow-countrymen who
had been banished along with him, and who were now in London in the utmost
distress. Lady Davenant remembered that she had been speaking to Granville
on this subject the very day that he had abandoned his falconry project.
"Now I understand it all," said she; "and it is like all I know and all
I have hoped of him. These hundreds a-year which he has settled on these
wretched exiles, are rather better disposed of in a noble national cause,
than in pampering one set of birds that they may fly at another set."

"And yet this is done," said Lord Davenant, "by one of the much reviled,
high-bred English gentlemen--among whom, let the much reviling, low-bred
English democrats say what they will, we find every day instances of
subscription for public purposes from private benevolence, in a spirit of
princely charity to be found only in our own dear England--England with all
her faults.'"

"But this was a less ordinary sort of generosity of Granville's," said Lady
Davenant,--"the giving up a new pleasure, a new whim with all its gloss
fresh upon it, full and bright in his eye."

"True," said Lord Davenant; "I never saw a strong-pulling fancy better
thrown upon its haunches."

The white dove, whose life Helen had saved, was brought home by Beauclerc,
and was offered to her and accepted. Whether she had done a good or a bad
action, by thus saving the life of a pigeon at the expense of a heron, may
be doubted, and will be decided according to the several tastes of ladies
and gentlemen for herons or doves. As Lady Davenant remarked, Helen's
humanity (or dove-anity, as Churchill called it,) was of that equivocal
sort which is ready to destroy one creature to save another which may
happen to be a greater favourite.

Be this as it may, the favourite had a friend upon the present occasion,
and no less a friend than General Clarendon, who presented it with a marble
basin, such as doves should drink out of, by right of long prescription.

The general feared, he said, "that this vase might be a little too
deep--dangerously perhaps----."

But Helen thought nothing could be altogether more perfect in taste and in
kindness--approving Beauclerc's kindness too--a remembrance of a day most
agreeably spent. Churchill, to whom she looked, as she said the last words,
with all becoming politeness, bowed and accepted the compliment, but with
a reserve of jealousy on the brow; and as he looked again at the dove,
caressing and caressed, and then at the classic vase--he stood vexed, and
to himself he said,--

"So this is the end of all my pains--hawking and all 'quite chivalrous!'
Beauclerc carries off the honours and pleasures of the day, and his present
and his dove are to be all in all. Yet still," continued he to himself in
more consolatory thought--"she is so open in her very love for the bird,
that it is plain she has not yet any love for the man. She would
be somewhat more afraid to show it, delicate as she is. It is only
friendship--honest friendship, on her side; and if her affections be not
engaged somewhere else--she may be mine: if--if I please--if--I can bring
myself fairly to propose--we shall see--I shall think of it."

And now he began to think of it seriously.--Miss Stanley's indifference to
him, and the unusual difficulty which he found in making any impression,
stimulated him in an extraordinary degree. Helen now appeared to him even
more beautiful than he had at first thought her--"Those eyes that fix so
softly," thought he, "those dark eyelashes--that blush coming and going so
beautifully--and there is a timid grace in all her motions, with that
fine figure too--and that high-bred turn of the neck!--altogether she is
charming! and she will be thought so!--she must be mine!"

She would do credit to his taste; he thought she would, when she had a
little more _usage du monde_, do the honours of his house well; and it
would be delightful to train her!--If he could but engage her affections,
before she had seen more of the world, she might really love him for his
own sake--and Churchill wished to be really loved, if possible, for his own
sake; but of the reality of modern love he justly doubted, especially for
a man of his fortune and his age; yet, with Helen's youth and innocence
he began to think he had some chance of disinterested attachment, and he
determined to bring out for her the higher powers of his mind--the better
parts of his character.

One day Lady Davenant had been speaking of London conversation. "So
brilliant," said she, "so short-lived, as my friend Lady Emmeline K----
once said, 'London wit is like gas, which lights at a touch, and at a touch
can be extinguished;'" and Lady Davenant concluded with a compliment to
him who was known to have this "_touch and go_" of good conversation to
perfection.

Mr. Churchill bowed to the compliment, but afterwards sighed, and it seemed
an honest sigh, from the bottom of his heart. Only Lady Davenant and Helen
were in the room, and turning to Lady Davenant he said,

"If I have it, I have paid dearly for it, more than it is worth, much
too dearly, by the sacrifice of higher powers; I might have been a very
different person from what I am."

Helen's attention was instantly fixed; but Lady Davenant suspected he was
now only talking for effect. He saw what she thought--it was partly true,
but not quite. He felt what he said at the moment; and besides, there is
always a sincere pleasure in speaking of one's self when one can do it
without exposing one's self to ridicule, and with a chance of obtaining
real sympathy.

"It was my misfortune," he said, "to be spoiled, even in childhood, by my
mother."

As he pronounced the word "mother," either his own heart or Helen's eyes
made him pause with a look of respectful tenderness. It was cruel of a son
to blame the fond indulgence of a mother; but the fact was, she brought
him too forward early as a clever child, fed him too much with that sweet
dangerous fostering dew of praise. The child--the man--must suffer for it
afterwards.

"True, very true," said Lady Davenant; "I quite agree with you."

"I could do nothing without flattery," continued he, pursuing the line of
confession which he saw had fixed Lady Davenant's attention favourably.
"Unluckily, I came too early into possession of a large fortune, and into
the London world, and I lapped the stream of prosperity as I ran, and it
was sweet with flattery, intoxicating, and I knew it, and yet could
not forbear it. Then in a London life every thing is too
stimulating--over-exciting. If there are great advantages to men of science
and literature in museums and public libraries, the more than _Avicenna_
advantages of having books come at will, and ministering spirits in waiting
on all your pursuits--there is too much of every thing except time, and too
little of that. The treasures are within our reach, but we cannot clutch;
we have, but we cannot hold. We have neither leisure to be good, nor to be
great: who can think of living for posterity, when he can scarcely live for
the day? and sufficient for the day are never the hours thereof. From want
of time, and from the immense quantity that nevertheless must be known,
comes the necessity, the unavoidable necessity of being superficial."

"Why should it be unavoidable necessity?" asked Lady Davenant.

"Because _should_ waits upon _must_, in London always, if not elsewhere,"
said Churchill.

"A conversation answer," replied Lady Davenant.

"Yes, I allow it; it is even so, just so, and to such tricks, such playing
upon words, do the bad habits of London conversation lead;" and Lady
Davenant wondered at the courage of his candour, as he went on to speak of
the petty jealousies, the paltry envy, the miserable selfish susceptibility
generated by the daily competition of London society. Such dissensions,
such squabbles--an ignoble but appropriate word--such deplorable, such
scandalous squabbles among literary, and even among scientific men.
"And who," continued he, "who can hope to escape in such a tainted
atmosphere--an atmosphere overloaded with life, peopled with myriads of
little buzzing stinging vanities! It really requires the strength of
Hercules, mind and body, to go through our labours, fashionable, political,
_bel esprit_, altogether too much for mortal. In parliament, in politics,
in the tug of war you see how the strongest minds fail, come to
untimely----"

"Do not touch upon that subject," cried Lady Davenant, suddenly agitated.
Then, commanding herself, she calmly added--"As you are not now, I think,
in parliament, it cannot affect you. What were you saying?--your health of
mind and body, I think you said, you were sensible had been hurt by----"

"These straining, incessant competitions have hurt me. My health suffered
first, then my temper. It was originally good, now, as you have seen, I
am afraid"--glancing at Helen, who quickly looked down, "I am afraid I am
irritable."

There was an awkward silence. Helen thought it was for Lady Davenant to
speak; but Lady Davenant did not contradict Mr. Churchill. Now, the not
contradicting a person who is abusing himself, is one of the most heinous
offences to self-love that can be committed; and it often provokes false
candour to pull off the mask and throw it in your face; but either Mr.
Horace Churchill's candour was true, or it was so well guarded at the
moment that no such catastrophe occurred.

"Worse than this bad effect on my temper!" continued he, "I feel that my
whole mind has been deteriorated--my ambition dwindled to the shortest
span--my thoughts contracted to the narrow view of mere effect; what would
please at the dinner-table or at the clubs--what will be thought of me
by this literary coterie, or in that fashionable boudoir. And for this
_reputation de salon_ I have sacrificed all hope of other reputation,
all power of obtaining it, all hope of "----(here he added a few words,
murmured down to Lady Davenant's embroidery frame, yet still in such a tone
that Helen could not help thinking he meant she should hear)--"If I had a
heart such as--" he paused, and, as if struck with some agonising thought,
he sighed deeply, and then added--"but I have not a heart worth such
acceptance, or I would make the offer."

Helen was not sure what these words meant, but she now pitied him, and she
admired his candour, which she thought was so far above the petty sort
of character he had at first done himself the injustice to seem, and she
seized the first opportunity to tell Beauclerc all Mr. Churchill had said
to Lady Davenant and to her, and of the impression it had made upon them
both. Beauclerc had often discussed Mr. Churchill's character with her,
but she was disappointed when she saw that what she told made no agreeable
impression on Beauclerc: at first he stood quite silent, and when she asked
what he thought, he said--"It's all very fine, very clever."

"But it is all true," said Helen, "And I admire Mr. Churchill's knowing the
truth so well and telling it so candidly."

"Every thing Mr. Churchill has said may be true--and yet I think the truth
is not in him."

"You are not usually so suspicious," said Helen. "If you had heard Mr.
Churchill's voice and emphasis, and seen his look and manner at the time, I
think you could not have doubted him."

The more eager she grew, the colder Mr. Beauclerc became. "Look and manner,
and voice and emphasis," said he, "make a great impression, I know, on
ladies."

"But what is your reason, Mr. Beauclerc, for disbelief? I have as yet only
heard that you believe every thing that Mr. Churchill said was true,
and yet that you do not believe in his truth," said Helen, in a tone of
raillery.

And many a time before had Beauclerc been the first to laugh when one
of his own paradoxes stared him in the face; but now he was more out of
countenance than amused, and he looked seriously about for reasons to
reconcile his seeming self-contradiction.

"In the first place, all those allusions and those metaphorical
expressions, which you have so wonderfully well remembered, and which no
doubt were worth remembering, all those do not give me the idea of a man
who was really feeling in earnest, and speaking the plain truth about
faults, for which, if he felt at all, he must be too much ashamed to talk
in such a grand style; and to talk of them at all, except to most intimate
friends, seems so unnatural, and quite out of character in a man who had
expressed such horror of egotists, and who is so excessively circumspect in
general."

"Yes, but Mr. Churchill's forgetting all his little habits of
circumspection, and all fear of ridicule, is the best proof of his being
quite in earnest--that all he said was from his heart."

"I doubt whether he has any heart," said Beauclerc.

"Poor man, he said----" Helen began, and then recollecting the words, 'or
I would make the offer,' she stopped short, afraid of the construction they
might bear, and then, ashamed of her fear, she coloured deeply.

"Poor man, he said----" repeated Beauclerc, fixing his eyes upon her,
"What did he say, may I ask?"

"No,--" said Helen, "I am not sure that I distinctly heard or understood
Mr. Churchill."

"Oh, if there was any mystery!" Beauclerc begged pardon.

And he went away very quickly. He did not touch upon the subject again, but
Helen saw that he never forgot it; and, by few words which she heard him
say to Lady Davenant about his dislike to half-confidences, she knew he
was displeased, and she thought he was wrong. She began to fear that his
mistrust of Churchill arose from envy at his superior success in society;
and, though she was anxious to preserve her newly-acquired good opinion of
Churchill's candour, she did not like to lose her esteem for Beauclerc's
generosity. Was it possible that he could be seriously hurt at the
readiness with which Mr. Churchill availed himself of any idea which
Beauclerc threw out, and which he dressed up, and passed as his own?
Perhaps this might be what he meant by "the truth is not in him." She
remembered one day when she sat between him and Beauclerc, and when he did
not seem to pay the least attention to what Mr. Beauclerc was saying to
her, yet fully occupied as he had apparently been in talking for the
company in general, he had through all heard Granville telling the Chinese
fable of the "Man in the Moon, whose business it is to knit together
with an invisible silken cord those who are predestined for each other."
Presently, before the dessert was over, Helen found the "Chinese Man in the
Moon," whom she thought she had all to herself, figuring at the other end
of the table, and received with great applause. And was it possible that
Beauclerc, with his abundant springs of genius, could grudge a drop
thus stolen from him? but without any envy in the case, he was right in
considering such theft, however petty, as a theft, and right in despising
the meanness of the thief. Such meanness was strangely incompatible with
Mr. Churchill's frank confession of his own faults. Could that confession
be only for effect?

Her admiration had been sometimes excited by a particular happiness of
thought, beauty of expression, or melody of language in Mr. Churchill's
conversation. Once Beauclerc had been speaking with enthusiasm of modern
Greece, and his hopes that she might recover her ancient character; and
Mr. Churchill, as if admiring the enthusiasm, yet tempering it with better
judgment, smiled, paused, and answered.

"But Greece is a dangerous field for a political speculator; the
imagination produces an illusion resembling the beautiful appearances which
are sometimes exhibited in the Sicilian straits; the reflected images of
ancient Grecian glory pass in a rapid succession before the mental eye;
and, delighted with the captivating forms of greatness and splendour, we
forget for a moment that the scene is in reality a naked waste."

Some people say they can distinguish between a written and a spoken style,
but this depends a good deal on the art of the speaker. Churchill could
give a colloquial tone to a ready-written sentence, and could speak it
with an off-hand grace, a carelessness which defied all suspicion of
preparation; and the look, and pause, and precipitation--each and all came
in aid of the actor's power of perfecting the illusion. If you had heard
and seen him, you would have believed that, in speaking this passage, the
thought of the _Fata Morgana_ rose in his mind at the instant, and that,
seeing it pleased you, and pleased with it himself, encouraged by your
look of intelligence, and borne along by your sympathy, the eloquent
man followed his own idea with a happiness more than care, admirable in
conversation. A few days afterwards, Helen was very much surprised to find
her admired sentence word for word in a book, from which Churchill's card
fell as she opened it.

Persons without a name Horace treated as barbarians who did not know the
value of their gold; and he seemed to think that, if they chanced to
possess rings and jewels, they might be plucked from them without remorse,
and converted to better use by some lucky civilised adventurer. Yet in his
most successful piracies he was always haunted by the fear of discovery,
and he especially dreaded the acute perception of Lady Davenant; he thought
she suspected his arts of appropriation, and he took the first convenient
opportunity of sounding her opinion on this point.

"How I enjoy," said he to Lady Cecilia "telling a good story to you, for
you never ask if it is a fact. Now, in a good story, no one sticks to
absolute fact; there must be some little embellishment. No one would send
his own or his friend's story into the world without 'putting a hat on its
head, and a stick into its hand,'" Churchill triumphantly quoted; this time
he did not steal.

"But," said Lady Davenant, "I find that even the pleasure I have in mere
characteristic or humorous narration is heightened by my dependence on the
truth--the character for truth--of the narrator."

Not only Horace Churchill, but almost every body present, except Helen,
confessed that they could not agree with her. The character for truth
of the story-teller had nothing to do with his story, unless it was
_historique_, or that he was to swear to it.

"And even if it were _historique_," cried Horace, buoyed up at the moment
by the tide in his favour, and floating out farther than was prudent--"and
even if it were _historique_, how much pleasanter is graceful fiction than
grim, rigid truth; and how much more amusing in my humble opinion!"

"Now," said Lady Davenant, "for instance, this book I am reading--(it was
Dumont's 'Memoires de Mirabeau')--this book which I am reading, gives
me infinitely increased pleasure, from my certain knowledge, my perfect
conviction of the truth of the author. The self-evident nature of some of
the facts would support themselves, you may say, in some instances; but my
perceiving the scrupulous care he takes to say no more than what he knows
to be true, my perfect reliance on the relater's private character for
integrity, gives a zest to every anecdote he tells--a specific weight to
every word of conversation which he repeats--appropriate value to every
trait of wit or humour characteristic of the person he describes. Without
such belief, the characters would not have to me, as they now have, all
the power, and charm, and life, of nature and reality. They are all now
valuable as records of individual varieties that have positively so
existed. While the most brilliant writer could, by fiction, have produced
an effect, valuable only as representing the general average of human
nature, but adding nothing to our positive knowledge, to the data from
which we can reason in future."

Churchill understood Lady Davenant too well to stand quite unembarrassed as
he listened; and when she went on to say how differently she should have
felt in reading these memoirs if they had been written by Mirabeau himself;
with all his brilliancy, all his talents, how inferior would have been her
enjoyment as well as instruction! his shrinking conscience told him how
this might all be applied to himself; yet, strange to say, though somewhat
abashed, he was nevertheless flattered by the idea of a parallel between
himself and Mirabeau. To _Mirabeauder_ was no easy task; it was a certain
road to notoriety, if not to honest fame.

But even in the better parts of his character, his liberality in money
matters, his good-natured patronage of rising genius, the meanness of his
mind broke out. There was a certain young poetess whom he had encouraged;
she happened to be sister to Mr. Mapletofft, Lord Davenant's secretary, and
she had spoken with enthusiastic gratitude of Mr. Churchill's kindness. She
was going to publish a volume of Sonnets under Mr. Churchill's patronage,
and, as she happened to be now at some country town in the neighbourhood,
he requested Lady Cecilia to allow him to introduce this young authoress to
her. She was invited for a few days to Clarendon Park, and Mr. Churchill
was zealous to procure subscriptions for her, and eager to lend the aid of
his fashion and his literary reputation to bring forward the merits of her
book. "Indeed," he whispered, "he had given her some little help in the
composition," and all went well till, in an evil hour, Helen praised one
of the sonnets rather too much--more, he thought, than she had praised
another, which was his own. His jealousy wakened--he began to criticise his
protegee's poetry. Helen defended her admiration, and reminded him that he
had himself recommended these lines to her notice.

"Well!--yes--I did say the best I could for the whole thing, and for her it
is surprising--that is, I am anxious the publication should take. But if we
come to compare--you know this cannot stand certain comparisons that might
be made. Miss Stanley's own taste and judgment must perceive--when we talk
of genius--that is quite out of the question, you know."

Horace was so perplexed between his philanthropy and his jealousy, his
desire to show the one and his incapability of concealing the other, that
he became unintelligible; and Helen laughed, and told him that she could
not now understand what his opinion really was. She was quite ready to
agree with him, she said, if he would but agree with himself: this made him
disagree still more with himself and unluckily with his better self, his
benevolence quite gave way before his jealousy and ill-humour, and he
vented it upon the book; and, instead of prophecies of its success, he
now groaned over "sad careless lines,"--"passages that lead to
nothing,"--"similes that will not hold when you come to examine them."

Helen pointed out in the dedication a pretty, a happy thought.

Horace smiled, and confessed that was his own.

What! in the dedication to himself?--and in the blindness of his vanity he
did not immediately see the absurdity.

The more he felt himself in the wrong, of course the more angry he grew,
and it finished by his renouncing the dedication altogether, declaring he
would have none of it. The book and the lady might find a better patron.
There are things which no man of real generosity could say or do, or think,
put him in ever so great a passion. He would not be harsh to an inferior--a
woman--a protegee on whom he had conferred obligations; but Mr. Churchill
was harsh--he showed neither generosity nor feeling; and Helen's good
opinion of him sank to rise no more.

Of this, however, he had not enough of the sympathy or penetration of
feeling to be aware.




CHAPTER III.


The party now at Clarendon Park consisted chiefly of young people. Among
them were two cousins of Lady Cecilia's, whom Helen had known at Cecilhurst
before they went abroad, while she was still almost a child. Lady Katrine
Hawksby, the elder, was several years older than Cecilia. When Helen last
saw her, she was tolerably well-looking, very fashionable, and remarkable
for high spirits, with a love for _quizzing_, and for all that is vulgarly
called _fun_, and a talent for ridicule, which she indulged at everybody's
expense. She had always amused Cecilia, who thought her more diverting than
really ill-natured; but Helen thought her more ill-natured than diverting,
never liked her, and had her own private reasons for thinking that she was
no good friend to Cecilia: but now, in consequence either of the wear and
tear of London life, or of a disappointment in love or matrimony, she had
lost the fresh plumpness of youth; and gone too was that spirit of mirth,
if not of good humour, which used to enliven her countenance. Thin and
sallow, the sharp features remained, and the sarcastic without the arch
expression; still she had a very fashionable air. Her pretensions to youth,
as her dress showed, were not gone; and her hope of matrimony, though
declining, not set. Her many-years-younger sister, Louisa, now Lady
Castlefort, was beautiful. As a girl, she had been the most sentimental,
refined, delicate creature conceivable; always talking poetry--and so
romantic--with such a soft, sweet, die-away voice--lips apart--and such
fine eyes, that could so ecstatically turn up to heaven, or be so cast
down, charmingly fixed in contemplation:--and now she is married, just the
same. There she is, established in the library at Clarendon Park, with the
most sentimental fashionable novel of the day, beautifully bound, on the
little rose-wood table beside her, and a manuscript poem, a great secret,
"Love's Last Sigh," in her bag with her smelling-bottle and embroidered
handkerchief; and on that beautiful arm she leaned so gracefully, with her
soft languishing expression; so perfectly dressed too--handsomer than ever.

Helen was curious to know what sort of man Lady Louisa had married, for she
recollected that no hero of any novel that ever was read, or talked of,
came up to her idea of what a hero ought to be, of what a man must be, whom
she could ever think of loving. Cecilia told Helen that she had seen Lord
Castlefort, but that he was not Lord Castlefort, or likely to be Lord
Castlefort, at that time; and she bade her guess, among all she could
recollect having ever seen at Cecilhurst, who the man of Louisa's choice
could be. Lady Katrine, with infinite forbearance, smiled, and gave no
hint, while Helen guessed and guessed in vain. She was astonished when she
saw him come into the room. He was a little deformed man, for whom Lady
Louisa had always expressed to her companions a peculiar abhorrence. He had
that look of conceit which unfortunately sometimes accompanies personal
deformity, and which disgusts even Pity's self. Lord Castlefort was said
to have declared himself made for love and fighting! Helen remembered
that kind-hearted Cecilia had often remonstrated for humanity's sake, and
stopped the quizzing which used to go on in their private coteries, when
the satirical elder sister would have it that _le petit bossu_ was in love
with Louisa.

But what _could_ make her marry him? Was there anything within to make
amends for the exterior? Nothing--nothing that could "rid him of the lump
behind." But superior to the metamorphoses of love, or of fairy tale,
are the metamorphoses of fortune. Fortune had suddenly advanced him to
uncounted thousands and a title, and no longer _le petit bossu_, Lord
Castlefort obtained the fair hand--the very fair hand of Lady Louisa
Hawksby, _plus belle que fee!_

Still Helen could not believe that Louisa had married him voluntarily; but
Lady Cecilia assured her that it was voluntarily, quite voluntarily. "You
could not have so doubted had you seen the _trousseau_ and the _corbeille_,
for you know, '_Le present fait oublier le futur_.'"

Helen could scarcely smile.

"But Louisa had feeling--really some," continued Lady Cecilia; "but she
could not afford to follow it. She had got into such debt, I really do not
know what she would have done if Lord Castlefort had not proposed; but she
has some little heart, and I could tell you a secret; but no, I will leave
you the pleasure of finding it out."

"It will be no pleasure to me," said Helen.

"I never saw anybody so out of spirits," cried Lady Cecilia, laughing,
"at another's unfortunate marriage, which all the time she thinks very
fortunate. She is quite happy, and even Katrine does not laugh at him any
longer, it is to be supposed; it is no laughing matter now."

"No indeed," said Helen.

"Nor a crying matter either," said Cecilia. "Do not look shocked at me, my
dear, I did not do it; but so many do, and I have seen it so often, that
I cannot wonder with such a foolish face of blame--I do believe, my dear
Helen, that you are envious because Louisa is married before you! for
shame, my love! Envy is a naughty passion, you know our Madame Bonne used
to say; but here's mamma, now talk to her about Louisa Castlefort, pray."

Lady Davenant took the matter with great coolness, was neither shocked nor
surprised at this match, she had known so many worse; Lord Castlefort, as
well as she recollected, was easy enough to live with. "And after all,"
said she, "it is better than what we see every day, the fairest of the
fair knowingly, willingly giving themselves to the most profligate of the
profligate, In short, the market is so overstocked with accomplished young
ladies on the one hand, and on the other, men find wives and establishments
so expensive, clubs so cheap and so much more luxurious than any home,
liberty not only so sweet but so fashionable, that their policy, their
maxim is, 'Marry not at all, or if marriage be ultimately necessary to pay
debts and leave heirs to good names, marry as late as possible;' and thus
the two parties with their opposite interests stand at bay, or try to
outwit or outbargain each other. And if you wish for the moral of the whole
affair, here it is from the vulgar nursery-maids, with their broad sense
and bad English, and the good or bad French of the governess, to the
elegant inuendo of the drawing-room, all is working to the same effect:
dancing-masters, music-masters, and all the tribe, what is it all for, but
to prepare young ladies for the grand event; and to raise in them, besides
the natural, a factitious, an abstract idea of good in being married!
Every girl in these days is early impressed with the idea that she must be
married, that she cannot be happy unmarried. Here is an example of what I
meant the other day by strength of mind; it requires some strength of mind
to be superior to such a foolish, vain, and vulgar belief."

"It will require no great strength of mind in me," said Helen, "for I
really never have formed such notions. They never were early put into my
head; my uncle always said a woman might be very happy unmarried. I do not
think I shall ever be seized with a terror of dying an old maid."

"You are not come to the time yet, my dear," said Lady Davenant smiling.
"Look at Lady Katrine; strength of mind on this one subject would have
saved her from being a prey to envy, and jealousy, and all the vulture
passions of the mind.

"In the old French _regime_," continued Lady Davenant, "the young women
were at least married safely out of their convents; but our young ladies,
with their heads full of high-flown poetry and sentimental novels, are
taken out into the world before marriage, expected to see and not to
choose, shown the most agreeable, and expected, doomed to marry the most
odious. But, in all these marriages for establishment, the wives who have
least feeling are not only likely to be the happiest, but also most likely
to conduct themselves well. In the first place they do not begin with
falsehood. If they have no hearts, they cannot pretend to give any to
the husband, and that is better than having given them to somebody else.
Husband and wife, in this case, clearly understand the terms of agreement,
expect, imagine no more than they have, and jog-trot they go on together to
the end of life very comfortably."

"Comfortably!" exclaimed Helen, "it must be most miserable."

"Not most miserable, Helen," said Lady Davenant, "keep your pity for
others; keep your sighs for those who need them--for the heart which no
longer dares to utter a sigh for itself, the faint heart that dares to
love, but dares not abide by its choice. Such infatuated creatures, with
the roots of feeling left aching within them, must take what opiates they
can find; and in after-life, through all their married existence, their
prayer must be for indifference, and thankful may they be if that prayer is
granted."

These words recurred to Helen that evening, when Lady Castlefort sang some
tender and passionate airs; played on the harp with a true Saint Cecilia
air and attitude; and at last, with charming voice and touching expression,
sung her favourite--"Too late for redress."

Both Mr. Churchill and Beauclerc were among the group of gentlemen;
neither was a stranger to her. Mr. Churchill admired and applauded as a
connoisseur. Beauclerc listened in silence. Mr. Churchill entreated for
more--more--and named several of his favourite Italian airs. Her ladyship
really could not. But the slightest indication of a wish from Beauclerc,
was, without turning towards him, heard and attended to, as her sister
failed not to remark and to make others remark.

Seizing a convenient pause while Mr. Churchill was searching for some
master-piece, Lady Katrine congratulated her sister on having recovered her
voice, and declared that she had never heard her play or sing since she was
married till tonight.

"You may consider it as a very particular compliment, I assure you,"
continued she, addressing herself so particularly to Mr. Beauclerc that he
could not help being a little out of countenance,--"I have so begged and
prayed, but she was never in voice or humour, or heart, or something.
Yesterday, even Castlefort was almost on his knees for a song,--were not
you, Lord Castlefort?"

Lord Castlefort pinched his pointed chin, and casting up an angry look,
replied in a dissonant voice,--"I do not remember!"

"_Tout voir, tout entendre, tout oublier_," whispered Lady Katrine to
Mr. Churchill, as she stooped to assist him in the search for a
music-book--"_Tout voir, tout entendre, tout oublier_, should be the motto
adopted by all married people."

Lady Castlefort seemed distressed, and turned over the leaves in such a
flutter that she could not find anything, and she rose, in spite of all
entreaties, leaving the place to her sister, who was, she said, "so much
better a musician and not so foolishly nervous." Lady Castlefort said her
"voice always went away when she was at all--"

There it ended as far as words went; but she sighed, and retired so
gracefully, that all the gentlemen pitied her.

There is one moment in which ill-nature sincerely repents--the moment when
it sees pity felt for its victim.

Horace followed Lady Castlefort to the ottoman, on which she sank.
Beauclerc remained leaning on the back of Lady Katrine's chair, but without
seeming to hear what she said or sung. After some time Mr. Churchill, not
finding his attentions well received, or weary of paying them, quitted Lady
Castlefort but sat down by Helen; and in a voice to be heard by her, but by
no one else, he said--

"What a relief!--I thought I should never get away!" Then, favoured by a
loud bravura of Lady Katrine's, he went on--"That beauty, between you
and me, is something of a bore--she--I don't mean the lady who is now
screaming--she should always sing. Heaven blessed her with song, not
sense--but here one is made so fastidious!"

He sighed, and for some moments seemed to be given up to the duet which
Lady Katrine and an officer were performing; and then exclaimed, but so
that Helen only could hear,--"Merciful Heaven! how often one wishes one had
no ears: that Captain Jones must be the son of Stentor, and that lady!--if
angels sometimes saw themselves in a looking-glass when singing--there
would be peace upon earth."

Helen, not liking to be the secret receiver of his contraband good things,
was rising to change her place, when softly detaining her, he said, "Do not
be afraid, no danger--trust me, for I have studied under Talma."

"What can you mean?"

"I mean," continued he, "that Talma taught me the secret of his dying
scenes--how every syllable of his dying words might be heard to the
furthest part of the audience; and I--give me credit for my ingenuity--know
how, by reversing the art, to be perfectly inaudible at ten paces'
distance, and yet, I trust, perfectly intelligible, always, to you."

Helen now rose decidedly, and retreated to a table at the other side of the
room, and turned over some books that lay there--she took up a volume of
the novel Lady Castlefort had been reading--"Love unquestionable." She was
surprised to find it instantly, gently, but decidedly drawn from her hand:
she looked up--it was Beauclerc.

"I beg your pardon, Miss Stanley, but----"

"Thank you! thank you!" said Helen; "you need not beg my pardon."

This was the first time Beauclerc had spoken in his friendly, cordial,
natural manner, to her, since their incomprehensible misunderstanding. She
was heartily glad it was over, and that he was come to himself again. And
now they conversed very happily together for some time; though what they
said might not be particularly worth recording. Lady Katrine was at Helen's
elbow before she perceived her "looking for her sac;" and Lady Castlefort
came for her third volume, and gliding off, wished to all--"_Felice,
felicissima notte_."

Neither of these sisters had ever liked Helen; she was too true for the
one, and too good-natured for the other. Lady Katrine had always, even when
she was quite a child, been jealous of Lady Cecilia's affection for Helen;
and now her indignation and disappointment were great at finding her
established at Clarendon Park--to live with the Clarendons, to _go out_
with Lady Cecilia. Now, it had been the plan of both sisters, that Lady
Katrine's present visit should be eternal. How they would ever have managed
to fasten her ladyship upon the General, even if Helen had been out of the
question, need not now be considered. Their disappointment and dislike to
Helen were as great as if she had been the only obstacle to the fulfilment
of their scheme.

These two sisters had never agreed--

  --"Doom'd by Fate
  To live in all the elegance of hate;"

and since Lady Castlefort's marriage, the younger, the beautiful being now
the successful lady of the ascendant, the elder writhed in all the combined
miseries of jealousy and dependance, and an everyday lessening chance of
bettering her condition. Lord Castlefort, too, for good reasons of his own,
well remembered, detested Lady Katrine, and longed to shake her off. In
this wish, at least, husband and wife united; but Lady Castlefort had no
decent excuse for her ardent impatience to get rid of her sister. She had
magnificent houses in town and country, ample room everywhere--but in her
heart. She had the smallest heart conceivable, and the coldest; but had it
been ever so large, or ever so warm, Lady Katrine was surely not the person
to get into it, or into any heart, male or female: there was the despair.
"If Katrine was but married--Mr. Churchill, suppose?"

Faint was the _suppose_ in Lady Castlefort's imagination. Not so the
hope which rose in Lady Katrine's mind the moment she saw him here. "How
fortunate!" Her ladyship had now come to that no particular age, when a
remarkable metaphysical phenomenon occurs; on one particular subject hope
increases as all probability of success decreases. This aberration of
intellect is usually observed to be greatest in very clever women; while
Mr. Churchill, the flattered object of her present hope, knew how to manage
with great innocence and modesty, and draw her on to overt acts of what is
called flirtation.

Rousseau says that a man is always awkward and miserable when placed
between two women to whom he is making love. But Rousseau had never
seen Mr. Churchill, and had but an imperfect idea of the dexterity,
the ambiguity, that in our days can be successfully practised by an
accomplished male coquette. Absolutely to blind female jealousy may be
beyond his utmost skill; but it is easy, as every day's practice shows, to
keep female vanity pleasantly perplexed by ocular deception--to make her
believe that what she really sees she does not see, and that what is unreal
is reality: to make her, to the amusement of the spectators, continually
stretch out her hand to snatch the visionary good that for ever eludes her
grasp, or changes, on near approach, to grinning mockery.

This delightful game was now commenced with Lady Katrine, and if Helen
could be brought to take a snatch, it would infinitely increase the
interest and amusement of the lookers on. Of this, however, there seemed
little chance; but the evil eye of envy was set upon her, and the demon of
jealousy was longing to work her woe.

Lady Castlefort saw with scornful astonishment that Mr. Beauclerc's eyes,
sometimes when she was speaking, or when she was singing, would stray
to that part of the room where Miss Stanley might be; and when she was
speaking to him, he was wonderfully absent. Her ladyship rallied him, while
Lady Katrine, looking on, cleared her throat in her horrid way, and longed
for an opportunity to discomfit Helen, which supreme pleasure her ladyship
promised herself upon the first convenient occasion,--convenient meaning
when Lady Davenant was out of the room; for Lady Katrine, though urged
by prompting jealousy, dared not attack her when under cover of that
protection. From long habit, even her sarcastic nature stood in awe of a
certain power of moral indignation, which had at times flashed upon
her, and of which she had a sort of superstitious dread, as of an
incomprehensible, incalculable power.

But temper will get the better of all prudence. Piqued by some little
preference which Lady Cecilia had shown to Helen's taste in the choice of
the colour of a dress, an occasion offered of signalising her revenge,
which could not be resisted. It was a question to be publicly decided,
whether blue, green, or white should be adopted for the ladies' uniform
at an approaching _fete_. She was deputed to collect the votes. All the
company were assembled; Lady Davenant, out of the circle, as it was a
matter that concerned her not, was talking to the gentlemen apart.

Lady Katrine went round canvassing. "Blue, green, or white? say blue,
_pray_." But when she came to Helen, she made a full stop, asked no
question--preferred no prayer, but after fixing attention by her pause,
said, "I need not ask Miss Stanley's vote or opinion, as I know my
cousin's, and with Miss Stanley it is always 'I say ditto to Lady Cecilia;'
therefore, to save trouble, I always count two for Cecilia--one for herself
and one for her _double_."

"Right, Lady Katrine Hawksby," cried a voice from afar, which made her
start; "you are quite right to consider Helen Stanley as my daughter's
double, for my daughter loves and esteems her as her second self--her
better self. In this sense Helen is Lady Cecilia's double, but if you
mean----"

"Bless me! I don't know what I meant, I declare. I could not have conceived
that Lady Davenant----Miss Stanley, I beg a thousand million of pardons."

Helen, with anxious good-nature, pardoned before she was asked, and
hastened to pass on to the business of the day, but Lady Davenant would not
so let it pass; her eye still fixed she pursued the quailing enemy--"One
word more. In justice to my daughter, I must say her love has not been won
by flattery, as none knows better than the Lady Katrine Hawksby."

The unkindest cut of all, and on the tenderest part. Lady Katrine could not
stand it. Conscious and trembling, she broke through the circle, fled into
the conservatory, and, closing the doors behind her, would not be followed
by Helen, Cecilia, or any body.

Lady Castlefort sighed, and first breaking the silence that ensued, said,
"'Tis such a pity that Katrine will always so let her wit run away with
her--it brings her so continually into----for my part, in all humility I
must confess, I can't help thinking that, what with its being unfeminine
and altogether so incompatible with what in general is thought amiable
--I cannot but consider wit in a woman as a real misfortune. What say the
gentlemen? they must decide, gentlemen being always the best judges."

With an appealing tone of interrogation she gracefully looked up to the
gentlemen; and after a glance towards Granville Beauclerc, unluckily
unnoticed or unanswered, her eyes expected reply from Horace Churchill. He,
well feeling the predicament in which he stood, between a fool and a _femme
d'esprit_, answered, with his ambiguous smile, "that no doubt it was a
great misfortune to have '_plus d'esprit qu'on ne sait mener.'"

"This is a misfortune," said Lady Davenant, "that may be deplored for a
great genius once in an age, but is really rather of uncommon occurrence.
People complain of wit where, nine times in ten, poor wit is quite
innocent; but such is the consequence of having kept bad company. Wit and
ill-nature having been too often found together, when we see one we expect
the other; and such an inseparable false association has been formed, that
half the world take it for granted that there is wit if they do but see
ill-nature."

At this moment Mr. Mapletofft, the secretary, entered with his face full
of care, and his hands full of papers. Lady Katrine needed not to feign or
feel any further apprehensions of Lady Davenant; for, an hour afterwards,
it was announced that Lord and Lady Davenant were obliged to set off for
town immediately. In the midst of her hurried preparations Lady Davenant
found a moment to comfort Helen with the assurance that, whatever happened,
she would see her again. It might end in Lord Davenant's embassy being
given up. At all events she would see her again--she hoped in a few
weeks, perhaps in a few days. "So no leave-takings, my dear child, and no
tears--it is best as it is. On my return let me find----"

"Lord Davenant's waiting, my lady," and she hurried away.




CHAPTER IV.


Absent or present, the guardian influence of a superior friend is one of
the greatest blessings on earth, and after Lady Davenant's departure Helen
was so full of all she had said to her, and of all that she would approve
or disapprove, that every action, almost every thought, was under the
influence of her friend's mind. Continually she questioned her motives as
well as examined her actions, and she could not but condemn some of her
conduct, or if not her conduct, her manner, towards Horace Churchill; she
had been flattered by his admiration, and had permitted his attentions
more than she ought, when her own mind was perfectly made up as to his
character. Ever since the affair of the poetess, she had been convinced
that she could never make the happiness or redeem the character of one so
mean.

According to the ladies' code, a woman is never to understand that a
gentleman's attentions mean anything more than common civility; she is
supposed never to see his mind, however he may make it visible, till he
declares it in words. But, as Helen could not help understanding his
manner, she thought it was but fair to make him understand her by her
manner. She was certain that if he were once completely convinced, not
only that he had not made any impression, but that he never could make any
impression, on her heart, his pursuit would cease. His vanity, mortified,
might revenge itself upon her, perhaps; but this was a danger which she
thought she ought to brave; and now she resolved to be quite sincere, as
she said to herself, at whatever hazard (probably meaning at the hazard of
displeasing Cecilia) she would make her own sentiments clear, and put an
end to Mr. Churchill's ambiguous conduct: and this should be done on the
very first opportunity.

An opportunity soon occurred--Horace had a beautiful little topaz ring
with which Lady Katrine Hawksby fell into raptures; such a charming
device!--Cupid and Momus making the world their plaything.

It was evident that Lady Katrine expected that the seal should be presented
to her. Besides being extravagantly fond of baubles, she desired to have
this homage from Horace. To her surprise and mortification, however, he was
only quite flattered by her approving of his taste:--it was his favourite
seal, and so "he kept the topaz, and the rogue was bit."

Lady Katrine was the more mortified by this failure, because it was
witnessed by many of the company, among whom, when she looked round,
she detected smiles of provoking intelligence. Soon afterwards the
dressing-bell rang and she quitted the room; one after another every one
dropped off, except Helen, who was finishing a letter, and Horace, who
stood on the hearth playing with his seal. When she came to sealing-time,
he approached and besought her to honour him by the acceptance of this
little seal. "If he could obliterate Momus--if he could leave only Cupid,
it would be more appropriate. But it was a device invented for him by a
French friend, and he hoped she would pardon his folly, and think only of
his love!"

This was said so that it might pass either for mere jest or for earnest;
his look expressed very sentimental love, and Helen seized the moment to
explain herself decidedly.

It was a surprise--a great surprise to Mr. Churchill, a severe
disappointment, not only to his vanity but to his heart, for he had one. It
was some comfort, however, that he had not quite committed himself, and he
recovered--even in the moment of disappointment he recovered himself time
enough dexterously to turn the tables upon Helen.

He thanked her for her candour--for her great care of his happiness, in
anticipating a danger which might have been so fatal to him; but he really
was not aware that he had said anything which required so serious an
answer.

Afterwards he amused himself with Lady Katrine at Miss Stanley's
expense, representing himself as in the most pitiable case of Rejected
Addresses--rejected before he had offered. He had only been guilty of
Folly, and he was brought in guilty of Love.

Poor Helen had to endure not only this persiflage, which was soon made to
reach her ear, but also the reproaches of Lady Cecilia, who said, "I should
have warned you, Helen, not to irritate that man's relentless vanity; now
you see the consequences."

"But, after all, what harm can he do me?" thought Helen. "It is very
disagreeable to be laughed at, but still my conscience is satisfied, and
that is a happiness that will last; all the rest will soon be over. I am
sure I did the thing awkwardly, but I am glad it is done."

Mr. Churchill soon afterwards received an invitation--a command to join a
royal party now at some watering-place; an illustrious person could not
live another day without Horace _le desire_. He showed the note, and acted
despair at being compelled to go, and then he departed. To the splendid
party he went, and drowned all recollections of whatever love he had felt
in the fresh intoxication of vanity--a diurnal stimulus which, however
degrading, and he did feel it degrading, was now become necessary to his
existence.

His departure from Clarendon Park was openly regretted by Lady Cecilia,
while Lady Katrine secretly mourned over the downfall of her projects, and
Beauclerc attempted not to disguise his satisfaction.

He was all life and love, and would then certainly have declared his
passion, but for an extraordinary change which now appeared in Helen's
manner towards him. It seemed unaccountable; it could not be absolute
caprice, she did not even treat him as a friend, and she evidently avoided
explanation. He thought, and thought, and came as near the truth without
touching it as possible. He concluded that she had understood his joy at
Churchill's departure; that she now clearly perceived his attachment;
and was determined against him. Not having the slightest idea that she
considered him as a married man, he could not even guess the nature of her
feelings. And all the time Helen did not well understand herself; she
began to be extremely alarmed at her own feelings--to dread that there
was something not quite right. This dread, which had come and gone by
fits,--this doubt as to her own sentiments,--was first excited by the
death of her dove--Beauclerc's gift. The poor dove was found one morning
drowned in the marble vase in which it went to drink. Helen was very
sorry--that was surely natural; but she was wonderfully concerned. Lady
Katrine scoffingly said; and before everybody, before Beauclerc, worse than
all, her ladyship represented to the best of her ability the attitude in
which she had found Helen mourning over her misfortune, the dove in her
hand pressed close to her bosom--"And in tears--absolutely." She would
swear to the tears.

Helen blushed, tried to laugh, and acknowledged it was very foolish. Well,
that passed off as only foolish, and she did not at first feel that it was
a thing much to be ashamed of in any other way. But she was sorry that
Beauclere was by when Lady Katrine mimicked her; most sorry that he should
think her foolish. But then did he? His looks expressed tenderness. He was
very tender-hearted. Really manly men always are so; and so she observed to
Lady Cecilia. Lady Katrine heard the observation, and smiled--her odious
smile--implying more than words could say. Helen was not quite clear,
however, what it meant to say.

Some days afterwards Lady Katrine took up a book, in which Helen's name was
written in Beauclerc's hand. "_Gage d'amitie?_" said her ladyship; and
she walked up and down the room, humming the air of an old French song;
interrupting herself now and then to ask her sister if she could recollect
the words. "The _refrain_, if I remember right, is something like this--

  Sous le nom d'amitie--sous le nom d'amitie,
  La moitie du monde trompe l'autre moitie,
  Sous le nom, sous le nom, sous le nom d'amitie.

And it ends with

  Sous le nom d'amitie, Damon, je vous adore,
  Sous le nom, sous le nom d'amitie.

Miss Stanley, do you know that song?" concluded her malicious ladyship.
No--Miss Stanley had never heard it before; but the marked emphasis with
which Lady Katrine sung and looked, made Helen clear that she meant to
apply the words tauntingly to her and Beauclerc,--but which of them her
ladyship suspected was cheating, or cheated--"_sous le nom d'amitie_,"
she did not know. All was confusion in her mind. After a moment's cooler
reflection, however, she was certain it could not be Beauclerc who was to
blame--it must be herself, and she now very much wished that every body,
and Lady Katrine in particular, should know that Mr. Beauclerc was engaged
--almost married; if this were but known, it would put an end to all such
imputations.

The first time she could speak to Cecilia on the subject, she begged to
know how soon Mr. Beauclerc's engagement would be declared. Lady Cecilia
slightly answered she could not tell--and when Helen pressed the question
she asked,--

"Why are you so anxious, Helen?"

Helen honestly told her, and Lady Cecilia only laughed at her for minding
what Lady Katrine said,--"When you know yourself, Helen, how it is, what
can it signify what mistakes others may make?"

But Helen grew more and more uneasy, for she was not clear that she did
know how it was, with herself at least. Her conscience faltered, and she
was not sure whether she was alarmed with or without reason. She began to
compare feelings that she had read of, and feelings that she had seen in
others, and feelings that were new to herself, and in this maze and mist
nothing was distinct--much was magnified--all alarming.

One day Beauclerc was within view of the windows on horseback, on a very
spirited horse, which he managed admirably; but a shot fired suddenly in an
adjoining preserve so startled the horse that it----oh! what it did Helen
did not see, she was so terrified: and why was she so much terrified? She
excused herself by saying it was natural to be frightened for any human
creature. But, on the other hand, Tom Isdall was a human creature, and she
had seen him last week actually thrown from his horse, and had not felt
much concern. But then he was not a friend; and he fell into a soft ditch:
and there was something ridiculous in it which prevented people from caring
about it. With such nice casuistry she went on pretty well; and besides,
she was so innocent--so ignorant, that it was easy for her to be deceived.
She went on, telling herself that she loved Beauclerc as a brother--as she
loved the general. But when she came to comparisons, she could not but
perceive a difference. Her heart never bounded on the general's appearance,
let him appear ever so suddenly, as it did one day when Beauclerc returned
unexpectedly from Old Forest. Her whole existence seemed so altered by his
approach, his presence, or his absence. Why was this? Was there any thing
wrong in it? She had nobody whose judgment she could consult--nobody to
whom she could venture to describe her feelings, or lay open her doubts
and scruples. Lady Cecilia would only laugh; and she could not quite trust
either her judgment or her sincerity, though she knew her affection.
Besides, after what Cecilia had said of her being safe; after all she had
told her of Beauclerc's engagement, how astonished and shocked Cecilia
would be!

Then Helen resolved that she would keep a strict watch over herself, and
repress all emotion, and be severe with her own mind to the utmost: and it
was upon this resolution that she had changed her manner, without knowing
how much, towards Beauclerc; she was certain he meant nothing but
friendship. It was her fault if she felt too much pleasure in his company;
the same things were, as she wisely argued, right or wrong according to the
intention with which they were said, done, looked, or felt. Rigidly she
inflicted on herself the penance of avoiding his delightful society, and to
make sure that she did not try to attract, she repelled him with all
her power--thought she never could make herself cold, and stiff, and
disagreeable enough to satisfy her conscience.

Then she grew frightened at Beauclerc's looks of astonishment--feared he
would ask explanation--avoided him more and more. Then, on the other hand,
she feared he might guess and interpret _wrong_, or rather _right_, this
change; and back she changed, tried in vain to keep the just medium--she
had lost the power of measuring--altogether she was very unhappy, and so
was Beauclerc; he found her incomprehensible, and thought her capricious.
His own mind was fluttered with love, so that he could not see or judge
distinctly, else he might have seen the truth; and sometimes, though free
from conceit, he did hope it might be all love. But why then so determined
to discourage him? he had advanced sufficiently to mark his intentions,
she could not doubt his sincerity. He would see farther before he ventured
farther. He thought a man was a fool who proposed before he had tolerable
reason to believe he should not be refused.

Lord Beltravers and his sisters were now expected at Old Forest
immediately, and Beauclerc went thither early every morning, to press
forward the preparations for the arrival of the family, and he seldom
returned till dinner-time; and every evening Lady Castlefort contrived to
take possession of him. It appeared to be indeed as much against his will
as it could be between a well-bred man and a high-bred belle; but to do her
bidding, seemed if not a moral, at least a polite necessity. She had been
spoiled, she owned, by foreign attentions, not French, for that is all gone
now at Paris, but Italian manners, which she so much preferred. She did not
know how she could live out of Italy, and she must convince Lord Castlefort
that the climate was necessary for her health. Meanwhile she adopted, she
acted, what she conceived to be foreign manners, and with an exaggeration
common with those who have very little sense and a vast desire to be
fashionable with a certain set. Those who knew her best (all but her sister
Katrine, who shook her head,) were convinced that there was really no harm
in Lady Castlefort, "only vanity and folly." How frequently folly leads
farther than fools ever, or wise people often foresee, we need not here
stop to record. On the present occasion, all at Clarendon Park, even those
most inclined to scandal, persons who, by the by, may be always known by
their invariable preface of, "I hate all scandal," agreed that "no one _so
far_ could behave better than Granville Beauclerc--so far,"--"as yet."
But all the elderly who had any experience of this world, all the young
who had any intuitive prescience in these matters, could not but fear that
things could not long go on as they were now going. It was sadly to be
feared that so young a man, and so very handsome a man, and such an admirer
of beauty, and grace, and music, and of such an enthusiastic temper, must
be in danger of being drawn on farther than he was aware, and before he
knew what he was about.

The general heard and saw all that went on without seeming to take heed,
only once he asked Cecilia how long she thought her cousins would stay. She
did not know, but she said "she saw he wished them to be what they were
not--cousins once removed--and quite agreed with him." He smiled, for a man
is always well pleased to find his wife agree with him in disliking her
cousins.

One night--one fine moonlight night--Lady Castlefort, standing at the
conservatory door with Beauclerc, after talking an inconceivable quantity
of nonsense about her passion for the moon, and her notions about the
stars, and congenial souls born under the same planet, proposed to him a
moonlight walk.

The general was at the time playing at chess with Helen, and had the best
of the game, but at that moment he made a false move, was check-mated, rose
hastily, threw the men together on the board, and forgot to regret his
shameful defeat, or to compliment Helen upon her victory. Lady Castlefort,
having just discovered that the fatality nonsense about the stars would
not quite do for Beauclerc, had been the next instant seized with a sudden
passion for astronomy; she must see those charming rings of Saturn, which
she had heard so much of, which the general was showing Miss Stanley the
other night; she must beg him to lend his telescope; she came up with her
sweetest smile to trouble the general for his glass. Lord Castlefort,
following, objected strenuously to her going out at night; she had been
complaining of a bad cold when he wanted her to walk in the daytime, she
would only make it worse by going out in the night air. If she wanted to
see Saturn and his rings, the general, he was sure, would fix a telescope
at the window for her.

But that would not do, she must have a moonlight walk; she threw open the
conservatory door, beckoned to Mr. Beauclerc, and how it ended Helen did
not stay to see. She thought that she ought not even to think on the
subject, and she went away as fast as she could. It was late, and she went
to bed wishing to be up early, to go on with a drawing she was to finish
for Mrs. Collingwood--a view by the river side, that view which had struck
her fancy as so beautiful the day she went first to Old Forest. Early the
next morning--and a delightful morning it was--she was up and out, and
reached the spot from which her sketch was taken. She was surprised to find
her little camp-stool, which she had looked for in vain in the hall, in its
usual place, set here ready for her, and on it a pencil nicely cut.

Beauclerc must have done this. But he was not in general an early riser.
However, she concluded that he had gone over thus early to Old Forest, to
see his friend Lord Beltravers, who was to have arrived the day before,
with his sisters. She saw a boat rowing down the river, and she had no
doubt he was gone. But just as she had settled to her drawing, she heard
the joyful bark of Beauclerc's dog Nelson, who came bounding towards her,
and the next moment his master appeared, coming down the path from the
wood. With quick steps he came till he was nearly close to her, then
slackened his pace.

"Good morning!" said Helen; she tried to speak with composure, but her
heart beat--she could not help feeling surprise at seeing him--but it was
only surprise.

"I thought you were gone to Old Forest?" said she.

"Not yet," said he.

His voice sounded different from usual, and she saw in him some suppressed
agitation. She endeavoured to keep her own manner unembarrassed--she
thanked him for the nicely-cut pencil, and the exactly well-placed seat. He
advanced a step or two nearer, stooped, and looked close at her drawing,
but he did not seem to see or know what he was looking at.

At this moment Nelson, who had been too long unnoticed, put up one paw on
Miss Stanley's arm, unseen by his master, and encouraged by such gentle
reproof as Helen gave, his audacious paw was on the top of her drawing-book
the next moment, and the next was upon the drawing--and the paw was wet
with dew.--"Nelson!" exclaimed his master in an angry tone.

"O do not scold him," cried Helen, "do not punish him; the drawing is not
spoiled--only wet, and it will be as well as ever when it is dry."

Beauclerc ejaculated something about the temper of an angel while she
patted Nelson's penitent head.

"As the drawing must be left to dry," said Beauclerc, "perhaps Miss Stanley
would do me the favour to walk as far as the landing-place, where the boat
is to meet me--to take me--if--if I MUST go to Old Forest!" and he sighed.

She took his offered arm and walked on--surprised--confused;--wondering
what he meant by that sigh and that look--and that strong emphasis on
_must_. "If I _must_ go to Old Forest." Was not it a pleasure?--was it not
his own choice?--what could he mean?--What could be the matter?

A vague agitating idea rose in her mind, but she put it from her, and they
walked on for some minutes, both silent. They entered the wood, and feeling
the silence awkward, and afraid that he should perceive her embarrassment,
and that he should suspect her suspicion, she exerted herself to speak--to
say something, no matter what.

"It is a charming morning!"

After a pause of absence of mind, he answered,

"Charming!--very!"

Then stopping short, he fixed his eyes upon Helen with an expression that
she was afraid to understand. It could hardly bear any interpretation but
one--and yet that was impossible--ought to be impossible--from a man in
Beauclerc's circumstances--engaged--almost a married man, as she had been
told to consider him. She did not know at this moment what to think--still
she thought she must mistake him, and she should be excessively ashamed of
such a mistake, and now more strongly felt the dread that he should see and
misinterpret or interpret too rightly her emotion; she walked on quicker,
and her breath grew short, and her colour heightened. He saw her
agitation--a delightful hope arose in his mind. It was plain she was not
indifferent--he looked at her, but dared not look long enough--feared that
he was mistaken. But the embarrassment seemed to change its character even
as he looked, and now it was more like displeasure--decidedly, she appeared
displeased. And so she was; for she thought now that he must either be
trifling with her, or, if serious, must be acting most dishonourably;--her
good opinion of him must be destroyed for ever, if, as now it seemed, he
wished to make an impression upon her heart--yet still she tried not to
think, not to see it. She was sorry, she was very wrong to let such an idea
into her mind--and still her agitation increased.

Quick as she turned from him these thoughts passed in her mind, alternately
angry and ashamed, and at last, forcing herself to be composed, telling
herself she ought to see farther and at least to be certain before she
condemned him--condemned so kind, so honourable a friend, while the fault
might be all her own; she now, in a softened tone, as if begging pardon
for the pain she had given, and the injustice she had done him, said some
words, insignificant in themselves, but from the voice of kindness charming
to Beauclerc's ear and soul.

"Are not we walking very fast?" said she, breathless. He slackened his pace
instantly, and with a delighted look, while she, in a hurried voice,
added, "But do not let me delay you. There is the boat. You must be in
haste--impatient!"

"In haste! impatient! to leave you, Helen!" She blushed deeper than he had
ever seen her blush before. Beauclerc in general knew--

  Which blush was anger's, which was love's!"

--But now he was so much moved he could not decide at the first glance:
at the second, there was no doubt; it was anger--not love. Her arm was
withdrawn from his. He was afraid he had gone too far. He had called her
Helen! He begged pardon, half humbly, half proudly. "I beg pardon; Miss
Stanley, I should have said. I see I have offended. I fear I have been
presumptuous, but Lady Davenant taught me to trust to Miss Stanley's
sincerity, and I was encouraged by her expressions of confidence and
friendship."

"Friendship! Oh, yes! Mr. Beauclerc," said Helen, in a hurried voice,
eagerly seizing on and repeating the word friendship; "yes, I have always
considered you as a friend. I am sure I shall always find you a sincere,
good friend."

"Friend!" he repeated in a disappointed tone--all his hopes sunk. She took
his arm again, and he was displeased even with that. She was not the being
of real sensibility he had fancied--she was not capable of real love. So
vacillated his heart and his imagination, and so quarrelled he alternately
every instant with her and with himself. He could not understand her,
or decide what he should next do or say himself; and there was the boat
nearing the land, and they were going on, on, towards it in silence. He
sighed.

It was a sigh that could not but be heard and noticed; it was not meant
to be noticed, and yet it was. What could she think of it? She could not
believe that Beauclerc meant to act treacherously. This time she was
determined not to take anything for granted, not to be so foolish as she
had been with Mr. Churchill.

"Is not that your boat that I see, rowing close?"

"Yes, I believe--certainly. Yes," said he.

But now the vacillation of Beauclerc's mind suddenly ceased. Desperate, he
stopped her, as she would have turned down that path to the landing-place
where the boat was mooring. He stood full across the path. "Miss Stanley,
one word--by one word, one look decide. You must decide for me whether I
stay--or go--for ever!"

"I!--Mr. Beauclerc!--"

The look of astonishment--more than astonishment, almost of
indignation--silenced him completely, and he stood dismayed. She pressed
onwards, and he no longer stopped her path. For an instant he submitted in
despair. "Then I must not think of it. I must go--must I, Miss Stanley?
Will not you listen to me, Helen? Advise me; let me open my heart to you as
a friend."

She stopped under the shady tree beneath which they were passing,
and, leaning against it, she repeated, "As a friend--but, no, no, Mr.
Beauclerc--no; I am not the friend you should consult--consult the general,
your guardian."

"I have consulted him, and he approves."

"You have! That is well, that is well at all events," cried she; "if he
approves, then all is right."

There was a ray of satisfaction on her countenance. He looked as if
considering what she exactly meant. He hoped again, and was again resolved
to hazard the decisive words. "If you knew all!" and he pressed her arm
closer to him--"if I might tell you all----?"

Helen withdrew her arm decidedly. "I know all," said she; "all I ought to
know, Mr. Beauclerc."

"You know all!" cried he, astonished at her manner.

"You know the circumstances in which I am placed?"

He alluded to the position in which he stood with Lady Castlefort; she
thought he meant with respect to Lady Blanche, and she answered--"Yes: I
know all!" and her eye turned towards the boat.

"I understand you," said he; "you think I ought to go?" "Certainly," said
she. It never entered into her mind to doubt the truth of what Lady Cecilia
had told her, and she had at first been so much embarrassed by the fear of
betraying what she felt she ought not to feel, and she was now so shocked
by what she thought his dishonourable conduct, that she repeated almost in
a tone of severity--"Certainly, Mr. Beauclerc, you ought to go."

The words, "since you are engaged,"--"you know you are engaged," she was on
the point of adding, but Lady Cecilia's injunctions not to tell him that
she had betrayed his secret stopped her.

He looked at her for an instant, and then abruptly, and in great agitation,
said; "May I ask, Miss Stanley, if your affections are engaged?"

"Is that a question, Mr. Beauclerc, which you have a right to ask me?"

"I have no right--no right, I acknowledge--I am answered."

He turned away from her, and ran down the bank towards the boat, but
returned instantly, and exclaimed, "If you say to me, go! I am gone for
ever!"

"Go!" Helen firmly pronounced. "You never can be more than a friend to me!
Oh never be less!--go!"

"I am gone," said he, "you shall never see me more."

He went, and a few seconds afterwards she heard the splashing of his oars.
He was gone! Oh! how she wished that they had parted sooner--a few minutes
sooner, even before he had so looked--so spoken!

"Oh! that we had parted while I might have still perfectly esteemed him;
but now--!"




CHAPTER V.


When Helen attempted to walk, she trembled so much that she could not move,
and leaning against the tree under which she was standing, she remained
fixed for some time almost without thought. Then she began to recollect
what had been before all this, and as soon as she could walk she went back
for her drawing-book, threw from her the pencil which Beauclerc had cut,
and made her way home as fast as she could, and up to her own room, without
meeting anybody; and as soon as she was there she bolted the door and threw
herself upon her bed. She had by this time a dreadful headache, and she
wanted to try and get rid of it in time for breakfast--that was her first
object; but her thoughts were so confused that they could not fix upon
anything rightly. She tried to compose herself, and to think the whole
affair over again; but she could not. There was something so strange in
what had passed! The sudden--the total change in her opinion--her total
loss of confidence! She tried to put all thoughts and feelings out of her
mind, and just to lie stupified if she could, that she might get rid of the
pain in her head. She had no idea whether it was late or early, and was
going to get up to look at her watch, when she heard the first bell, half
an hour before breakfast, and this was the time when Cecilia usually opened
the door between their rooms. She dreaded the sound, but when she had
expected it some minutes, she became impatient even for that which she
feared; she wanted to have it over, and she raised herself on her elbow,
and listened with acute impatience: at last the door was thrown wide open,
and bright and gay as ever, in came Cecilia, but at the first sight of
Helen on her bed, wan and miserable, she stopped short.

"My dearest Helen! what can be the matter?"

"Mr. Beauclerc--"

"Well! what of him?" cried Cecilia, and she smiled.

"Oh, Cecilia! do not smile; you cannot imagine--"

"Oh, yes! but I can," cried Cecilia. "I see how it is; I understand it all;
and miserable and amazed as you look at this moment, I will set all right
for you in one word. He is not going to be married--not engaged."

Helen started up. "Not engaged!"

"No more than you are, my dear! Oh! I am glad to see your colour come
again!"

"Thank Heaven!" cried Helen, "then he is not--"

"A villain!--not at all. He is all that's right; all that is charming, my
dear. So thank Heaven, and be as happy as you please."

"But I cannot understand it," said Helen, sinking back; "I really cannot
understand how it is, Cecilia." Cecilia gave her a glass of water in great
haste, and was very sorry, and very glad, and begged forgiveness, and all
in a breath: but as yet Helen did not know what she had to forgive, till it
was explained to her in direct words, that Cecilia had told her not only
what was not true, but what she at the time of telling knew to be false.

"For what purpose, oh! my dear Cecilia! All to save me from a little
foolish embarrassment at first, you have made us miserable at last."

"Miserable! my dear Helen; at worst miserable only for half an hour.
Nonsense! lie down again, and rest your poor head. I will go this minute to
Granville. Where is he?"

"Gone! Gone for ever! Those were his last words."

"Impossible! absurd! Only what a man says in a passion. But where is he
gone? Only to Old Forest! Gone for ever--gone till dinner-time! Probably
coming back at this moment in all haste, like a true lover, to beg your
pardon for your having used him abominably ill. Now, smile; do not shake
your head, and look so wretched; but tell me exactly, word for word and
look for look, all that passed between you, and then I shall know what is
best to be done."

Word for word Helen could not answer, for she had been so much confused,
but she told to the best of her recollection; and Cecilia still thought
no great harm was done. She only looked a little serious from the
apprehension, now the real, true apprehension, of what might happen about
Lady Blanche, who, as she believed, was at Old Forest. "Men are so foolish;
men in love, so rash. Beauclerc, in a fit of anger and despair on being so
refused by the woman he loved, might go and throw himself at the feet
of another for whom he did not care in the least, in a strange sort of
revenge. But I know how to settle it all, and I will do it this moment."

But Helen caught hold of her hand, and firmly detaining it, absolutely
objected to her doing anything without telling her exactly and truly what
she was going to do.

Lady Cecilia assured her that she was only going to inquire from the
general whether Lady Blanche was with her sister at Old Forest, or not.
"Listen to me, my dear Helen; what I am going to say can do no mischief.
If Lady Blanche is there, then the best thing to be done is, for me to go
immediately, this very morning, to pay the ladies a visit on their coming
to the country, and I will bring back Granville. A word will bring him
back. I will only tell him there was a little mistake, or if you think
it best, I will tell him the whole truth. Let me go--only let me go and
consult the general before the breakfast-bell rings, for I shall have no
time afterwards."

Helen let her go, for as Beauclerc had told her that he had opened his mind
to the general, she thought it was best that he should hear all that had
happened.

The moment the general saw Lady Cecilia come in, he smiled, and said,
"Well! my dear Cecilia, you have seen Helen this morning, and she has seen
Beauclerc--what is the result? Does he stay, or go?"

"He is gone!" said Cecilia. The general looked surprised and sorry. "He did
not propose for her," continued Cecilia, "he did not declare himself--he
only began to sound her opinion of him, and she--she contrived to
misunderstand--to offend him, and he is gone, but only to Old Forest, and
we can have him back again directly."

"That is not likely," said the general, "because I know that Beauclerc had
determined, that if he went he would not return for some time. Your friend
Helen was to decide. If she gave him any hope, that is, permitted him to
appear as her declared admirer, he could, with propriety, happiness, and
honour, remain here; if not, my dear Cecilia, you must be sensible that he
is right to go."

"Gone for some time!" repeated Cecilia, "you mean as long as Lady
Castlefort is here."

"Yes," said the general.

"I wish she was gone, I am sure, with all my heart," said Cecilia; "but
in the mean time, tell me, my dear Clarendon, do you know whether Lord
Beltravers' sisters are at Old Forest?"

The general did not think that Lady Blanche had arrived; he was not
certain, but he knew that the Comtesse de St. Cymon had arrived yesterday.

"Then," said Cecilia, "it would be but civil to go to see the comtesse. I
will go this morning."

General Clarendon answered instantly, and with decision, that she must not
think of such a thing--that it could not be done. "Madame de St. Cymon is a
woman of doubtful reputation, not a person with whom Lady Cecilia Clarendon
ought to form any acquaintance."

"No, not form an acquaintance--I'm quite aware of that," and eagerly she
pleaded that she had no intention of doing anything; "but just one morning
visit paid and returned, you know, leads to nothing. Probably we shall
neither of us be at home, and never meet; and really it would be such a
marked thing not to pay this visit to the Beltravers family on their return
to the country. Formerly there was such a good understanding between the
Forresters and your father; and really hospitality requires it. Altogether
this one visit really must be paid, it cannot be helped, so I will order
the carriage."

"It must not be done!" the general said; "it is a question of right, not of
expediency."

"Right, but there is nothing really wrong, surely; I believe all that has
been said of her is scandal. Nobody is safe against reports--the public
papers are so scandalous! While a woman lives with her husband, it is but
charitable to suppose all is right. That's the rule. Besides, we should not
throw the first stone." Then Lady Cecilia pleaded, lady this and lady that,
and the whole county, without the least scruple would visit Madame de St.
Cymon.

"Lady this and lady that may do as they please, or as their husbands think
proper or improper, that is no rule for Lady Cecilia Clarendon; and as
to the whole county, or the whole world, what is that to me, when I have
formed my own determination?"

The fact was, that at this very time Madame de St. Cymon was about to be
separated from her husband. A terrible discovery had just been made. Lord
Beltravers had brought his sister to Old Forest to bide her from London
disgrace; there he intended to leave her to rusticate, while he should
follow her husband to Paris immediately, to settle the terms of separation
or divorce.

"Beauclerc, no doubt, will go to Paris with him," said the general.

"To Paris! when will he set out?"

"To-day--directly, if Helen has decidedly rejected him; but you say he did
not declare himself. Pray tell me all at once."

And if she had done so, all might have been well; but she was afraid. Her
husband was as exact about _some things_ as her mother; he would certainly
be displeased at the deception she had practised on Helen; she could not
tell him that, not at this moment, for she had just fooled him to the top
of his bent about this visit; she would find a better time; she so dreaded
the instant change of his smile--the look of disapprobation; she was so
cowardly; in short, the present pain of displeasing--the consequences even
of her own folly, she never could endure, and to avoid it she had always
recourse to some new evasion; and now, when Helen--her dear Helen's
happiness, was at stake, she faltered--she paltered--she would not for the
world do her any wrong; but still she thought she could manage without
telling the whole--she would tell nothing _but_ the truth. So, after a
moment's hesitation, while all these thoughts went through her mind, when
the general repeated his question, and begged to know at once what was
passing in her little head; she smiled in return for that smile which
played on her husband's face while he fondly looked upon her, and she
answered, "I am thinking of poor Helen. She has made a sad mistake--and has
a horrid headache at this moment--in short she has offended Beauclerc past
endurance--past his endurance--and he went off in a passion before she
found out her mistake. In short, we must have him back again; could you go,
my dear love--or write directly?"

"First let me understand," said the general. "Miss Stanley has made a
mistake--what mistake?"

"She thought Beauclerc was engaged to Lady Blanche."

"How could she think so? What reason had she?"

"She had been told so by somebody."

"Somebody!--that eternal scandal-monger Lady Katrine, I suppose."

"No--not Lady Katrine," said Cecilia; "but I am not at liberty to tell you
whom."

"No matter; but Miss Stanley is not a fool; she could not believe somebody
or anybody, contrary to common sense."

"No, but Beauclerc did not come quite to proposing--and you know she
had been blamed for refusing Mr. Churchill before she was asked--and in
short--in love, people do not always know what they are about."

"I do not understand one word of it," said the general; "nor I am sure do
you, my dear Cecilia." "Yes, I really do, but----"

"My dear Cecilia, I assure you it is always best to let people settle their
love affairs their own way."

"Yes, certainly--I would not interfere in the least--only to get Granville
back again--and then let them settle it their own way. Cannot you call at
Old Forest?"

"No."

"Could you not write?"

"No--not unless I know the whole. I will do nothing in the dark. Always
tell your confessor, your lawyer, your physician, your friend, your whole
case, or they are fools or rogues if they act for you; go back and repeat
this to Helen Stanley from me."

"But, my dear, she will think it so unkind."

"Let her show me how I can serve her, and I will do it."

"Only write a line to Beauclerc--say, 'Beauclerc come back,--here has been
a mistake.'" She would have put a pen into his hand, and held paper to him.

"Let me know the whole, and then, and not till then, can I judge whether I
should be doing right for her or not." The difficulty of telling the whole
had increased to Lady Cecilia, even from the hesitation and prevarication
she had now made. "Let me see Helen,--let me speak to her myself, and
learn what this strange nonsensical mystery is." He was getting impatient.
"Cannot I see Miss Stanley?"

"Why no, my dear love, not just now, she has such a headache! She is lying
down. There is the breakfast-bell--after breakfast, if you please. But I
am clear she would rather not speak to you herself on the subject."

"Then come down to breakfast, my dear, and let her settle it her own
way--that is much the best plan. Interference in love matters always does
mischief. Come to breakfast, my dear--I have no time to lose--I must be off
to a court-martial."

He looked at his watch, and Cecilia went half down stairs with him, and
then ran back to keep Helen quiet by the assurance that all would
be settled--all would be right, and that she would send her up some
breakfast--she must not think of coming down; and Cecilia lamented half
breakfast-time--how subject to headaches poor Helen was; and through this
and through all other conversation she settled what she would do for her.
As the last resource, she would tell the whole truth--not to her husband,
she loved him too well to face his displeasure for one moment--hut to
Beauclerc; and writing would be so much easier than speaking--without
being put to the blush she could explain it all to Beauclerc, and turn
it playfully; and he would be so happy that he would be only too glad to
forgive her, and to do anything she asked. She concocted and wrote a very
pretty letter, in which she took all the blame fully on herself--did
perfect justice to Helen; said she wrote without her knowledge, and
depended entirely upon his discretion, so he must come back of his own
accord, and keep her counsel. This letter, however, she could not despatch
so soon as she had expected; she could not send a servant with it till
the general should be off to his court-martial. Now had Cecilia gone the
straight-forward way to work, her husband could in that interval, and
would, have set all to rights; but this to Cecilia was impossible; she
could only wait in an agony of impatience till the general and his officers
were all out of the way, and then she despatched a groom with her letter to
Old Forest, and desired him to return as fast as possible, while she went
to Helen's room, to while away the time of anxious suspense as well as she
could; and she soon succeeded in talking herself into excellent spirits
again. "Now, my dear Helen, if that unlucky mistake had not been made,--if
you had not fancied that Granville was married already,--and if he had
actually proposed for you,--what would you have said?--in short--would you
have accepted him?"

"Oh! Cecilia, I do hope he will understand how it all was; I hope he will
believe that I esteem him as I always did: as to love--"

Helen paused, and Lady Cecilia went on: "As to love, nobody knows
anything about it till it comes--and here it is coming, I do believe!"
continued she, looking out of the window.--No! not Mr. Beauclerc, but
the man she had sent with her letter, galloping towards the house.
Disappointed not to see Beauclerc himself, she could only conclude that
as he had not his horse with him, he was returning in the boat. The
answer to her letter was brought in. At the first glance on the
direction, her countenance changed. "Not Granville's hand!--what can
have happened?" She tore open the note, "He is gone!--gone with Lord
Beltravers--set off!--gone to Paris!" Helen said not one word, and
Cecilia, in despair, repeated, "Gone!--gone!--absolutely gone! Nothing
more can he done. Oh, that I had done nothing about it! All has failed!
Heaven knows what may happen now! Oh! if I could but have let it all
alone! I never, never can forgive myself! My dear Helen, be angry with
me--reproach me: pray--pray reproach me as I deserve!" But Helen could
not blame one who so blamed herself--one who, however foolish and wrong
she had been, had done it all from the kindest motives. In the agony of
her penitence, she now told Helen all that had passed between her and
the general; that, to avoid the shame of confessing to him her first
deception, she had gone on another and another step in these foolish
evasions, contrivances, and mysteries; how, thinking she could manage
it, she had written without his knowledge; and now, to complete her
punishment, not only had every thing which she had attempted failed, but
a consequence which she could never have foreseen had happened.--"Here I
am, with a note actually in my hand from this horrid Madame de St.
Cymon, whom Clarendon absolutely would not hear of my even calling upon!
Look what she writes to me. She just took advantage of this opportunity
to begin a correspondence before an acquaintance: but I will never
answer her. Here is what she says:--

"'The Comtesse de St. Cymon exceedingly regrets that Lady Cecilia
Clarendon's servant did not arrive in time to deliver her ladyship's letter
into Mr. Beauclerc's own hand. Mr. B. left Old Forest with Lord Beltravers
early to-day for Paris. The Comtesse de St. Cymon, understanding that
Lady Cecilia Clarendon is anxious that there should be as little delay as
possible in forwarding her letter, and calculating that if returned by her
ladyship's servant it must be too late for this day's post from Clarendon
Park, has forwarded it immediately with her own letters to Paris, which
cannot fail to meet Mr. Beauclerc directly on his arrival there.'

"Oh!" cried Lady Cecilia, "how angry the general would be if he knew of
this!" She tore the note to the smallest bits as she spoke, and threw them
away; and next she begged that Helen would never say a word about it. There
was no use in telling the general what would only vex him, and what could
not be helped; and what could lead to nothing, for she should never answer
this note, nor have any further communication of any kind with Madame de
St. Cymon.

Helen, nevertheless, thought it would be much better to tell the general of
it, and she wondered how Cecilia could think of doing otherwise, and just
when she had so strongly reproached herself, and repented of these foolish
mysteries; and this was going on another step. "Indeed, Cecilia," said
Helen, "I wish--on my own account I wish you would not conceal anything. It
is hard to let the general suspect me of extreme folly and absurdity, or
of some sort of double dealing in this business, in which I have done my
utmost to do right and to go straightforward." Poor Helen, with her nervous
headache beating worse and worse, remonstrated and entreated, and came to
tears; and Lady Cecilia promised that it should be all done as she desired;
but again she charged and besought Helen to say nothing herself about the
matter to the general: and this acceded to, Lady Cecilia's feelings being
as transient as they were vehement, all her self-reproaches, penitence, and
fears passed away, and, taking her bright view of the whole affair, she
ended with the certainty that Beauclerc, would return the moment he
received her letter; that he would have it in a very few days, and all
would end well, and quite as well as if she had not been a fool.




CHAPTER VI.


THE first tidings of Beauclerc came in a letter from him to the general,
written immediately after his arrival at Paris. But it was plain that it
must have been written before Lady Cecilia's letter, forwarded by Madame de
St. Cymon, could have reached him. It was evident that matters were as yet
unexplained, from his manner of writing about "the death-blow to all his
hopes," and now he was setting off with Lord Beltravers for Naples, to
follow M. de St. Cymon, and settle the business of the sister's divorce.
Lady Cecilia could only hope that her letter would follow him thither,
enclosed in this Madame de St. Cymon's despatches to her brother; and now
they could know nothing more till they could hear from Naples.

Meanwhile, Helen perceived that, though the general continued to be as
attentive and kind to her as usual, yet that there was something more
careful and reserved in his manner than formerly, less of spontaneous
regard, and cordial confidence. It was not that he was displeased by her
having discouraged the addresses of his ward, fond as he was of Beauclerc,
and well as he would have been pleased by the match. This he distinctly
expressed the only time that he touched upon the subject. He said, that
Miss Stanley was the best and the only judge of what would make her happy;
but he could not comprehend the nature of the mistake she had made;
Cecilia's explanations, whatever they were, had not made the matter clear.
There was either some caprice, or some mystery, which he determined not to
inquire into, upon his own principle of leaving people to settle their love
affairs in their own way. Helen's spirits were lowered: naturally of great
sensibility, she depended more for her happiness on her inward feelings
than upon any external circumstances. A great deal of gaiety was now going
on constantly among the young people at Clarendon Park, and this made
her want of spirits more disagreeable to herself, more obvious, and more
observed by others. Lady Katrine rallied her unmercifully. Not suspecting
the truth, her ladyship presumed that Miss Stanley repented of having,
before she was asked, said No instead of Yes, to Mr. Churchill. Ever since
his departure she had evidently worn the willow.

Lady Cecilia was excessively vexed by this ill-natured raillery: conscious
that she had been the cause of all this annoyance to Helen, and of much
more serious evil to her, the zeal and tenderness of her affection now
increased, and was shown upon every little occasion involuntarily, in a
manner that continually irritated her cousin Katrine's jealousy. Helen had
been used to live only with those by whom she was beloved, and she was not
at all prepared for the sort of warfare which Lady Katrine carried on; her
perpetual sneers, innuendoes, and bitter sarcasms, Helen did not resent,
but she felt them. The arrows, ill-aimed and weak, could not penetrate far;
it was not with their point they wounded, but by their venom--wherever
that touched it worked inward mischief. Often to escape from one false
imputation she exposed herself to another more grievous. One night, when
the young people wished to dance, and the usual music was not to be
had, Helen played quadrilles, and waltzes, for hours with indefatigable
good-nature, and when some of the party returned their cordial thanks, Lady
Katrine whispered, "our musician has been well paid by Lord Estridge's
admiration of her white hands." His lordship had not danced, and had been
standing all the evening beside Helen, much to the discomfiture of Lady
Katrine, who intended to have had him for her own partner. The next night,
Helen did not play, but joined the dance, and with a boy partner, whom
nobody could envy her. The general, who saw wonderfully quickly the by-play
of society, marked all this, and now his eye followed Helen through the
quadrille, and he said to some one standing by, that Miss Stanley danced
charmingly, to his taste, and in such a lady-like manner. He was glad to
see her in good spirits again; her colour was raised, and he observed that
she looked remarkably well. "Yes," Lady Katrine answered, "remarkably well;
and black is so becoming to that sort of complexion, no doubt this is the
reason Miss Stanley wears it so much longer than is customary for an uncle.
Short or long mournings are, to be sure, just according to fashion,
or feeling, as some say. For my part, I hate long mournings--so like
ostentation of sentiment; whatever I did, at any rate I would be
consistent. I never would dance in black. Pope, you know, has such a good
cut at that sort of thing. Do you recollect the lines?"

 "'And bear about the mockery of woe
  To midnight dances and the public show.'"

Lady Castlefort took Miss Stanley aside, after the dance was over, to
whisper to her so good-naturedly, how shockingly severe Katrine had been;
faithfully repeating every word that her sister had said. "And so cruel,
to talk of your bearing about the _mockery_ of woe!--But, my sweet little
lamb, do not let me distress you so." Helen, withdrawing from the false
caresses of Lady Castlefort, assured her that she should not be hurt by
any thing Lady Katrine could say, as she so little understood her real
feelings; and at the moment her spirit rose against the injustice, and felt
as much superior to such petty malice as even Lady Davenant could have
desired. She had resolved to continue in mourning for the longest period
in which it is worn for a parent, because, in truth, her uncle had been a
parent to her; but the morning after Lady Katrine's cruel remarks, Cecilia
begged that Helen would oblige her by laying aside black. "Let it be on my
birthday." Lady Cecilia's birth-day was to be celebrated the ensuing week.
"Well, for that day certainly I will," Helen said; "but only for that day."
This would not satisfy Cecilia. Helen saw that Lady Katrine's observations
had made a serious impression, and, dreading to become the subject of daily
observation, perhaps altercation, she yielded. The mourning was thrown
aside. Then every thing she wore must be new. Lady Cecilia and Mademoiselle
Felicie, her waiting-maid, insisted upon taking the matter into their
own hands. Helen really intended only to let one dress for her friend's
birth-day be bespoken for her; but from one thing she was led on to
another. Lady Cecilia's taste in dress was exquisite. Her first general
principle was admirable--"Whatever you buy, let it be the best of its kind,
which is always the cheapest in the end." Her second maxim was--"Never have
anything but from such and such people, or from such and such places,"
naming those who were at the moment accredited by fashion. "These, of
course, make you pay high for the name of the thing; but that must be. The
name is all," said Lady Cecilia. "Does your hat, your bonnet, whatever it
be, come from the reigning fashionable authority? then it is right, and you
are quite right. You can put down all objections and objectors with the
magic of a name. You need think no more about your dress; you have no
trouble; while the poor creatures who go toiling and rummaging in cheap
shops--what comes of it? but total exhaustion and disgrace! Yesterday, now,
my dear Helen, recollect. When Lady Katrine, after dinner, asked little
Miss Isdall where she bought that pretty hat, the poor girl was quite out
of countenance. 'Really she did not know; she only knew it was very cheap.'
You saw that nobody could endure the hat afterwards; so that, cheap as it
might be, it was money to all intents and purposes absolutely thrown away,
for it did not answer its purpose."

Helen, laughing, observed, that if its purpose had been to look well, and
to make the wearer look well, it had fully succeeded. "Sophistry, my dear
Helen. The purpose was not to look well, but to have a distinguished air.
Dress, and what we call fashion and taste altogether, you know, are mere
matters of opinion, association of ideas, and so forth. When will you learn
to reason, as mamma says? Do not make me despair of you."

Thus, half in jest, half in earnest, with truth and falsehood, sense and
nonsense, prettily blended together, Lady Cecilia prevailed in overpowering
Helen's better judgment, and obtained a hasty submission. In economy, as in
morals, false principles are far more dangerous than any one single error.
One false principle as to laying out money is worse than any bad bargain
that can be made, because it leads to bad bargains innumerable. It was
settled that all Helen wanted should be purchased, not only from those who
sold the best goods, but from certain very expensive houses of fashionably
high name in London. And the next point Lady Cecilia insisted upon was,
that Helen's dress should always be the same as her own. "You know it used
to be so, my dear Helen, when we were children; let it be so now."

"But there is such a difference _now_" said Helen; "and I cannot
afford----"

"Difference! Oh! don't talk of differences--let there be none ever between
us. Not afford!--nonsense, my dear--the expense will be nothing. In
these days you get the materials of dress absolutely for nothing--the
fashion--the making-up is all, us Felicie and I, and everybody who knows
anything of the matter, can tell you. Now all that sort of thing we can
save you--here is my wedding paraphernalia all at your service--patterns
ready cut--and here is Felicie, whose whole French soul is in the
toilette--and there is your own little maid, who has hands, and head, and
heart, all devoted to you--so leave it to us--leave it to us, my dear--take
no thought what you shall put on--and you will put it on all the better."
Felicie was summoned. "Felicie, remember Miss Stanley's dress is always
to be the same as my own. It must be so, my dear. It will be the greatest
pleasure to me," and with her most persuasive caressing manner, she added,
"My own dear Helen, if you love me, let it be so."

This was an appeal which Helen could not resist. She thought that she could
not refuse without vexing Cecilia; and, from a sort of sentimental belief
that she was doing Cecilia "a real kindness,"--that it was what Cecilia
called "a sisterly act," she yielded to what she knew was unsuited to her
circumstances--to what was quite contrary to her better judgment. It often
so happens, that our friends doubly guard one obvious point of weakness,
while another exists undiscovered by them, and unknown to ourselves. Lady
Davenant had warned Helen against the dangers of indecision and coquetry
with her lovers, but this danger of extravagance in dress she had not
foreseen--and into how much expense this one weak compliance would lead
her, Helen could not calculate. She had fancied that, at least, till she
went to town, she should not want anything expensive--this was a great
mistake. Formerly in England, as still in every other country but England,
a marked difference was made in the style of dress in the country and in
town. Formerly, overdressing in the country was reprobated as quite vulgar;
but now, even persons of birth and fashion are guilty of this want of taste
and sense. They display almost as much expensive dress in the country as in
town.

It happened that, among the succession of company at Clarendon Park
this summer, there came, self-invited, from the royal party in the
neighbourhood, a certain wealthy lady, by some called "Golconda," by others
"the Duchess of Baubleshire." She was passionately fond of dress, and she
eclipsed all rivals in magnificence and variety of ornaments. At imminent
peril of being robbed, she brought to the country, and carried about
everywhere with her, an amazing number of jewels, wearing two or three
different sets at different times of the day--displaying them on the most
absurdly improper occasions--at a fete champetre, or a boat race.

Once, after a riding-party, at a pic-nic under the trees, when it had been
resolved unanimously that nobody should change their dress at dinner-time,
Golconda appeared in a splendid necklace, displayed over her riding-dress,
and when she was reproached with having broken through the general
agreement not to dress she replied, that, "Really she had put the thing on
in the greatest hurry, without knowing well what it was, just to oblige her
little page who had brought three sets of jewels for her choice--she had
chosen the _most undressed_ of the three, merely because she could not
disappoint the poor little fellow."

Every one saw the affectation and folly, and above all, the vulgarity of
this display, and those who were most envious were most eager to comfort
themselves by ridicule. Never was the "Golconda" out of hearing, but Lady
Katrine was ready with some instance of her "absurd vanity." "If fortune
had but blessed her with such jewels," Lady Katrine said, "she trusted she
should have worn them with better grace;" but it did not appear that the
taste for baubles was diminished by the ridicule thrown upon them--quite
the contrary, it was plain that the laughers were only envious, and envious
because they could not be envied.

Lady Cecilia, who had no envy in her nature--who was really
generous--entered not into this vain competition; on the contrary, she
refrained from wearing any of her jewels, because Helen had none; besides,
simplicity was really the best taste, the general said so--this was well
thought and well done for some time, but there was a little lurking love
of ornaments in Cecilia's mind, nor was Helen entirely without sympathy in
that taste. Her uncle had early excited it in her mind by frequent fond
presents of the prettiest trinkets imaginable; the taste had been matured
along with her love for one for whom she had such strong affection, and it
had seemed to die with its origin. Before she left Cecilhurst, Helen had
given away every ornament she possessed; she thought she could never want
them again, and she left them as remembrances with those who had loved her
and her uncle.

Cecilia on her birthday brought her a set of forget-me-nots to match those
which she intended to wear herself, and which had been long ago given to
Lady Cecilia by the dear good dean himself. This was irresistible to Helen,
and they were accepted. But this was only the prelude to presents of more
value, which Helen scrupled to receive; yet--

  "Oft to refuse and never once offend"

was not so easily done as said, especially with Lady Cecilia; she was so
urgent, so caressing, and had so many plausible reasons, suitable to all
occasions. On the general's birthday, Lady Cecilia naturally wished to wear
his first gift to her--a pair of beautiful pearl bracelets, but then Helen
must have the same. Helen thought that Roman pearl would do quite as well
for her. She had seen some such excellent imitations that no eye could
detect the difference. "No eye! very likely; but still your own conscience,
my dear!" replied Lady Cecilia. "And if people ask whether they are real,
what could you say? You know there are everywhere impertinent people;
malicious Lady Katrines, who will ask questions. Oh! positively I cannot
bear to think of your being detected in passing off counterfeits. In all
ornaments, it should be genuine or none--none or genuine."

"None, then, let it be for me this time, dear Cecilia."

Cecilia seemed to submit, and Helen thought she had well settled it. But
on the day of the general's _fete_, the pearl bracelets were on her
dressing-table. They were from the general, and could not be refused.
Cecilia declared she had nothing to do with the matter.

"Oh, Cecilia!"

"Upon my word!" cried Lady Cecilia; "and if you doubt me, the general shall
have the honour of presenting, and you the agony of refusing or accepting
them in full salon."

Helen sighed, hesitated, and submitted. The general, on her appearing with
the bracelets, bowed, smiled, and thanked her with his kindest look; and
she was glad to see him look kindly upon her again.

Having gained her point so pleasantly this time, Lady Cecilia did not stop
there; and Helen found there was no resource but to bespeak beforehand for
herself whatever she apprehended would be pressed upon her acceptance.

Fresh occasions for display, and new necessities for expense, continually
occurred. Reviews, and races, and race-balls, and archery meetings, and
archery balls, had been, and a regatta was to be. At some of these the
ladies had appeared in certain uniforms, new, of course, for the day; and
now preparations for the regatta had commenced, and were going on. It was
to last several days: and after the boat-races in the morning, there were
to be balls at night. The first of these was to be at Clarendon Park, and
Mademoiselle Felicie considered her lady's dress upon this occasion as one
of the objects of first importance in the universe. She had often sighed
over the long unopened jewel-box. Her lady might as well be nobody.
Mademoiselle Felicie could no ways understand a lady well born not wearing
that which distinguished her above the common; and if she was ever to
wear jewels, the ball-room was surely the proper place. And the sapphire
necklace would look _a ravir_ with her lady's dress, which, indeed, without
it, would have no effect; would be quite _mesquine_ and _manquee_.

Now Lady Cecilia had a great inclination to wear that sapphire necklace,
which probably Felicie saw when she commenced her remonstrances, for it is
part of the business of the well-trained waiting-woman, to give utterance
to those thoughts which her lady wishes should be divined and pressed into
accomplishment. Cecilia considered whether it would not be possible to
divide the double rows of her sapphires, to make out a set for Helen as
well as for herself; she hesitated only because they had been given to her
by her mother, and she did not like to run the hazard of spoiling the set;
but still she could manage it, and she would do it. Mademoiselle Felicie
protested the attempt would be something very like sacrilege; to prevent
which, she gave a hint to Helen of what was in contemplation.

Helen knew that with Cecilia, when once she had set her heart upon a
generous feat of this kind, remonstrance would be in vain; she dreaded
that she would, if prevented from the meditated division of the sapphires,
purchase for her a new set: she had not the least idea what the expense
was, but, at the moment, she thought anything would be better than letting
Cecilia spoil her mother's present, or put her under fresh obligations of
this sort. She knew that the sapphires had been got from the jewellers with
whom her uncle had dealt, and who were no strangers to her name; she wrote,
and bespoke a similar set to Lady Cecilia's.

"_Charmante!_ the very thing," Mademoiselle Felicie foresaw, "a young lady
so well born would determine on doing. And if she might add a little word,
it would be good at the same opportunity to order a ruby brooch, the same
as her lady's, as that would be the next object in question for the second
day's regatta ball, when it would be indispensable for that night's
appearance; _positivement_, she knew her lady would do it for Miss Stanley
if Miss Stanley did not do it of her own head."

Helen did not think that a brooch could be very expensive; there was not
time to consider about it--the post was going--she was afraid that Lady
Cecilia would come in and find her writing, and prevent her sending the
letter. She hastily added an order for the brooch, finished the letter, and
despatched it. And when it was gone she told Cecilia what she had done.
Cecilia looked startled; she was well aware that Helen did not know the
high price of what she had bespoken. But, determining that she would settle
it her own way, she took care not to give any alarm, and shaking her head,
she only reproached Helen playfully with having thus stolen a march upon
her.

"You think you have out-generaled me, but we shall see. Remember, I am the
wife of a general, and not without resources."




CHAPTER VII.


Of the regatta, of the fineness of the weather, the beauty of the
spectacle, and the dresses of the ladies, a full account appeared in the
papers of the day, of which it would be useless here to give a repetition,
and shameful to steal or seem to steal a description. We shall record only
what concerns Helen.

With the freshness of youth and of her naturally happy temper, she was
delighted with the whole, to her a perfectly new spectacle, and every body
was pleased except Lady Katrine, who, in the midst of every amusement,
always found something that annoyed her, something that "should not have
been so." She was upon this occasion more cross than usual, because this
morning's uniform was not becoming to her, and was most particularly so to
Miss Stanley, as all the gentlemen observed.

Just in time before the ladies went to dress for the ball at night, the
precious box arrived, containing the set of sapphires. Cecilia opened it
eagerly, to see that all was right. Helen was not in the room. Lady Katrine
stood by, and when she found that these were for Helen, her envious
indignation broke forth. "The poor daughters of peers cannot indulge
in such things," cried she; "they are fit only for rich heiresses! I
understood," continued she, "that Miss Stanley had given away her fortune
to pay her uncle's debts, but I presume she has thought better of that, as
I always prophesied she would----generosity is charming, but, after all,
sapphires are so becoming!"

Helen came into the room just as this speech was ended. Lady Katrine had
one of the bracelets in her hand. She looked miserably cross, for she
had been disappointed about some ornaments she had expected by the same
conveyance that brought Miss Stanley's. She protested that she had nothing
fit to wear to-night. Helen looked at Cecilia; and though Cecilia's look
gave no encouragement, she begged that Lady Katrine would do her the honour
to wear these sapphires this night, since she had not received what her
ladyship had ordered. Lady Katrine suffered herself to be prevailed on, but
accepted with as ill a grace as possible. The ball went on, and Helen at
least was happier than if she had worn the bracelets. She had no pleasure
in being the object of envy, and now, when she found that Cecilia could be
and was satisfied, though their ornaments were not exactly alike, it
came full upon her mind that she had done foolishly in bespeaking these
sapphires: it was at that moment only a transient self-reproach for
extravagance, but before she went to rest this night it became more
serious.

Lady Davenant had been expected all day, but she did not arrive till late
in the midst of the ball, and she just looked in at the dancers for a few
minutes before she retired to her own apartment. Helen would have followed
her, but that was not allowed. After the dancing was over, however, as she
was going to her room, she heard Lady Davenant's voice, calling to her as
she passed by; and, opening the door softly, she found her still awake, and
desiring to see her for a few minutes, if she was not too much tired.

"Oh no, not in the least tired; quite the contrary," said Helen.

After affectionately embracing her, Lady Davenant held her at arms' length,
and looked at her as the light of the lamp shone full upon her face and
figure. Pleased with her whole appearance, Lady Davenant smiled, and said,
as she looked at her--"You seem, Helen, to have shared the grateful old
fairy's gift to Lady Georgiana B. of the never-fading rose in the cheek.
But what particularly pleases me, Helen, is the perfect simplicity of your
dress. In the few minutes that I was in the ball-room to-night, I was
struck with that over-dressed duchess: her figure has been before my eyes
ever since, hung round with jewellery, and with that _aureole_ a foot and
a-half high on her head: like the Russian bride's headgear, which Heber
so well called 'the most costly deformity he ever beheld.' Really, this
passion for baubles," continued Lady Davenant, "is the universal passion of
our sex. I will give you an instance to what extravagance it goes. I know a
lady of high rank, who hires a certain pair of emerald earrings at fifteen
hundred pounds per annum. She rents them in this way from some German
countess in whose family they are an heir-loom, and cannot be sold." Helen
expressed her astonishment. "This is only one instance, my dear; I could
give you hundreds. Over the whole world, women of all ages, all ranks, all
conditions, have been seized with this bauble insanity--from the counter to
the throne. Think of Marie Antoinette and the story of her necklace; and
Josephine and her Cisalpine pearls, and all the falsehoods she told about
them to the emperor she reverenced, the husband she loved--and all for
what?--a string of beads! But I forget," cried Lady Davenant, interrupting
herself, "I must not forget how late it is: and I am keeping you up, and
you have been dancing: forgive me! When once my mind is moved, I forget all
hours. Good night--or good morning, my dear child; go, and rest." But just
as Helen was withdrawing her hand, Lady Davenant's eye fixed on her pearl
bracelets--"Roman pearls, or real? Real, I see, and very valuable!--given
to you, I suppose, by your poor dear extravagant uncle?"

Helen cleared her uncle's memory from this imputation, and explained that
the bracelets were a present from General Clarendon. She did not know they
were so "very valuable," but she hoped she had not done wrong to accept of
them in the circumstances; and she told how she had been induced to take
them.

Lady Davenant said she had done quite right. The general was no
present-maker, and this exception in his favour could I not lead to any
future inconvenience. "But Cecilia," continued she, "is too much addicted
to trinket giving, which ends often disagreeably even between friends, or
at all events fosters a foolish taste, and moreover associates it with
feelings of affection in a way particularly deceitful and dangerous to such
a little, tender-hearted person as I am speaking to, whose common sense
would too easily give way to the pleasure of pleasing or fear of offending
a friend. Kiss me, and don't contradict me, for your conscience tells you
that what I say is true."

The sapphires, the ruby brooch, and all her unsettled accounts, came across
Helen's mind; and if the light had shone upon her face at that moment, her
embarrassment must have been seen; but Lady Davenant, as she finished the
last words, laid her head upon the pillow, and she turned and settled
herself comfortably to go to sleep. Helen retired with a disordered
conscience; and the first thing she did in the morning was to look in the
red case in which the sapphires came, to see if there was any note of their
price; she recollected having seen some little bit of card--it was found
on the dressing-table. When she beheld the price, fear took away her
breath--it was nearly half her whole year's income; still she _could_ pay
it. But the ruby brooch that had not yet arrived--what would that cost? She
hurried to her accounts; she had let them run on for months unlooked at,
but she thought she must know the principal articles of expense in dress by
her actual possessions. There was a heap of little crumpled bills which,
with Felicie's griffonage, Helen had thrown into her table-drawer. In vain
did she attempt to decipher the figures, like apothecaries' marks, linked
to quarters and three-quarters, and yards, of gauzes, silks, and muslins,
altogether inextricably puzzling. They might have been at any other moment
laughable, but now they were quite terrible to Helen; the only thing she
could make clearly out was the total; she was astonished when she saw to
how much little nothings can amount, an astonishment felt often by the
most experienced--how much more by Helen, all unused to the arithmetic of
economy! At this instant her maid came in smiling with a packet, as if sure
of being the bearer of the very thing her young lady most wished for; it
was the brooch--the very last thing in the world she desired to see. With
a trembling hand she opened the parcel, looked at the note of the price,
and sank upon her chair half stupified, with her eyes fixed upon the sum.
She sat she knew not how long, till, roused by the opening of Cecilia's
door, she hastened to put away the papers. "Let me see them, my dear, don't
put away those papers," cried Cecilia; "Felicie tells me that you have been
at these horrid accounts these two hours, and--you look--my dear Helen, you
must let me see how much it is!" She drew the total from beneath Helen's
hand. It was astounding even to Cecilia, as appeared by her first unguarded
look of surprise. But, recovering herself immediately, she in a playfully
scolding tone told Helen that all this evil came upon her in consequence of
her secret machinations. "You set about to counteract me, wrote for things
that I might not get them for you, you see what has come of it! As to these
bills, they are all from tradespeople who cannot be in a hurry to be paid;
and as to the things Felicie has got for you, she can wait, is not she a
waiting-woman by profession? Now, where is the ruby-brooch? Have you never
looked at it?--I hope it is pretty--I am sure it is handsome," cried she as
she opened the case. "Yes; I like it prodigiously, I will take it off your
hands, my dear; will that do?"

"No, Cecilia, I cannot let you do that, for you have one the same, I know,
and you cannot want another--no, no."

"You speak like an angel, my dear, but you do not look like one," said
Cecilia. "So woe-begone, so pale a creature, never did I see! do look at
yourself in the glass; but you are too wretched to plague. Seriously, I
want this brooch, and mine it must be--it is mine: I have a use for it, I
assure you."

"Well, if you have a use for it, really," said Helen, "I should indeed be
very glad----"

"Be glad then, it is mine," said Cecilia; "and now it is yours, my dear
Helen, now, not a word! pray, if you love me!"

Helen could not accept of it; she thanked Cecilia with all her heart, she
felt her kindness--her generosity, but even the hitherto irresistible
words, "If you love me," were urged in vain. If she had not been in actual
need of money, she might have been over-persuaded, but now her spirit of
independence strengthened her resolution, and she persisted in her refusal.
Lady Davenant's bell rang, and Helen, slowly rising, took up the miserable
accounts, and said, "Now I must go----"

"Where!" said Cecilia; "you look as if you had heard a knell that summoned
you--what are you going to do?" "To tell all my follies to Lady Davenant."

"Tell your follies to nobody but me," cried Lady Cecilia. "I have enough of
my own to sympathise with you, but do not go and tell them to my mother, of
all people; she, who has none of her own, how can you expect any mercy?"

"I do not; I am content to bear all the blame I so richly deserve, but I
know that after she has heard me, she will tell me what I ought to do, she
will find out some way of settling it all rightly, and if that can but be,
I do not care how much I suffer. So the sooner I go to her the better,"
said Helen.

"But you need not be in such a hurry; do not be like the man who said,
'Je veux etre l'enfant prodigue, je veux etre l'enfant perdu.' L'enfant
prodigue, well and good, but why l'enfant perdu?"

"My dear Cecilia, do not play with me now--do not stop me," said Helen
anxiously. "It is serious with me now, and it is as much as I can do----"

Cecilia let her go, but trembled for her, as she looked after her, and saw
her stop at her mother's door.

Helen's first knock was too low, it was unheard, she was obliged to wait;
another, louder, was answered by, "Come in." And in the presence she stood,
and into the middle of things she rushed at once; the accounts, the total,
lay before Lady Davenant. There it was: and the culprit, having made her
confession, stood waiting for the sentence.

The first astonished change of look, was certainly difficult to sustain.
"I ought to have foreseen this," said Lady Davenant; "my affection has
deceived my judgment. Helen, I am sorry for your sake, and for my own."

"Oh do not speak in that dreadful calm voice, as if--do not give me up at
once," cried Helen.

"What can I do for you? what can be done for one who has no strength of
mind?" I have some, thought Helen, or I should not be here at this moment.
"Of what avail, Helen, is your good heart--your good intentions, without
the power to abide by them? When you can be drawn aside from the right by
the first paltry temptation--by that most contemptible of passions--the
passion for baubles! You tell me it was not that, what then? a few words of
persuasion from any one who can smile, and fondle, and tell you that they
love you;--the fear of offending Cecilia! how absurd! Is this what you both
call friendship? But weaker still, Helen, I perceive that you have been led
blindfold in extravagance by a prating French waiting-maid--to the brink of
ruin, the very verge of dishonesty."

"Dishonesty! how?"

"Ask yourself, Helen: is a person honest, who orders and takes from the
owner that for which he cannot pay? Answer me, honest or dishonest."

"Dishonest! if I had intended not to pay. But I did intend to pay, and I
will."

"You will! The weak have no will--never dare to say I will. Tell me how you
will pay that which you owe. You have no means--no choice, except to take
from the fund you have already willed to another purpose. See what good
intentions, come to, Helen, when you cannot abide by them!"

"But I can," cried Helen; "whatever else I do, I will not touch that fund,
destined for my dear uncle--I have not touched it. I could pay it in two
years, and I will--I will give up my whole allowance."

"And what will you live upon in the mean time?"

"I should not have said my whole allowance, but I can do with very little,
I will buy nothing new."

"Buy nothing--live upon nothing!" repeated Lady Davenant; "how often have
I heard these words said by the most improvident, in the moment of
repentance, even then as blind and uncalculating as ever! And you, Helen,
talk to me of your powers of forbearance,--you, who, with the strongest
motive your heart could feel, have not been able for a few short months to
resist the most foolish--the most useless fancies."

Helen burst into tears. But Lady Davenant, unmoved, at least to all outward
appearance, coldly said, "It is not feeling that you want, or that I
require from you; I am not to be satisfied by words or tears."

"I deserve it all," said Helen; "and I know you are not cruel. In the midst
of all this, I know you are my best friend."

Lady Davenant was now obliged to be silent, lest her voice should betray
more tenderness than her countenance chose to show.

"Only tell me what I can do now," continued Helen; "what can I do?"

"What you CAN do, I will tell you, Helen. Who was the man you were dancing
with last night?" "I danced with several; which do you mean?"

"Your partner in the quadrille you were dancing when I came in."

"Lord Estridge: but you know him--he has been often here."

"Is he rich?" said Lady Davenant.

"Oh yes, very rich, and very self-sufficient: he is the man Cecilia used to
call '_Le prince de mon merite._'"

"Did she? I do not remember. He made no impression on me, nor on you, I
dare say."

"Not the least, indeed."

"No matter, he will do as well as another, since he is rich. You can marry
him, and pay your present debts, and contract new, for thousands instead of
hundreds:--this is what you CAN do, Helen."

"Do you think I can?" said Helen.

"You can, I suppose, as well as others. You know that young ladies often
marry to pay their debts?"

"So I once heard," said Helen, "but is it possible?"

"Quite. You might have been told more--that they enter into regular
partnerships, joint-stock companies with dress-makers and jewellers, who
make their ventures and bargains on the more or less reputation of the
young ladies for beauty or for fashion, supply them with finery, speculate
on their probabilities of matrimonial success, and trust to being repaid
after marriage. Why not pursue this plan next season in town? You must come
to it like others, whose example you follow--why not begin it immediately?"

There is nothing so reassuring to the conscience as to hear, in the midst
of blame that we do deserve, suppositions of faults, imputations which we
know to be unmerited--impossible. Instead of being hurt or alarmed by what
Lady Davenant had said, the whole idea appeared to Helen so utterly beneath
her notice, that the words made scarcely any impression on her mind, and
her thoughts went earnestly back to the pressing main question--"What can
I do, honestly to pay this money that I owe?" She abruptly asked Lady
Davenant if she thought the jeweller could be prevailed upon to take back
the sapphires and the brooch?

"Certainly not, without a considerable loss to you," replied Lady Davenant;
but with an obvious change for the better in her countenance, she added,
"Still the determination to give up the bauble is good; the means, at
whatever loss, we will contrive for you, if you are determined."

"Determined!--oh yes." She ran for the bracelets and brooch, and eagerly
put them into Lady Davenant's hand. And now another bright idea came into
her mind: she had a carriage of her own--a very handsome carriage, almost
new; she could part with it--yes, she would, though it was a present from
her dear uncle--his last gift; and he had taken such pleasure in having it
made perfect for her. She was very, very fond of it, but she would part
with it; she saw no other means of abiding by her promise, and paying his
debts and her own. This passed rapidly through her mind; and when she had
expressed her determination, Lady Davenant's manner instantly returned to
all its usual kindness, and she exclaimed as she embraced her, drew her
to her, and kissed her again and again--"You are my own Helen! These are
deeds, Helen, not words: I am satisfied--I may be satisfied with you now!

"And about that carriage, my dear, it shall not go to a stranger, it shall
be mine. I want a travelling chaise--I will purchase it from you: I shall
value it for my poor friend's sake, and for yours, Helen. So now it is
settled, and you are clear in the world again. I will never spoil you,
but I will always serve you, and a greater pleasure I cannot have in this
world."

After this happy termination of the dreaded confession, how much did Helen
rejoice that she had had the courage to tell all to her friend. The pain
was transient--the confidence permanent.

As Helen was going into her own room, she saw Cecilia flying up stairs
towards her, with an open letter in her hand, her face radiant with joy. "I
always knew it would all end well! Churchill might well say that all the
sand in my hour-glass was diamond sand. There, my dear Helen--there," cried
Cecilia, embracing her as she put the letter into her hand. It was from
Beauclerc, his answer to Lady Cecilia's letter, which had followed him to
Naples. It was written the very instant he had read her explanation, and,
warm from his heart, he poured out all the joy he felt on hearing the
truth, and, in his transport of delight, he declared that he quite forgave
Lady Cecilia, and would forget, as she desired, all the misery she had made
him feel. Some confounded quarantine he feared might detain him, but he
would certainly be at Clarendon Park in as short a time as possible.
Helen's first smile, he said, would console him for all he had suffered,
and make him forget everything.

Helen's first smile he did not see, nor the blush which spread and rose as
she read. Cecilia was delighted. "Generous, affectionate Cecilia!" thought
Helen; "if she has faults, and she really has but one, who could help
loving her?" Not Helen, certainly, or she would have been the most
ungrateful of human beings. Besides her sympathy in Helen's happiness,
Cecilia was especially rejoiced at this letter, coming, as it did, the very
day after her mother's return; for though she had written to Lady Davenant
on Beauclerc's departure, and told her that he was gone only on Lord
Beltravers' account, yet she dreaded that, when it came to speaking, her
mother's penetration would discover that something extraordinary had
happened. Now all was easy. Beauclerc was coming back: he had finished his
friend's business, and, before he returned to Clarendon Park he wished
to know if he might appear there as the acknowledged admirer of Miss
Stanley--if he might with any chance of success pay his addresses to her.
Secure that her mother would never ask to see the letter, considering it
either as a private communication to his guardian, or as a love letter
to Helen, Cecilia gave this version of it to Lady Davenant; and how she
settled it with the general, Helen never knew, but it seemed all smooth and
right.

And now, the regatta being at an end, the archery meetings over, and no
hope of further gaiety for this season at Clarendon Park, the Castleforts
and Lady Katrine departed. Lady Katrine's last satisfaction was the hard
haughty look with which she took leave of Miss Stanley--a look expressing,
as well as the bitter smile and cold form of good breeding could express
it, unconquered, unconquerable hate.




CHAPTER VIII


There is no better test of the strength of affection than the ready turning
of the mind to the little concerns of a friend, when preoccupied with
important interests of our own. This was a proof of friendship, which Lady
Davenant had lately given to Helen, for, at the time when she had entered
with so much readiness and zeal into Helen's little difficulties and debts,
great political affairs and important interests of Lord Davenant's were in
suspense, and pressed heavily upon her mind. What might be the nature of
these political embarrassments had not been explained. Lady Davenant had
only hinted at them. She said, "she knew from the terror exhibited by
the inferior creatures in office that some change in administration
was expected, as beasts are said to howl and tremble before storm, or
earthquake, or any great convulsion of nature takes place."

Since Lady Davenant's return from town, where Lord Davenant still remained,
nothing had been said of the embassy to Russia but that it was delayed.
Lady Cecilia, who was quick, and, where she was not herself concerned,
usually right, in interpreting the signs of her mother's discomfiture,
guessed that Lord Davenant had been circumvented by some diplomatist of
inferior talents, and she said to Helen, "When an ass kicks you never tell
it, is a maxim which mamma heard from some friend, and she always acts
upon it; but a kick, whether given by ass or not, leaves a bruise, which
sometimes tells in spite of ourselves, and my mother should remember
another maxim of that friend's, that the faults and follies of the great
are the delight and comfort of the little. Now, my mother, though she is
so well suited, from her superior abilities and strength of mind, and all
that, to be the wife of a great political leader, yet in some respects she
is the most unfit person upon earth for _the situation_; for, though she
feels the necessity of conciliating, she cannot unbend with her inferiors,
that is, with half the world. As Catalani said of singing, it is much more
difficult to descend than to ascend well. Shockingly mamma shows in her
manner sometimes how tired she is of the stupid, and how she despises the
mean; and all the underlings think she can undo them with papa, for it has
gone abroad that she _governs_, while in fact, though papa asks her advice,
to be sure, because she is so wise, she never does interfere in the least;
but, now it has once got into the world's obstinate head that she does, it
cannot be put out again, and mamma is the last person upon earth to take
her own part, or condescend to explain and set things right. She is always
thinking of papa's glory and the good of the public, but the public will
never thank him and much less her; so there she is a martyr, without her
crown; now, if I were to make a martyr of myself, which, Heaven forbid! I
would at least take right good care to secure my crown, and to have my full
glory round my head, and set on becomingly. But seriously, my dear Helen,"
continued Lady Cecilia, "I am unhappy about papa and mamma, I assure you.
I have seen little clouds of discontent long gathering, lowering, and
blackening, and I know they will burst over their heads in some tremendous
storm at last."

Helen hoped not, but looked frightened.

"Oh, you may hope not, my dear, but I know it will be--we may not hear the
thunder, but we shall see the lightning all the more dangerous. We shall be
struck down, unless--" she paused.

"Unless what?" said Helen.

"Unless the storm be dispersed in time."

"And how?"

"The lightning drawn off by some good conductor--such as myself; I am quite
serious, and though you were angry with me for laughing just now, as if I
was not the best of daughters, even though I laugh, I can tell you I am
meditating an act of self-devotion for my mother's sake--a grand _coup
d'etat_." "_Coup d'etat_? you, Cecilia! my dear--"

"I, Helen, little as you think of me."

"Of your political talents you don't expect me to think much, do you?"

"My political talents! you shall see what they are. I am capable of a
grand _coup d'etat_. I will have next week a three days' congress,
anti-political, at Clarendon Park, where not a word of politics shall be
heard, nor any thing but nonsense if I can help it, and the result shall
be, as you shall see, goodwill between all men and all women--women?
yes, there's the grand point. Mamma has so affronted two ladies, very
influential as they call it, each--Lady Masham, a favourite at court, and
Lady Bearcroft, risen from the ranks, on her husband's shoulders; he, 'a
man of law,' Sir Benjamin Bearcroft, and very clever she is I hear, but
loud and coarse; absolutely inadmissible she was thought till lately, and
now, only tolerated for her husband's sake, but still have her here I
must."

"I think you had better not," remonstrated Helen; "if she is so very
vulgar, Lady Davenant and the general will never endure her." "Oh, he will!
the general will bear a great deal for mamma's sake, and more for papa's. I
must have her, my dear, for the husband is of consequence and, though he is
ashamed of her, for that very reason he cannot bear that any body should
neglect her, and terribly mamma has neglected her! Now, my dear Helen, do
not say a word more against it." Very few words had Helen said. "I must
ponder well," continued Cecilia, "and make out my list of worthies, my
concordatum party."

Helen much advised the consulting Lady Davenant first; but Lady Cecilia
feared her mother might be too proud to consent to any advance on her own
part. Helen still feared that the bringing together such discordant people
would never succeed, but Lady Cecilia, always happy in paying herself with
words answerable to her wishes, replied, "that discords well managed often
produced the finest harmony." The only point she feared was, that she
should not gain the first step, that she should not be able to prevail upon
the general to let her give the invitations. In truth, it required all her
persuasive words, and more persuasive looks to accomplish this preliminary,
and to bring General Clarendon to invite, or permit to be invited, to
Clarendon Park, persons whom he knew but little, and liked not at all. But
as Lady Cecilia pleaded and urged that it would soon be over, "the whole
will be over in three days--only a three days' visit; and for mamma!--I am
sure, Clarendon--you will do anything for her, and for papa, and your
own Cecilia? "--the general smiled, and the notes were written, and the
invitations were accepted, and when once General Clarendon had consented,
he was resolutely polite in his reception of these to him unwelcome guests.
His manner was not false; it was only properly polite, not tending to
deceive any one who understood the tokens of conventional good breeding.
It however required considerable power over himself to keep the line of
demarcation correctly, with one person in particular to whom he had a
strong political aversion: Mr. Harley.--His very name was abhorrent
to General Clarendon, who usually designated him as "That Genius,
Cecilia--that favourite of your mother's! "--while to Lady Davenant
Mr. Harley was the only person from whose presence she anticipated any
pleasure, or who could make the rest of the party to her endurable. Helen,
though apprehensive of what might be the ultimate result of this congress,
yet could not help rejoicing that she should now have an opportunity of
seeing some of those who are usually considered "high as human veneration
can look." It is easy, after one knows who is who, to determine that we
should have found out the characteristic qualities and talents in each
countenance. Lady Cecilia, however, would not tell Helen the names of the
celebrated unknown who were assembled when they went into the drawing-room
before dinner, and she endeavoured to guess from their conversation the
different characters of the speakers; but only a few sentences were
uttered, signifying nothing; snuff-boxes were presented, pinches taken
and inclinations made with becoming reciprocity, but the physiognomy of
a snuff-box Helen could not interpret, though Lavater asserts that every
thing in nature, even a cup of tea, has a physiognomy.

Dinner was announced, and the company paired off, seemingly not standing
on the order of their going; yet all, especially as some were strangers,
secretly mindful of their honours, and they moved on in precedence just,
and found themselves in places due at the dinner-table.

But Helen did not seem likely to obtain more insight into the characters
of these great personages in the dining-room than she had done in the
drawing-room. For it often happens that, when the most celebrated, and
even the most intellectual persons are brought together expressly for the
purpose of conversation, then it does not flow, but sinks to silence, and
ends at last in the stagnation of utter stupidity. Each seems oppressed
with the weight of his own reputation, and, in the pride of high celebrity,
and the shyness, real or affected, of high rank, each fears to commit
himself by a single word. People of opposite parties, when thrown together,
cannot at once change the whole habit of their minds, nor without some
effort refrain from that abuse of their opposites in which they are
accustomed to indulge when they have it all to themselves. Now every
subject seems laboured--for in the pedantry of party spirit no partisan
will speak but in the slang or cant of his own craft. Knowledge is not only
at one entrance, but at every entrance quite shut out, and even literature
itself grows perilous, so that to be safe they must all be dumb.

Lady Cecilia Clarendon was little aware of what she undertook when she
called together this heterogeneous assembly of uncongenials and dissimilars
round her dinner-table. After she had in vain made what efforts she could,
and, well skilled in throwing the ball of conversation, had thrown it again
and again without rebound from either side, she felt that all was flat, and
that the silence and the stupidity were absolutely invincible. Helen could
scarcely believe, when she tried afterwards to recollect, that she had
literally this day, during the whole of the first course, heard only the
following sentences, which came out at long intervals between each couple
of questions and answers--or observations and acquiescences:--"We had a
shower."--"Yes, I think so." "But very fine weather we have had."--"Only
too hot."--"Quite." "The new buildings at Marblemore--are they getting on,
my Lord?"--"Do not know; did not come that way." "Whom have they now at
Dunstanbury?" was the next question. Then in reply came slowly a list of
fashionable names. "Sir John died worth a million, they say."--"Yes, a
martyr to the gout." "Has Lady Rachel done any thing for her eyes?"--"Gone
to Brighton, I believe." "Has any thing been heard of the North Pole
expedition?"--"Not a word." "Crockly has got a capital cook, and English
too."--"English! eh?"--"English--yes." Lord Davenant hoped this English
cook would, with the assistance of several of his brother _artistes_ of
the present day, redeem our country from one-half of the Abbe Gregoire's
reproach. The abbe has said that England would be the finest country in the
world, but that it wants too essentials, _sunshine_ and _cooks_. "Good!
Good! Very!" voices from different sides of the table pronounced; and there
was silence again.

At the dessert, however, after the servants had withdrawn, most people
began to talk a little to their next neighbours; but by this Helen profited
not, for each pair spoke low, and those who were beside her on either hand,
were not disposed to talk; she was seated between Sir Benjamin Bearcroft
and Mr. Harley--Sir Benjamin the man of law, and Mr. Harley the man of
genius, each eminent in his kind; but he of law seemed to have nothing in
him but law, of which he was very full. In Sir Benjamin's economy of human
life it was a wholesome rule, which he practised invariably, to let his
understanding sleep in company, that it might waken in the courts, and for
his repose he needed not what some great men have professed so much to
like--"the pillow of a woman's mind." Helen did not much regret the silence
of this great legal authority, but she was very sorry that the man of
genius did not talk; she did not expect him to speak to her, but she wished
to hear him converse with others. But something was the matter with him;
from the moment he sat down to dinner Helen saw he seemed discomfited. He
first put his hand across his eyes, then pressed his forehead: she feared
he had a bad headache. The hand went next to his ear, with a shrinking,
excruciating gesture; it must be the earache thought Helen. Presently his
jaws were pinched together; toothache perhaps. At last she detected the
disturbing cause. Opposite to Mr. Harley, and beside Lady Davenant, sat a
person whom he could not endure; one, in the first place, of an opposite
party, but that was nothing; a man who was, in Mr. Harley's opinion, a
disgrace to any party, and what could bring him here? They had had several
battles in public, but had never before met in private society, and the
aversion of Mr. Harley seemed to increase inversely as the squares of
the distance. Helen could not see in the object adequate cause for this
antipathy: the gentleman looked civil, smiling, rather mean, and quite
insignificant, and he really was as insignificant as he appeared--not
of consequence in any point of view. He was not high in office, nor
ambassador, nor _charge-d'affaires_; not certain that he was an _attache_
even, but he was said to have the ear of _somebody_, and was reputed to
be secretly employed in diplomatic transactions of equivocal character;
disclaimed, but used, by his superiors, and courted by his timid inferiors,
whom he had persuaded of his great influence _somewhere_. Lady Cecilia
had been assured, from good authority, that he was one who ought to be
propitiated on her father's account, but now, when she perceived what sort
of creature he was, sorely did she repent that he had been invited; and her
mother, by whom he sat, seemed quite oppressed and nauseated.

So ended the dinner. And, as Lady Cecilia passed the general in going out
of the room, she looked her contrition, her acknowledgment that he was
perfectly right in his prophecy that it would never do.




CHAPTER IX.


It was rather worse when the ladies were by themselves. Some of the
party were personally strangers to Lady Davenant; all had heard of her
sufficiently; most had formed a formidable and false opinion of her. Helen
was quite astonished at the awe her ladyship inspired in strangers.
Lady Davenant's appearance and manner at this moment were not, indeed,
calculated to dispel this dread. She was unusually distant and haughty,
from a mistaken sort of moral pride. Aware that some of the persons now
before her had, in various ways, by their own or their husbands' means,
power to serve or to injure Lord Davenant, she disdained to propitiate them
by the slightest condescension.

But how any persons in England--in London--could be strangers to Lady
Davenant, was to a foreign lady who was present, matter of inexpressible
surprise. She could not understand how the wives of persons high in
political life, some of opposite, but some of the same parties, should
often be personally strangers to each other. Foreigners are, on first
coming to England, apt to imagine that all who act together in public life
must be of the same private society; while, on the contrary, it often
happens that the ladies especially of the same party are in different
grades of fashion--moving in different orbits. The number of different
circles and orbits in London is, indeed, astonishing to strangers, and the
manner in which, though touching at tangents, these keep each their own
path, attracted and repelled, or mutually influential, is to those who have
not seen and studied the planisphere, absolutely incomprehensible. And, as
she pondered on this difficulty, the ambassadress, all foreigner as she
was, and all unused to silence, spoke not, and no one spoke: and nought was
heard but the cup on the saucer, or the spoon in the cup, or the buzzing of
a fly in the window.

In the midst of this awful calm it was that Lady Bearcroft blurted out
with loud voice--"Amazing entertaining we are! so many clever people got
together, too, for what?" It was worth while to have seen Lady Masham's
face at that moment! Lady Bearcroft saw it, and, fearing no mortal,
struck with the comic of that look of Lady Masham's, burst into laughter
uncontrolled, and the contrast of dignity and gravity in Lady Davenant only
made her laugh the more, till out of the room at last she ran. Lady Masham
all the while, of course, never betrayed the slightest idea that she could
by any possibility have been the object of Lady Bearcroft's mirth. But Lady
Davenant--how did she take it? To her daughter's infinite relief, quite
quietly; she looked rather amused than displeased. She bore with Lady
Bearcroft, altogether, better than could have been expected; because she
considered her only as a person unfortunately out of her place in society,
and, without any fault of her own, dragged up from below to a height
of situation for which nature had never intended, and neither art nor
education had ever prepared her; whose faults and deficiencies were thus
brought into the flash of day at once, before the malice of party and the
fastidiousness of fashion, which knows not to distinguish between _manque
d'esprit_, and _manque d'usage_.

Not so Lady Davenant: she made liberal and philosophic allowance for even
those faults of manner which were most glaring, and she further suspected
that Lady Bearcroft purposely exaggerated her own vulgarity, partly for
diversion, partly to make people stare, and partly to prevent their seeing
what was habitual, and what involuntary, by hiding the bounds of reality.
Of this Lady Masham had not the most distant conception; on the contrary,
she was now prepared to tell a variety of odd anecdotes of Lady Bearcroft.
She had seen, she said, this extraordinary person before, but had never met
her in society, and delighted she was unexpectedly to find her here--"quite
a treat." Such characters are indeed seldom met with at a certain height
in the atmosphere of society, and such were peculiarly and justly Lady
Masham's delight, for they relieved and at the same time fed a sense of
superiority insufficient to itself. Such a person is fair, privileged, safe
game, and Lady Masham began, as does a reviewer determined to be especially
severe, with a bit of praise.

"Really very handsome, Lady Bearcroft must have been! Yes, as you say, Lady
Cecilia, she is not out of blow yet certainly, only too full blown rather
for some tastes--fortunately not for Sir Benjamin; he married her, you
know, long ago, for her beauty; she is a very correct person--always was;
but they do repeat the strangest things she says--so very odd! and they
tell such curious stories, too, of the things she does." Lady Masham then
detailed a variety of anecdotes, which related chiefly to Lady Bearcroft's
household cares, which never could she with haste despatch; then came
stories of her cheap magnificence and extraordinary toilette expedients.
"I own," continued Lady Masham, "that I always thought the descriptions I
heard must be exaggerated; but one is compelled to acknowledge that there
is here in reality a terrible want of tact. Poor Sir Benjamin! I quite pity
him, he must so see it! Though not of the first water himself, yet still he
must feel, when he sees Lady Bearcroft with other people! He has feeling,
though nobody would guess it from his look, and he shows it too, I am told;
sadly annoyed he is sometimes by her _malapropoisms_. One day, she at
one end of the table and he at the other, her ladyship, in her loud voice
called out to him, 'Sir Benjamin! Sir Benjamin! this is our wedding-day!'
He, poor man, did not hear; she called out again louder, 'Sir Benjamin, my
dear, this day fifteen years ago you and I were married!' 'Well, my dear,'
he answered, 'well, my dear, how can I possibly help that now!'"

Pleased with the success of this anecdote, which raised a general smile,
Lady Masham vouched for its perfect correctness, "she had it from one, who
heard it from a person who was actually present at the time it happened."
Lady Davenant had not the least doubt of the correctness of the story, but
she believed the names of the parties were different; she had heard it
years ago of another person. It often happens, as she observed, to those
who make themselves notoriously ridiculous, as to those who become famous
for wit, that all good things in their kinds are attributed to them; though
the one may have no claim to half the witticisms, and the other may not be
responsible for half the absurdities for which they have the reputation. It
required all Lady Masham's politeness to look pleased, and all her candour
to be quite happy to be set right as to that last anecdote. But many she
had heard of Lady Bearcroft were really incredible. "Yet one would almost
believe anything of her." While she was yet speaking, Lady Bearcroft
returned, and her malicious enemy, leaning back in her chair as if in
expectation of the piece beginning, waited for her puppet to play or be
played off.

All this time Lady Cecilia was not at ease; she, well aware what her
mother would feel, and had felt, while Lady Masham was going on with this
gossip-talk, had stood between her ladyship and Lady Davenant, and, as
Lady Masham did not speak much above her breath, Cecilia had for some time
flattered herself that her laudable endeavours to intercept the sound,
or to prevent the sense from reaching her mother's ear, had succeeded,
especially as she had made as many exclamations as she could of "Really!"
"Indeed!" "How extraordinary!" "You do not say so?" which, as she
pronounced them, might have excited the curiosity of commonplace people,
but which she knew would in her mother's mind deaden all desire to listen.
However, Lady Masham had raised her voice, and from time to time had
stretched her neck of snow beyond Lady Cecilia's intercepting drapery,
so as actually to claim Lady Davenant's attention. The consequences
her daughter heard and felt. She heard the tap, tap, tap of the ivory
folding-knife upon the table; and well interpreting, she knew, even before
she saw her mother's countenance, that Lady Masham had undone herself,
and, what was of much more consequence, had destroyed all chance of
accomplishing that reconciliation with "mamma," that projected coalition
which was to have been of such ultimate advantage to "papa."

Notwithstanding Lady Bearcroft's want of knowledge of the great world, she
had considerable knowledge of human nature, which stood her wonderfully in
stead. She had no notion of being made sport of for the _elegantes_, and,
with all Lady Masham's plausibility of persiflage, she never obtained her
end, and never elicited anything really absurd by all attempts to draw her
out--out she would not be drawn. After an unconquerable silence and all the
semblance of dead stupidity, Lady Bearcroft suddenly showed signs of life,
however, and she, all at once, began to talk--to Helen of all people!--And
why?--because she had taken, in her own phrase, a monstrous fancy to Miss
Stanley; she was not sure of her name, but she knew she liked her nature,
and it would be a pity that her reason should not be known and in the words
in which she told it to Lady Cecilia, "Now I will just tell you why I have
taken such a monstrous fancy to your friend here, Miss Hanley--"

"Miss Stanley--give me leave to mention," said Lady Cecilia. "Let me
introduce you regularly."

"Oh! by no means; don't trouble yourself now, Lady Cecilia, for I hate
regular introductions. But, as I was going to tell you how, before dinner
to-day, as I came down the great staircase, I had an uncommon large, big,
and, for aught I know, yellow corking-pin, which that most careless of all
careless maids of mine--a good girl, too--had left sticking point foremost
out of some part of me. Miss Hanley--Stanley (beg pardon) was behind, and
luckily saw and stopped. Out she pulled it, begging my pardon; so kindly
too, I only felt the twitch on my sleeve, and turned, and loved the first
sight I had of that pretty face, which need never blush, I am sure, though
it's very becoming the blush too. So good-natured, you know, Lady Cecilia,
it was, when nobody was looking, and before any body was the wiser. Not
like some young ladies, or old even, that would have _showed one up_,
rather than help one out in any pin's point of a difficulty."

Lady Cecilia herself was included in Lady Bearcroft's good graces, for she
liked that winning way, and saw there was a real good-nature there, too.
She opened to both friends cordially, _a propos_ to some _love_ of a lace
trimming. Of lace she was a famous judge, and she went into details of her
own good bargains, with histories of her expeditions into the extremity of
the city in search of cheap goods and unheard of wonders at prime cost, in
regions unknown. She told how it was her clever way to leave her carriage
and her _people_, and go herself down narrow streets and alleys, where only
wheel-barrows and herself could go; she boasted of her feats in diving into
dark dens in search of run goods, charming things--French warranted--that
could be had for next to nothing, and, in exemplification, showed the
fineness of her embroidered cambric handkerchiefs, and told their price to
farthing!

Lady Masham's "Wonderful!" was worthy of any Jesuit male or female, that
ever existed.

From her amazing bargains, the lady of the law-knight wen on to smuggling;
and, as she got into spirits, talking loudly, she told of some amber satin,
a whole piece capitally got over in an old gentleman's "Last Will and
Testament," tied up with red tape so nicely, and sealed and superscribed
and all, got through untouched! "But a better thing I did myself,"
continued she; "the last trip I made to Paris--coming back, I set at
defiance all the searchers and _stabbers_, and custom-house officers of
both nations. I had hundreds of pounds worth of Valenciennes and Brussels
lace hid--you would never guess where. I never told a servant--not a mortal
maid even; that's the only way; had only a confidante of a coachmaker.
But when it came to packing-up time, my own maid smelt out the lace was
missing; and gave notice, I am, confident, to the custom-house people to
search me. So much the more glory to me. I got off clear; and, when they
had stabbed the cushions, and torn the inside of my carriage all to pieces,
I very coolly made them repair the mischief at their own cost. Oh, I love
to do things bravely! and away I drove triumphant with the lace, well
stuffed, packed, and covered within the pole leather of the carriage they
had been searching all the time."

At this period of her narrative the gentlemen came into the drawing-room.
"But here comes Sir Benjamin! mum, mum! not a word more for my life! You
understand, Lady Cecilia! husbands must be minded. And let me whisper a
favour--a whist-party I must beg; nothing keeps Sir Ben in good-humour so
certainly as whist--when he wins, I mean."

The whist-party was made, and Lady Cecilia took care that Sir Benjamin
should win, while she lost with the best grace possible. By her
conciliating manners and good management in dividing to govern, all
parties were arranged to general satisfaction. Mr. Harley's antipathy, the
_attache_, she settled at ecarte with Lady Masham, who found him "quite a
well-mannered, pleasant person." Lady Cecilia explained to Mr. Harley, that
it was her fault--her mistake entirely--that this person had been invited.
Mr. Harley was now himself again, and happy in conversation with Lady
Davenant, beside whom he found his place on the sofa.

After Helen had done her duty at harp and piano-forte, Cecilia relieved
her, and whispered that she might now go to her mother's sofa, and rest and
be happy. "Mamma's work is in some puzzle, Helen; you must go and set it to
rights, my dear." Lady Davenant welcomed her with a smile, made room for
her on the sofa, and made over to her the tambour-frame; and now that Helen
saw and heard Mr. Harley in his natural state, she could scarcely believe
that he was the same person who had sat beside her at dinner. Animated and
delightful he was now, and, what she particularly liked in him, there was
no display--nothing in the Churchill style. Whenever any one came near, and
seemed to wish to hear or speak, Mr. Harley not only gave them fair play,
but helped them in their play. Helen observed that he possessed the art
which she had often remarked in Lord Davenant, peculiar to good-natured
genius--the art of drawing something good out of every body; sometimes more
than they knew they had in them till it was brought out. Even from Lord
Masham, insipid and soulless though he was, as any courtier-lord in waiting
could be, something was extracted: Lord Masham, universally believed to
have nothing in him, was this evening surprisingly entertaining. He gave
Lady Davenant a description of what he had been so fortunate as to see--the
first public dinner of the king of France on his restoration, served
according to all the _ci-devant_ ceremonials, and in the etiquette of Louis
the Fourteenth's time. Lord Masham represented in a lively manner the
Marquis de Dreux, in all his antiquarian glory, going through the whole
form prescribed: first, knocking with his cane at the door; then followed
by three guards with shouldered carbines, marching to buttery and hall,
each and every officer of the household making reverential obeisance as
they passed to the _Nef_--the _Nef_ being, as Lord Masham explained to Miss
Stanley, a piece of gilt plate in the shape of the hull of a ship, in which
the napkins for the king's table are kept. "But why the hull of a ship
should be appropriated to the royal napkins?" was asked. Lord
Masham confessed that this was beyond him, but he looked amazingly
considerate--delicately rubbed his polished forehead with the second finger
of the right hand, then regarded his ring, and turned it thrice slowly
round, but the talismanic action produced nothing, and he received timely
relief by a new turn given to the conversation, in which he was not, he
thought, called upon to take any share--the question indeed appeared to him
irrelevant, and retiring to the card-table, he "left the discussion to
abler heads."

The question was, why bow to the Nef at all?--This led to a discussion upon
the advantages of ceremonials in preserving respect for order and reverence
for authority, and then came an inquiry into the abuses of this real good.
It was observed that the signs of the times should always be consulted, and
should guide us in these things.--How far? was next to be considered. All
agreed on the principle that 'order is Heaven's first law,' yet there were
in the application strong shades of difference between those who took part
in the conversation. On one side, it was thought that overturning the
_tabouret_ at the court of France had been the signal for the overthrow
of the throne; while, on the other hand, it was suggested that a rigid
adherence to forms unsuited to the temper of the times only exasperates,
and that, wherever reliance on forms is implicit, it is apt to lead princes
and their counsellors to depend too much on the strength of that fence
which, existing only in the imagination, is powerless when the fashion
changes. Ins a court quite surrounded and enveloped by old forms, the light
of day cannot penetrate to the interior of the palace, the eyes long kept
in obscurity are weakened, so that light cannot be borne: when suddenly
it breaks in, the royal captive is bewildered, and if obliged to act, he
gropes, blunders, injures himself, and becomes incapable of decision in
extremity of danger, reduced to the helplessness which marks the condition
of the Eastern despot, or _les rois faineans_ of any time or country.

As Helen sat by, listening to this conversation, what struck and interested
her most was, the manner in which it went on and went off without leading
to any unpleasant consequences, notwithstanding the various shades of
opinion between the parties. This she saw depended much on the good sense
and talents, but far more on the good breeding and temper of those who
spoke and those who listened. Time in the first place was allowed and
taken for each to be understood, and no one was urged by exclamation,
or misconception, or contradiction, to say more than just the thing he
thought.

Lady Cecilia, who had now joined the party, was a little in pain when she
heard Louis the Fourteenth's love for punctuality alluded to. She dreaded,
when the general quoted "Punctuality is the virtue of princes," that Mr.
Harley, with the usual impatience of genius, would have ridiculed so
antiquated a notion; but, to Lady Cecilia's surprise, he even took the part
of punctuality: in a very edifying manner he distinguished it from mere
ceremonial etiquette--the ceremonial of the German courts, where "they lose
time at breakfast, at dinner, at supper; at court, in the antechamber, on
the stairs, everywhere:"--punctuality was, he thought, a habit worthy to be
ranked with the virtues, by its effects upon the mind, the power it demands
and gives of self-control, raising in us a daily, hourly sense of duty,
of something that ought, that must be done, one of the best habits human
creatures can have, either for their own sake or the sake of those with
whom they live. And to kings and courtiers more particularly, because it
gives the idea of stability--of duration; and to the aged, because it
gives a sort of belief that life will last for ever. The general had
often thought this, but said he had never heard it so well expressed; he
afterwards acknowledged to Cecilia that he found Mr. Harley was quite a
different person from what he had expected--"He has good sense, as well as
genius and good breeding. I am glad, my dear Cecilia, that you asked him
here." This was a great triumph.

Towards the close of the evening, when mortals are beginning to think of
bed-chamber candles, Lady Cecilia looked at the _ecarte_ table, and said to
her mother, "How happy they are, and how comfortable we are! A card-table
is really a necessary of life--not even music is more universally useful."
Mr. Harley said, "I doubt," and then arose between Lady Davenant and him an
argument upon the comparative power in modern society of music and cards.
Mr. Harley took the side of music, but Lady Davenant inclined to think that
cards, in their day, and their day is not over yet, have had a wider range
of influence. "Nothing like that happy board of green cloth; it brings all
intellects to one level," she said. Mr. Harley pleaded the cause of music,
which, he said, hushes all passions, calms even despair. Lady Davenant
urged the silent superiority of cards, which rests the weary talker, and
relieves the perplexed courtier, and, in support of her opinion, she
mentioned an old ingenious essay on cards and tea, by Pinto, she thought;
and she begged that Helen would some time look for it in the library. Helen
went that instant. She searched, but could not find; where it ought to have
been, there it of course was not. While she was still on the book-ladder,
the door opened, and enter Lady Bearcroft.

"Miss Hanley!" cried she, "I have a word to say to you, for, though you are
a stranger to me, I see you are a dear good creature, and I think I may
take the liberty of asking your advice in a little matter."

Helen, who had by this time descended from the steps, stood and looked a
little surprised, but said all that was properly civil, "gratified by Lady
Bearcroft's good opinion-happy to be of any service,"--&c. &c.

"Well, then--sit ye down one instant, Miss Hanley."

Helen suggested that her name was Stanley.

"Stanley!--eh?--Yes, I remember. But I want to consult you, since you are
so kind to allow me, on a little matter--but do sit down, I never can talk
of business standing. Now I just want you, my dear Miss Hanley, to do a
little job for me with Lady Davenant, who, with half an eye can see, is a
great friend of yours.--Arn't I right?"

Helen said Lady Davenant was indeed a very kind friend of hers, but still
what it could be in which Lady Bearcroft expected her assistance she could
not imagine.

"You need not be frightened at the word job; if that is what alarms you,"
continued Lady Bearcroft, "put your heart at ease, there is nothing of that
sort here. It is only a compliment that I want to make, and nothing in the
world expected in return for it--as it is a return in itself. But in the
first place look at this cover." She produced the envelope of a letter.
"Is this Lady Davenant's handwriting, think you?" She pointed to the word
"_Mis-sent_," written on the corner of the cover. Helen said it was Lady
Davenant's writing. "You are certain?--Well, that is odd!--Mis-sent! when
it was directed to herself, and nobody else on earth, as you see as plain
as possible--Countess Davenant, surely that is right enough?" Then opening
a red morocco case she showed a magnificent diamond Sevigne. "Observe now,"
she continued, "these diamonds are so big, my dear Miss Hanley--Stanley,
they would have been quite out of my reach, only for that late French
invention, which maybe you may not have heard of, nor should I, but for the
hint of a friend at Paris, who is in the jewellery line. The French, you
must know, have got the art of sticking small diamonds together so as to
make little worthless ones into large, so that, as you see, you would never
tell the difference; and as it was a new discovery, and something ingenious
and scientific, and Lady Davenant being reported to be a scientific lady,
as well as political and influential, and all that, I thought it a good
opportunity, and a fine excuse for paying her a compliment, which I had
long wished to pay, for she was once on a time very kind to Sir Ben, and
got him appointed to his present station; and though Lord Davenant was the
ostensible person, I considered her as the prime mover behind the curtain.
Accordingly, I sat me down, and wrote as pretty a note as I could pen, and
Sir Ben approved of the whole thing; but I don't say that I'm positive he
was as oft-handed and clean-hearted in the matter as I was, for between you
and I his gratitude, as they say of some people's, is apt to squint with
one eye to the future as well as one to the past--you comprehend?"

Helen was not clear that she comprehended all that had been said; still
less had she any idea what she could have to do in this matter; she waited
for further explanation.

"Now all I want from you then, Miss Hanley--Stanley I would say, I beg
pardon, I'm the worst at proper names that lives--but all I want of
you, Miss Hanley, is--first, your opinion as to the validity of the
handwriting,--well, you are positive, then, that this _mis-sent_ is her
hand. Now then, I want to know, do you think Lady Davenant knew what she
was about when she wrote it?"

Helen's eyes opened to their utmost power of distension, at the idea of
anybody's questioning that Lady Davenant knew what she was about.

"La! my dear," said Lady Bearcroft; "spare the whites of your eyes,
I didn't mean she didn't know what she was about in _that_ sense."

"What sense?" said Helen.

"Not in any particular sense," replied Lady Bearcroft. "But let me go on,
or we shall never come to an understanding; I only meant that her ladyship
might have just sat down to answer my note, as I often do myself, without
having read the whole through, or before I have taken it in quite." Helen
thought this very unlikely to have happened with Lady Davenant.

"But still it might have happened," continued Lady Bearcroft, "that her
ladyship did not notice the delicacy of the way in which the thing was
_put_--for it really was put so that nobody could take hold of it against
any of us--you understand; and after all, such a curiosity of a Sevigne as
this, and such fine 'di'monds,' was too pretty, and too good a thing to be
refused hand-over-head, in that way. Besides, my note was so respectable,
and respectful, it surely required and demanded something more of an
answer, methinks, from a person of birth or education, than the single bald
word 'mis-sent,' like the postman! Surely, Miss Hanley, now, putting your
friendship apart, candidly you must think as I do? And, whether or no, at
least you will be so obliging to do me the favour to find out from Lady
Davenant if she really made the reply with her eyes open or not, and really
meant what she said."

Helen being quite clear that Lady Davenant always meant what she said, and
had written with her eyes open, declined, as perfectly useless, making the
proposed inquiry. It was plain that Lady Davenant had not thought proper
to accept of this present, and to avoid any unpleasant explanations, had
presumed it was not intended for her, but had been sent by mistake. Helen
advised her to let the matter rest.

"Well, well!" said Lady Bearcroft, "thank you, Miss Hanley, at all events
for your good advice. But, neck or nothing, I am apt to go through with
whatever I once take into my head, and, since you cannot aid and abet,
I will trouble you no further, only not to say a word of what I have
mentioned. But all the time I thank you, my dear young lady, as much as
if I took your dictum. So, my dear Miss Hanley--Stanley--do not let me
interrupt you longer in your book-hunt. Take care of that step-ladder,
though; it is _coggledy_, as I observed when you came down--Good night,
good night."




CHAPTER X


"My dear Helen, there is an end of every thing!" cried Lady Cecilia, the
next day, bursting into Helen's room, and standing before her with an air
of consternation. "What has brought things to this sad pass, I know not,"
continued she, "for, but an hour before, I left every body in good-humour
with themselves--all in good train. But now----"

"What?" said Helen, "for you have not given me the least idea of what has
happened."

"Because I have not the least idea myself, my dear. All I know is, that
something has gone wrong, dreadfully! between my mother and Lady Bearcroft.
Mamma would not tell me what it is; but her indignation is at such a height
she declares she will not see that _woman,_ again:--positively will not
come forth from her chamber as long as Lady Bearcroft remains in the house.
So there is a total break up--and I wish I had never meddled with any
thing. O that I had never brought together these unsuitabilities, these
incompatibilities! Oh, Helen! what shall I do?"

Quite pale, Lady Cecilia stood, really in despair; and Helen did not know
what to advise.

"Do you know any thing about it, Helen, for you look as if you did?"

An abrupt knock at the door interrupted them, and, without waiting for
permission, in came Lady Bearcroft, as if blown by a high wind, looking
very red: half angry, half frightened, and then laughing, she exclaimed--"
A fine _boggle-de-botch,_ I have made of it!" But seeing Lady Cecilia, she
stopped short--"Beg pardon--thought you were by yourself, Miss Hanley."

Lady Cecilia instantly offered to retire, yet intimated, as she moved
towards the door, a wish to stay, and, if it were not too much, to ask what
was meant by----

"By _boggle-de-botch_, do you mean?" said Lady Bearcroft. "I am aware it is
not a canonical word--classical, I mean; nor in nor out of any dictionary,
perhaps--but when people are warm, they cannot stand picking terms."
"Certainly not," said Lady Cecilia; "but what is the matter? I am sorry
any thing unpleasant has occurred."

"Unpleasant indeed!" cried Lady Bearcroft; "I have been treated actually
like a dog, while paying a compliment too, and a very handsome compliment,
beyond contradiction. Judge for yourself, Lady Cecilia, if this Sevigne is
to be _sneezed at_?"

She opened the case; Lady Cecilia said the diamonds were certainly very
handsome, but----

"But!" repeated Lady Bearcroft, "I grant you there may be a but to
everything in life; still it might be said civilly, as you say it, Lady
Cecilia, or looked civilly, as you look it, Miss Hanley: and if that had
been done, instead of being affronted, I might after all have been well
enough pleased to pocket my diamonds; but nobody can without compunction
pocket an affront."

Lady Cecilia was sure her mother could not mean any affront.

"Oh, I do not know what she could or could not mean; but I will tell you
what she did--all but threw the diamonds in my face."

"Impossible!" cried Helen.

"Possible--and I will show you how, Miss Hanley. This way: just shut down
the case--snap!--and across the table she threw it, just as you would deal
a card in a passion, only with a Mrs. Siddons' air to boot. I beg your
pardons, both ladies, for mimicking your friend and your parent, but flesh
and blood could not stand that sort of style, you know, and a little
wholesome mimicry breaks no bones, and is not very offensive, I hope?"
The mimicry could not indeed be very offensive, for the imitation was so
utterly unlike the reality, that Lady Cecilia and Helen with difficulty
repressed their smiles. "Ladies may smile, but they would smile on the
wrong sides of their pretty little mouths if they had been treated as I
have been--so ignominiously. I am sure I wish I had taken your advice, Miss
Hanley; but the fact was, last night I did not quite believe you: I thought
you were only saying the best you could to set off a friend; for, since I
have been among the great, and indeed even when I lived with the little, I
have met with so many fair copies of false countenances, that I could
not help suspecting there might he something of that sort with your Lady
Davenant, but I am entirely convinced all you told me is true, for I peeped
quite close at her, lifted up the hood, and found there were not two faces
under it--only one very angry one for my pains. But I declare I would
rather see that than a double one, like my Lady Masham's, with her
spermaceti smile. And after all, do you know," continued Lady Bearcroft in
a right vulgarly-cordial tone--"Do you know now, really, the first anger
over, I like Lady Davenant--I protest and vow, even her pride I like--it
well became her--birth and all, for I hear she is straight from
Charlemagne! But I was going to mention, now my recollection is coming to
me, that when I began talking to her ladyship of Sir Ben's gratitude about
that place she got for him, she cut me short with her queer look, and said
she was sure that Lord Davenant (and if he had been the king himself,
instead of only her husband, and your father, Lady Cecilia, she could not
have pronounced his name with more distinction)--she was sure, she said,
that Lord Davenant would not have been instrumental in obtaining that place
for Sir Benjamin Bearcroft if he had known any man more worthy of it, which
indeed I did not think at the time over and above civil--for where, then,
was the particular compliment to Sir Ben?"

But when Lady Bearcroft saw Lady Cecilia's anxiety and real distress at her
mother's indignant resolution, she, with surprising good-humour said,--"I
wish I could settle it for you, my dear. I cannot go away directly, which
would be the best move, because Sir Benjamin has business here to-day with
Lord Davenant--some job of his own, which must take place of any movements
of mine, he being the more worthy gender.. But I will tell you what I can
do, and will, and welcome. I will keep my room instead of your mother
keeping hers; so you may run and tell Lady Davenant that she is a prisoner
at large, with the range of the whole house, without any danger of meeting
me, for I shall not stir till the carriage is at the door to-morrow
morning, when she will not be up, for we will have it at six. I will tell
Sir Benjamin, he is in a hurry back to town, and he always is. So all is
right on my part. And go you to your mother, my dear Lady Cecilia, and
settle her. I am glad to see you smile again; it is a pity you should ever
do any thing else." It was not long before Cecilia returned, proclaiming,
"Peace, peace!" She had made such an amusing report to her mother of all
that Lady Bearcroft had said and done, and purposed to do, that Lady
Davenant could not help seeing the whole in a ludicrous light, felt at once
that it was beneath her serious notice, and that it would be unbecoming to
waste indignation upon such a person. The result was, that she commissioned
Helen to release Lady Bearcroft as soon as convenient, and to inform her
that an act of oblivion was passed over the whole transaction.

There had been a shower, and it had cleared up. Lady Cecilia thought the
sky looked bluer, and birds sang sweeter, and the air felt pleasanter than
before the storm. "Nothing like a storm," said she, "for clearing the air;
nothing like a little honest hurricane. But with Lady Masham there never is
anything like a little honest hurricane. It is all still and close with an
indescribable volcano-like feeling; one is not sure of what one is standing
upon. Do you know, Helen," continued she, "I am quite afraid of some
explosion between mamma and Lady Masham. If we came to any difficulty with
her, we could not get out of it quite so well as with Lady Bearcroft, for
there is no resource of heart or frankness of feeling with her. Before we
all meet at dinner, I must sound mamma, and see if all is tolerably safe."
And when she went this day at dressing-time with a bouquet, as was her
custom, for her mother, she took Helen with her.

At the first hint of Lady Cecilia's fears, that Lady Masham could do her
any mischief, Lady Davenant smiled in scorn. "The will she may have, my
dear, but she has not the power."

"She is very foolish, to be sure," said Lady Cecilia; "still she might do
mischief, and there is something monstrously treacherous in that smile of
hers."

"Monstrously!" repeated Lady Davenant. "No, no, my dear Cecilia; nothing
monstrous. Leave to Lady Bearcroft the vulgar belief in court-bred
monsters; we know there are no such things. Men and women there, as
everywhere else, are what nature, education, and circumstances have
made them. Once an age, once in half-a-dozen ages, nature may make a
Brinvilliers, or art allow of a Zeluco; but, in general, monsters are mere
fabulous creatures--mistakes often, from bad drawings, like the unicorn."
"Yes, mamma, yes; now I feel much more comfortable. The unicorn has
convinced me," said Lady Cecilia, laughing and singing

  ''Tis all a mere fable; there's nothing to fear.'

"And I shall think of her henceforth as nothing but what she appears to be,
a well-dressed, well-bred, fine lady. Ay--every inch a fine lady; every
word, look, motion, thought, suited to that _metier_."

"That vocation," said Lady Davenant; it is above a trade; with her it
really is a sacred duty, not merely a pleasure, to be fine. She is a fine
lady of the first order; nothing too professional in her manner--no obvious
affectation, for affectation in her was so early wrought into habit as to
have become second nature, scarcely distinguishable from real--all easy."

"Just so, mamma; one gets on so easy with her."

"A curious illusion," continued Lady Davenant, "occurs with every one
making acquaintance with such persons as Lady Masham, I have observed;
perhaps it is that some sensation of the tread-mill life she leads,
communicates itself to those she is talking to; which makes you fancy you
are always getting on, but you never do get beyond a certain point."

"That is exactly what I feel," said Helen, "while Lady Masham speaks, or
while she listens, I almost wonder how she ever existed without me."

"Yes, and though one knows it is all an illusion," said Lady Cecilia,
"still one is pleased, knowing all the time that she cannot possibly care
for one in the least; but then one does not expect every body to care for
one really; at least I know I cannot like all my acquaintance as much as my
friends, much less can I love all my neighbours as myself--"

"Come, come! Cecilia!" said her mother.

"By 'come, come!' mamma means, don't go any further, Cecilia," said she,
turning to Helen. "But now, mamma, I am not clear whether you really think
her your friend or your enemy, inclined to do you mischief or not. Just as
it may be for her interest or not, I suppose."

"And just as it may be the fashion or not," said Lady Davenant. "I remember
hearing old Lady -----, one of the cleverest women of the last century, and
one who had seen much of the world, say, 'If it was the fashion to burn me,
and I at the stake, I hardly know ten persons of my acquaintance who would
refuse to throw on a faggot.'"

"Oh mamma!--Oh Lady Davenant!" exclaimed Helen and Cecilia.

"It was a strong way of putting the matter," said Lady Davenant,
laughing:--"but fashion has, I assure you, more influence over weak minds,
such as Lady Masham's, than either party or interest. And since you do not
like my illustration by fire, take one by water--She is just a person to go
out with, on a party of pleasure, on the smooth surface of a summer sea,
and if a slight shower comes on would pity your bonnet sincerely, but if a
serious squall arose and all should be in danger----"

"Then, of course, every body would take care of themselves," interrupted
Lady Cecilia, "excepting such a simpleton as Helen, who would take care of
you first, mamma, of me next and of herself last."

"I believe it--I do believe it," cried Lady Davenant, and, her eyes and
thoughts fixing upon Helen, she quite forgot what further she was going to
say of Lady Masham.

The perfectly unimpassioned tone, in which her mother had discussed this
lady's character, even the candour, convinced Lady Cecilia as well as
Helen, that nothing further could be done as to drawing them together.
No condescension of manner, no conciliation, could be expected from Lady
Davenant towards Lady Masham, but at the same time there was no fear of any
rupture. And to this humble consolation was Lady Cecilia brought. She told
Helen that she gave up all hope of doing any good, she would now be quite
content if she avoided doing harm, and if this visit ended without coming
to any further outrage on the part of Lady Bearcroft, and without her
mother's being _guilty of contempt_ to Lady Masham. She had done some
little service, however, with respect to the ambassadress, and her mother
knew it. It was well known that the ambassadress governed the ambassador,
and Lady Cecilia had quite won her heart, "so that he will be assuredly
a friend to papa. Indeed, this has been almost promised. Madame
l'Ambassadrice assured me that her husband looks upon Lord Davenant as one
of the first sages of England, that is to say, of Europe; and she says he
is well acquainted with all Lord Davenant's works--and it is my belief,"
concluded Lady Cecilia, "that all Sir William Davenant's works go with her
to papa's credit, for as she spoke she gave a polite glance towards the
bookcase where she saw their gilded backs, and I found the ambassador
himself, afterwards, with 'Davenant on Trade' in his hand! Be it so: it is
not, after all, you know, robbing the dead, only inheriting by mistake
from a namesake, which with foreigners is allowable, because impossible to
avoid, from the time of _'Monsieur Robinson parent apparemment de Monsieur
Crusoe?'_ to the present day."

By dint of keeping well asunder those who would not draw well together,
Lady Cecilia did contrive to get through the remaining morning of this
operose visit; some she sent out to drive with gallant military outriders
to see places in the neighbourhood famed for this or that; others walked or
boated, or went through the customary course of conservatories, pheasantry,
flower-garden, pleasure-grounds, and best views of Clarendon Park--and
billiards always. The political conferences were held in Lord Davenant's
apartment: to what these conferences tended we never knew and never shall;
we consider them as matters of history, and leave them with due deference
to the historian; we have to do only with biography. Far be it from us to
meddle with politics--we have quite enough to do with manners and morality.




CHAPTER XI.


The next day, as Helen was going across the hall, she saw the members
of the last political conclave coming out of Lord Davenant's room, each
looking as if the pope had not been chosen according to his wish--dark and
disappointed; even Mr. Harley's radiant countenance was dimmed, and the
dry symptomatic cough which he gave after taking leave of Lady Davenant,
convinced Helen that all was not well within. He departed, and there seemed
to be among those who remained a greater constraint than ever. There
appeared to be in each an awakened sense that there were points on which
they could never agree; all seemed to feel how different it would have been
if Mr. Harley had remained. True, the absence or presence of a person of
genius makes as much difference in the whole appearance of things, as
sunshine or no sunshine on the landscape.

Dinner, however, was got through, for time and the hour, two hours, or
three, will get through the roughest dinner or the smoothest. "Never saw a
difficult dinner-party better, bothered!" was Lady Bearcroft's compliment,
whispered to Cecilia as they went into the drawing-room; and Helen,
notwithstanding Lady Bearcroft's vulgarity, could not help beginning
absolutely to like her for her good nature and amazingly prompt sympathy;
but, after all, good nature without good manners is but a blundering ally,
dangerous to its best friend.

This evening, Lady Cecilia felt that every one was uncomfortable, and,
flitting about the room, she touched here and there to see how things were
going on. They were not going on well, and she could not make them better;
even her efforts at conciliation were ineffectual; she had stepped in
between her mother, some of the gentlemen, and the general, in an argument
in which she heard indications of strife, and she set about to explain away
contradictions, and to convince every body that they were really all of the
same opinion. With her sweet voice and pretty persuasive look, this might
have done for the general, as a relaxing smile seemed to promise; but it
would not do at all with Lady Davenant, who, from feelings foreign to
the present matter, was irritated, and spoke, as Helen thought, too
harshly:--"Cecilia, you would act Harmony in the comedy to perfection; but,
unfortunately, I am not one of those persons who can be persuaded that
when I say one thing I mean quite another--probably because it is not
my practice so to do. That old epigram, Sir Benjamin, do you know it,"
continued she, "which begins with a bankrupt's roguish 'Whereas?'

  "Whereas the religion and fate of three nations
  Depend on th' importance of our conversations:
  Whereas some objections are thrown in our way,
  And words have been construed to mean what they say,--
  Be it known from henceforth to each friend and each brother,
  When'er we say one thing we mean quite another."

Sir Benjamin gravely remarked that it was good law practice. The courts
themselves would be shut up if some such doctrine were not understood
in the practice there, _subaudito,_ if not publicly proclaimed with an
absolute "Whereas be it known from henceforth." Whether this was dry humour
of Sir Benjamin's, or plain matter of fact and serious opinion, the gravity
with which it was delivered indicated not; but it produced the good effect
of a smile, a laugh, at him or with him. Lady Cecilia did not care which,
the laugh was good at all events; her invincible goodnature and sweetness
of temper had not been soured or conquered even by her mother's severity;
and Lady Davenant, observing this, forgave and wished to be forgiven.

"My dearest Cecilia," said she, "clasp this bracelet for me, will you? It
would really be a national blessing, if, in the present times, all women
  were as amiable as you,'Fond to spread friendships, but to cover heat
 Then, turning to a French gentleman, she spoke of the change she had
observed when she was last at Paris, from the overwhelming violence of
party spirit on all sides.

"Dreadfully true," the French gentleman replied--"party spirit, taking
every Proteus form, calling itself by a hundred names and with a thousand
devices and watchwords, which would be too ridiculous, if they were not
too terrible--domestic happiness destroyed, all society disordered,
disorganised--literature not able to support herself, scarcely appearing in
company--all precluded, superseded by the politics of the day."

Lady Davenant joined with him in his regrets, and added, that she feared
society in England would soon be brought to the same condition.

"No," said the French gentleman, "English ladies will never be so vehement
as my countrywomen; they will never become, I hope, like some of our lady
politicians, '_qui heurlent comme des demons_.'"

Lady Cecilia said that, from what she had seen at Paris, she was persuaded
that if the ladies did bawl too loud it was because the gentlemen did
not listen to them; that above half the party-violence which appeared in
Parisian belles was merely dramatic, to produce a sensation, and draw the
gentlemen, from the black _pelotons_ in which they gathered, back to their
proper positions round the _fauteuils_ of the fair ladies.

The foreigner, speaking to what he saw passing in Lady Davenant's mind,
went on;--"Ladies can do much, however, in this as in all other dilemmas
where their power is, and ought to be, omnipotent."

"Female _influence_ is and ought to be _potent,_" said the general, with an
emphasis on influence, contradistinguishing it from power, and reducing
the exaggeration of omnipotent by the short process of lopping off two
syllables.

"So long as ladies keep in their own proper character," said Lady Davenant,
"all is well; but, if once they cease to act as women, that instant they
lose their privilege--their charm: they forfeit their exorcising power;
they can no longer command the demon of party nor themselves, and he
transforms them directly, as you say," said she to the French gentleman,
"into actual furies."

"And, when so transformed, sometimes unconscious of their state," said the
general, drily, his eye glancing towards the other end of the room, and
lighting upon Lady Bearcroft, who was at the instant very red and very
loud; and Lady Cecilia was standing, as if watchful for a moment's pause,
in which to interpose her word of peace. She waited for some time in vain,
for when she hastened from the other end of the room to this--the scene
of action, things had come to such a pass between the ladies Masham and
Bearcroft, that mischief, serious mischief, must have ensued, had not
Lady Cecilia, at utmost need, summoned to her aid the happy genius of
Nonsense--the genius of Nonsense, in whose elfin power even Love delights;
on whom Reason herself condescends often to smile, even when Logic frowns,
and chops him on his block: but cut in twain, the ethereal spirit soon
unites again, and lives, and laughs. But mark him well--this little happy
genius of Nonsense; see that he be the true thing--the genuine spirit. You
will know him by his well-bred air and tone, which none can counterfeit;
and by his smile; for while most he makes others laugh, the arch little
rogue seldom goes beyond a smile himself! Graceful in the midst of all
his pranks, he never goes too far--though far enough he has been known to
go--he has crept into the armour of the great hero, convulsed the senate in
the wig of a chancellor, and becomingly, decorously, put on now and then
the mitre of an archbishop. "If good people," said Archbishop Usher, "would
but make goodness agreeable, and smile, instead of frowning in their
virtue, how many they would win to the good cause!" Lady Cecilia in this
was good at need, and at her utmost need, obedient to her call, came this
happy little genius, and brought with him song and dance, riddle and
charade, and comic prints; and on a half-opened parcel of books Cecilia
darted, and produced a Comic Annual, illustrated by him whom no risible
muscles can resist. All smiled who understood, and mirth admitted of her
crew all who smiled, and party-spirit fled. But there were foreigners
present. Foreigners cannot well understand our local allusions; our
Cruikshank is to them unintelligible, and Hood's "Sorrows of Number One"
quite lost upon them. Then Lady Bearcroft thought she would do as much as
Lady Cecilia, and more--that she would produce what these poor foreigners
could comprehend. But not at her call came the genius of lively nonsense,
he heard her not. In his stead came that counterfeit, who thinks it witty
to be rude:

  "And placing raillery in railing,
  Will tell aloud your greatest failing--"

that vulgar imp yclept Fun--known by his broad grin, by his loud tone, and
by his rude banter. Head foremost forcing himself in, came he, and brought
with him a heap of coarse caricatures, and they were party caricatures.

"Capital!" Lady Bearcroft, however, pronounced them, as she spread all upon
the table for applause--but no applause ensued.

Not such, these, as real good English humour produces and enjoys,
independently of party--these were all too broad, too coarse. Lady Davenant
despised, the general detested. Helen turned away, and Lady Cecilia threw
them under the table, that they might not be seen by the foreigners.
"For the honour of England, do not let them be spread abroad, pray, Lady
Bearcroft."

"The world is grown mighty nice!" said Lady Bearcroft; "for my part, give
me a good laugh when it is to be had."

"Perhaps we shall find one here," said Lady Cecilia, opening a portfolio
of caricatures in a different style, but they were old, and Lady Bearcroft
would have thrown them aside; but Lord Davenant observed that, if they have
lasted so long,--they must be good, because their humour only can ensure
their permanence; the personality dies with the person: for instance,
in the famous old print of the minister rat-catcher, in the Westminster
election, the likeness to each rat of the day is lost to us, but the
ridicule on placemen ratters remains. The whole, however, is perfectly
incomprehensible to foreigners. "Rats! rat!" repeated one of the
foreigners, as he looked at and studied the print. It was amusing to see
the gravity with which this foreign diplomatist, quite new to England,
listened to Lady Bearcroft's explanation of what is meant in English by a
_rat political_. She was at first rather good on this topic, professing
a supernatural acuteness of the senses, arising from an unconquerable
antipathy, born with her, to the whole race of _rats_. She declared that
she could see a rat a mile off in any man--could, from the moment a man
opened his mouth in parliament, or on the hustings, prophesy whether he
would turn into a rat at last, or not. She, moreover, understood the
language of rats of every degree, and knew even when they said "No," that
they meant "Yes,"--two monosyllables, the test of rats, which betray them
all sooner or later, and transform the biped into the quadruped, who then
turns tail, and runs always to the other side, from whatever side he may be
of.

The _charge-d'affaires_ stood in half bow, lending deferential ear and
serious attention the whole time of this lecture upon rats, without being
able from beginning to end to compass its meaning, and at the close, with a
disconsolate shrug, he exclaimed, "_Ah! Je renonce a ca_--"

Lady Bearcroft went on--"Since I cannot make your excellency understand
by description what I mean by an English rat-political, I must give you
an example or two, dead and living--living best, and I have more than one
noted and branded rat in my eye."

But Lady Cecilia, anxious to interrupt this perilous business, hastily rang
for wine and water; and as the gentlemen went to help themselves she gave
them a general toast, as sitting down to the piano-forte, to the tune of--
"Here's to the maiden of blushing fifteen"--

She sang--

 "Here's to rats and ratcatchers of every degree,
  The rat that is trapped, and the rat that is free,
  The rat that is shy, sir, the rat that is bold, sir,
  The rat upon sale, sir, the rat that is sold, sir.
  Let the rats rat! Success to them all,
  And well off to the old ones before the house fall!"




CHAPTER XII.


Sir Benjamin and Lady Bearcroft departed at six o'clock the next morning,
and all the rest of the political and diplomatic corps _left_ immediately
after breakfast.

Lady Davenant looked relieved, the general satisfied, and Lady Cecilia
consoled herself with the hope that, if she had done no good, she had not
done any harm. This was a bad slide, perhaps, in the magic lantern, but
would leave no trace behind. She began now to be very impatient for
Beauclerc's appearance; always sanguine, and as rapid in her conclusions as
she was precipitate in her actions, she felt no doubt, no anxiety, as to
the future; for, though she refrained from questioning Helen as to her
sentiments for Beauclerc, she was pretty well satisfied on that subject.
Helen was particularly grateful to Lady Cecilia for this forbearance, being
almost ashamed to own, even to herself, how exceedingly happy she felt; and
now that it was no longer wrong in her to love, or dishonourable in him
to wish to be loved, she was surprised to find how completely the idea
of Beauclerc was connected with and interwoven through all her thoughts,
pursuits, and sentiments. He had certainly been constantly in her company
for several months, a whole summer, but she could scarcely believe that
during this time he could have become so necessary to her happiness. While,
with still increasing agitation, she looked forward to his arrival, she
felt as if Lady Davenant's presence was a sort of protection, a something
to rely on, in the new circumstances in which she was to be placed. Lord
Davenant had returned to town, but Lady Davenant remained. The Russian
embassy seemed still in abeyance.

One morning as Helen was sitting in Lady Davenant's room alone with her,
she said suddenly: "At your age, Helen, I had as little taste for what are
called politics as you have, yet you see what I am come to, and by the same
road you may, you will, arrive at the same point."

"I! oh, I hope not!" cried Helen, almost before she felt the whole
inference that might he drawn from this exclamation.

"You hope not?" repeated her ladyship calmly. "Let us consider this matter
rationally, and put our hopes, and our fears, and our prejudices out of the
question, if possible. Let me observe to you, that the position of women in
society is somewhat different from what it was a hundred years ago, or as
it was sixty, or I will say thirty years since. Women are now so highly
cultivated, and political subjects are at present of so much importance, of
such high interest, to all human creatures who live together in society,
you can hardly expect, Helen, that you, as a rational being, can go through
the world as it now is, without forming any opinion on points of public
importance. You cannot, I conceive, satisfy yourself with the common
namby-pamby little missy phrase, 'ladies have nothing to do with
politics.'"

Helen blushed, for she was conscious that, wrong or right, namby-pamby,
little missy, or not, she had hitherto satisfied herself very comfortably
with some such thought.

"Depend upon it, Helen," resumed Lady Davenant, "that when you are married,
your love for a man of superior abilities, and of superior character, must
elevate your mind to sympathy with all his pursuits, with all the subjects
which claim his attention."

Helen felt that she must become strongly interested in every subject in
which the man she loved was interested; but still she observed that she had
not abilities or information, like Lady Davenant's, that could justify her
in attempting to follow her example. Besides, Helen was sure that, even if
she had, it would not suit her taste; and besides, in truth, she did not
think it well suited to a woman--she stopped when she came to that last
thought. But what kindness and respect suppressed was clearly understood by
her penetrating friend. Fixing her eyes upon Helen, she said with a
smile, the candour and nobleness of her character rising above all little
irritation of temper.

"I agree with you, my dear Helen, in all you do _not_ say, and were I to
begin life over again, my conduct should in some respects be different. Of
the public dangers and private personal inconveniences that may result
from women becoming politicians, or, as you better express our meaning
interfering, with public affairs, no one can be more aware than I am.
_Interfering_, observe I say, for I would mark and keep the line between
influence and interference. Female influence must, will, and ought to exist
on political subjects as on all others; but this influence should always
be domestic, not public--the customs of society have so ruled it. Of the
thorns in the path of ambitious men all moralists talk, but there are
little, scarcely visible, thorns of a peculiar sort that beset the path
of an ambitious woman, the venomous prickles of the _domestic bramble_, a
plant not perhaps mentioned in Withering's Botany, or the Hortus Kewensis,
but it is too well known to many, and to me it has been sorely known."

At this instant General Clarendon came in with some letters, which had been
forwarded to him express. One, for Lady Davenant, he had been desired
to put into her hands himself: he retired, and Lady Davenant opened the
letter. By the first glance at her countenance, Helen saw that there was
something in it which had surprised and given her great concern. Helen
withdrew her eyes, and waited till she should speak. But Lady Davenant was
quite silent, and Helen, looking at her again, saw her put her hand to her
heart, as if from some sudden sense of violent bodily pain, and she sank
on the sofa, fell back, and became as pale as death and motionless.
Excessively frightened, Helen threw open the window, rang the bell for Lady
Davenant's own woman, and sent the page for Lady Cecilia. In a few moments
Lady Cecilia and Elliott came. Neither was as much alarmed as Helen
had expected they would be. They had seen Lady Davenant, under similar
attacks--they knew what remedies to apply. Elliott was a remarkably
composed, steady person. She now went on doing all that was necessary
without speaking a word. The paroxysm lasted longer than usual, as Lady
Cecilia observed; and, though she continued her assurances to Helen that
"It was all nervous--only nerves," she began evidently to be herself
alarmed. At length symptoms of returning animation appeared, and then
Cecilia retired, beckoning to Helen to follow her into the next room. "We
had better leave mamma to Elliott, she will be happier if she thinks we
know nothing of the matter." Then, recollecting that Helen had been in the
room when this attack came on, she added--"But no, you must go back, for
mamma will remember that you were present--take as little notice, however,
as possible of what has happened."

Cecilia said that her mother, when they were abroad, had been subject to
such seizures at intervals, "and in former times, before I was born, I
believe," said Lady Cecilia, "she had some kind of extraordinary disease
in the heart; but she has a particular aversion to being thought nervous.
Every physician who has ever pronounced her nervous has always displeased
her, and has been dismissed. She was once quite vexed with me for barely
suggesting the idea. There," cried Cecilia, "I hear her voice, go to her."

Helen followed Lady Cecilia's suggestion, and took as little notice as
possible of what had happened. Elliott disappeared as she entered--the page
was waiting at the door, but to Helen's satisfaction Lady Davenant did not
admit him. "Not yet; tell him I will ring when I want him," said she. The
door closed: and Lady Davenant, turning to Helen, said, "Whether I live or
die is a point of some consequence to the friends who love me; but there
is another question, Helen, of far more importance to me, and, I trust,
to them. That question is, whether I continue to live as I have lived,
honoured and respected, or live and die dishonoured and despised,"--her eye
glanced towards the letter she had been reading. "My poor child," continued
Lady Davenant, looking at Helen's agitated countenance,--"My poor child, I
will not keep you in suspense." She then told Helen that she was suspected
of having revealed a secret of state that had been confided to her husband,
and which it was supposed, and truly supposed, that Lord Davenant had told
to her. Beyond its political importance, the disclosure involved a charge
of baseness, in her having betrayed confidence, having suffered a copy of a
letter from an illustrious personage to be handed about and read by several
people. "Lord Davenant as yet knows nothing of this, the effect upon him is
what I most dread. I cannot show you this," continued she, opening again
the letter she had just received, "because it concerns others as well as
myself. I am, at all events, under obligations that can never be forgotten
to the person who gave me this timely notice, which could no otherwise have
reached me, and the person to whom I am thus obliged is one, Helen, whom
neither you nor I like, and whom Cecilia particularly dislikes--Miss
Clarendon! Her manner of doing me this service is characteristic: she
begins,

"'Miss Clarendon is aware that Lady Davenant has no liking for her, but
that shall not prevent Miss Clarendon from doing what she thinks an act of
justice towards a noble character falsely attacked.'"--Lady Davenant read
no more.

"Had not you better wait till you are stronger, my dear Lady Davenant!"
said Helen, seeing her prepare to write.

"It was once said, gloriously well," replied Lady Davenant, "that the
duties of life are more than life itself--so I think."

While she wrote, Helen thought of what she had just heard, and she ventured
to interrupt Lady Davenant to ask if she had formed any idea of the means
by which the secret could have been betrayed--or the copy of the letter
obtained.

Yes, she had a suspicion of one person, the diplomatist to whom Mr. Harley
had shown such a mortal antipathy. She recollected that the last morning
the _Congress_ had sat in Lord Davenant's cabinet, she had left her
writing-desk there, and this letter was in it; she thought that she had
locked the desk when she had left the room, it certainly was fast when she
returned, but it had a spring Bramah lock, and its being shut down would
have fastened it. She had no proof one way or other, her suspicion rested
where was her instinctive dislike. It was remarkable, however, that she at
once did justice to another person whom she did not like, Mr. Mapletofft,
Lord Davenant's secretary. "His manners do not please me," she said, "but I
have perfect confidence in his integrity."

Helen felt and admired this generous candour, but her suspicions were not
of the diplomatist alone: she thought of one who might perhaps have been
employed by him--Carlos the page. And many circumstances, which she
recollected and put together, now strengthened this suspicion. She wondered
it had not occurred to Lady Davenant; she thought it must, but that she did
not choose to mention it. Helen had often heard Lady Davenant's particular
friends complain that it was extremely disagreeable to them to have this
boy constantly in the room, whatever might be the conversation. There was
the page, either before or behind a screen, always within hearing.

Lady Davenant said that, as Carlos was a Portuguese, and had never been in
England till she had brought him over, a few months before, he could not
understand English well enough to comprehend what was going on. This was
doubted, especially by Helen, who had watched his countenance, and had
represented her doubts and her reasons for them to Lady Davenant, but she
was not convinced. It was one of the few points on which she could justly
be reproached with adhering to her fancy instead of listening to reason.
The more Carlos was attacked, the more she adhered to him. In fact, it was
not so much because he was a favourite, as because he was a _protege_;
he was completely dependent upon her protection: she had brought him to
England, had saved him from his mother, a profligate camp-follower, had
freed him from the most miserable condition possible, and had raised him
to easy, happy, confidential life. To the generous the having conferred
an obligation is in itself a tie hard to sever. All noble-minded people
believe in fidelity, and never doubt of gratitude; they throw their own
souls into those they oblige, and think and feel for them, as they, in
their situation, would think and feel. Lady Davenant considered it an
injustice to doubt the attachment of this boy, and a cruelty she deemed it
to suspect him causelessly of being the most base of human creatures--he, a
young defenceless orphan. Helen had more than once offended, by attempting
to stop Lady Davenant from speaking imprudently before Carlos; she was
afraid, even at this moment, to irritate her by giving utterance to her
doubts; she determined, therefore, to keep them to herself till she had
some positive grounds for her suspicions. She resolved to watch the boy
very carefully. Presently, having finished her letters, Lady Davenant rang
for him. Helen's eyes were upon Carlos the moment he entered, and her
thoughts did not escape observation.

"You are wrong, Helen," said Lady Davenant, as she lighted the taper to
seal her letters.

"If I am not right," said Helen, keeping her eyes upon the boy's changing
countenance, "I am too suspicious--but observe, am I not right, at this
instant, in thinking that his countenance is _bad?_"

Lady Davenant could not but see that countenance change in an extraordinary
manner, in spite of his efforts to keep it steady.

"You cause that of which you complain," said she, going on sealing her
letters deliberately. "In courts of public justice, and in private equity,"
the word _equity_ she pronounced with an austere emphasis, "how often is
the change of countenance misinterpreted. The sensibility of innocence,
that cannot bear to be suspected, is often mistaken for the confusion worse
confounded of guilt."

Helen observed, that, as Lady Davenant spoke, and spoke in his favour, the
boy's countenance cleared up; that vacillating expression of fear, and
consciousness of having something within him unwhipt of justice, completely
disappeared, and his whole air was now bold and open--towards Helen, almost
an air of defiance.

"What do you think is the cause of this change in his countenance--you
observe it, do you not?" asked Helen.

"Yes, and the cause is as plain as the change. He sees I do not suspect
him, though you do; and seeing, Helen, that he has at least one friend in
the world, who will do him justice, the orphan boy takes courage."

"I wish I could be as good as you are, my dearest Lady Davenant," said
Helen; "but I cannot help still feeling, and saying,--I doubt. Now observe
him, while I speak; I will turn my eyes away, that my terrible looks may
not confound him. You say he knows that you do not suspect him, and that I
do. How does he know it?"

"How!" said Lady Davenant. "By the universal language of the eyes."

"Not only by that universal language, I think," said Helen; "but I suspect
he understands every word we say."

Helen, without ever looking up from a bunch of seals which she was rubbing
bright, slowly and very distinctly added,

"I think that he can speak, read, and write English."

A change in the countenance of Carlos appeared, notwithstanding all his
efforts to hold his features in the same position; instead of placid
composure there was now grim rigidity.

"Give me the great seal with the coat of arms on it," said Lady Davenant,
dropping the wax on her letter, and watching the boy's eye as she spoke,
without herself looking towards the seal she had described. He never
stirred, and Helen began to fear she was unjust and suspicious. But again
her doubts, at least of his disposition, occurred: as she was passing
through Lady Davenant's dressing-room with her, when they were going down
to dinner, the page following them, Helen caught his figure in a mirror,
and saw that he was making a horrible grimace at her behind her back, his
dark countenance expressing extreme hatred and revenge. Helen touched Lady
Davenant's arm, but, before her eye could be directed to the glass, Carlos,
perceiving that he was observed, pretended to be suddenly seized with the
cramp in his foot, which obliged him to make these frightful contortions.
Helen was shocked by his artfulness, but it succeeded with Lady Davenant:
it was in vain to say more about it to her, so Helen let it pass. When she
mentioned it afterwards to Lady Cecilia, she said--"I am sorry, for your
sake, Helen, that this happened; depend upon it, that revengeful little
Portuguese gnome will work you mischief some time or other." Helen did not
think of herself--indeed she could not imagine any means by which he could
possibly work her woe; but the face was so horrible, that it came again and
again before her eyes, and she was more and more determined to watch Carlos
constantly.

This was one of the public days at Clarendon Park, on which there was a
good deal of company; many of the neighbouring gentry were to be at
dinner. When Lady Davenant appeared, no inquiries concerning her health
were made by her daughter or by the general--no allusion to her having
been unwell. She seemed quite recovered, and Helen observed that she
particularly exerted herself, and that her manner was more gracious than
usual to commonplace people--more present to everything that was passing.
She retired however early, and took Helen with her. The depression of her
spirits, or rather the weight upon her mind, appeared again as soon as
they were alone together. She took her writing-desk, and looked over some
letters which she said ought to be burned. She could not sleep in peace,
she said--she ought not to sleep, till this was done. Several of these, as
she looked over them, seemed to give her pain, and excited her indignation
or contempt as she from time to time exclaimed--"Meanness!--corruption!--
ingratitude too!--all favours forgotten! To see--to feel this--is the
common fate of all who have lived the life I have lived; of this I am not
so inconsistent as to complain. But it is hard that my own character--the
integrity of a whole life--should avail me nothing! And yet," added she,
after a moment's pause of reflection, "to how few can my character be
really known! Women cannot, like men, make their characters known by
public actions. I have no right to complain; but if Lord Davenant's honour
is to be--" She paused; her thoughts seeming too painful for utterance.
She completed the arrangement of the papers, and, as she pressed down the
lid of her writing-box, and heard the closing sound of the lock, she
said,--"Now I may sleep in peace." She put out the lamp, and went to her
bed-room, carrying with her two or three books which she intended to read
after she should be in bed; for, though she talked of sleeping, it was
plain she thought she should not. Helen prevailed upon her to let her
remain with her, and read to her.

She opened first a volume of Shakspeare, in which was Lady Davenant's
mark. "Yes," said she, "read that speech of Wolsey's; read that whole
scene, the finest picture of ambition ever drawn." And, after she had
heard the scene, she observed that there is no proof more certain of the
truth of poetic description, than its recurring to us at the time we
strongly feel. "Those who tell us," continued she, "that it is unnatural
to recollect poetry or eloquence at times of powerful emotion, are much
mistaken; they have not strong feelings or strong imaginations. I can
affirm from my own experience, that it is perfectly natural." Lady
Davenant rapidly mentioned some instances of this sort which she
recollected, but seeing the anxiety of Helen's look, she added, "You are
afraid that I am feverish; you wish me to rest; then, go on reading to
me."

Helen read on, till Lady Davenant declared she would not let her sit up any
longer. "Only, before you go, my dear child, look here at what I have been
looking at while you have been reading." She made Helen place herself so as
to see exactly in the same direction and light in which she was looking,
and she pointed out to her, in the lining of the bed, a place where, from
the falling of the folds and the crinkles in the material, a figure with
the head, head-dress, and perfect profile of an old woman with a turned-up
chin, appeared. At first Helen could not see it; but at last she caught
it, and was struck with it. "The same sort of curious effect of chance
resemblance and coincidence which painters, Leonardo da Vinci in
particular, have observed in the moss and stains on old stones," observed
Lady Davenant. "But it struck me to-night, Helen, perhaps because I am
a little feverish--it struck me in a new point of view--moral, not
picturesque. If such be the effects of chance, or of coincidence, how
cautious we should be in deciding from appearances, or pronouncing from
circumstantial evidence upon the guilt of evil design in any human
creature."

"You mean this to apply to me about Carlos?" said Helen.

"I do. But not only of him and you was I thinking, but of myself and those
who judge of me falsely from coincidences, attributing to me designs which
I never had, and actions of which I am incapable." She suddenly raised
herself in her bed, and was going to say more, but the pendule striking at
that instant two o'clock, she stopped abruptly, kissed Helen, and sent her
away.

Helen gathered together and carried away with her all the books, that Lady
Davenant might not be tempted to look at them more. As she had several
piled on one arm, and had a taper in her hand, she was somewhat encumbered,
and, though she managed to open the bed-room door, and to shut it again
without letting any of the books fall, and crossed the little ante-room
between the bed-chamber and dressing-room safely, yet, as she was opening
the dressing-room door, and taking too much or too little care of some part
of her pyramid of books, down came the whole pile with a noise which, in
the stillness of the night, sounded tremendous. She was afraid it would
disturb Lady Davenant, and was going back to tell her what it was, when she
was startled by hearing, as she thought, the moving of a chair or table in
the dressing-room: she stopped short to listen--all was silent; she thought
she had mistaken the direction in which the noise came.

She softly opened the dressing-room door, and looked in--all was silent--no
chair, or stool, or table overturned, every thing was in its place exactly
as they had left it, but there was a strong smell of a half extinguished
lamp: she thought it had been put out when they had left the room, she now
supposed it had not been sufficiently lowered, she turned the screw, and
took care now to see it completely extinguished; then went back for the
books, and as people sometimes will, when most tired and most late, be most
orderly, she would not go to bed without putting every volume in its place
in the book-case. After reaching to put one book upon the highest shelf,
as she was getting down she laid her hand on the top of Lady Davenant's
writing-box, and, as she leaned on it, was surprised to hear the click of
its lock closing. The sound was so peculiar she could not be mistaken;
besides, she thought she had felt the lid give way under her pressure.
There was no key left in the lock--she perfectly recollected the very sound
of that click when Lady Davenant shut the lid down before leaving the room
this night. She stood looking at the lock, and considering how this could
be, and as she remained perfectly still, she heard, or thought she heard
some one breathing near her. Holding in her own breath, she listened
and cautiously looked round without stirring from the place where she
stood--one of the window curtains moved, so at least she thought--yes,
certainly there was some living thing behind it. It might be Lady
Davenant's great dog; but looking again at the bottom of the curtain she
saw a human foot. The page, Carlos! was her instant suspicion, and his
vengeful face came before her, and a vision of a stiletto! or she did not
well know what. She trembled all over; yet she had presence of mind enough
to recollect that she should not seem to take notice. And, while she moved
about the books on the table, she gave another look, and saw that the foot
was not withdrawn. She knew she was safe still, it had not been perceived
that she had seen it; now what was she to do? "Go up to that curtain and
draw it back and face the boy"--but she did not dare; yet he was only
a boy--But it might be a man and not the page. Better go and call
somebody--tell Lady Davenant. She MUST go through the antechamber, and pass
close to that curtain to open the door. All this was the thought of one
moment, end she went on holding up the light to the book-shelves as if
in quest of some book, and kept coasting along to gain the door; she was
afraid when she was to pass the window-curtain, either of touching it,
or of stumbling over that foot. But she got past without touching or
stumbling, opened the door, whisked through--that was done too quickly,
but she could not help it,--she shut, bolted the door, and ran across the
ante-chamber to Lady Davenant's bed-room. She entered softly, aware of the
danger to her of sudden alarm. But Lady Davenant was not asleep, was not
alarmed, but was _effective_ in a moment. First she asked:--"Did you lock
the door after you?" "Yes, bolted it,"--"That is well." Neither of them
said. "Who do you think it is?" But each knew what the other thought. They
returned through the ante-chamber to the dressing-room. But when they
opened the door, all was quiet--no one behind the curtain, no one in the
room--they searched under the sofas, everywhere; there was no closet or
hiding-place in which any one could be concealed. The window fastenings
were unstirred. But the door into the gallery was unlocked, and the simple
thing appeared--that Helen, in her confusion, had thought only of fastening
the door into the ante-chamber, which also opened on the gallery, but had
totally forgotten to lock that from the dressing-room into the gallery, by
which whoever had been in the room had escaped without any difficulty. Lady
Davenant rather inclined to believe that no one had been there, and that it
was all Helen's imagination. But Helen persisted that she had seen what she
had seen, and heard what she had heard. They went into the gallery--all
silence, no creature visible, and the doors at the ends of the gallery
locked outside.

After a fruitless search they retired, Lady Davenant to her own room, and
Helen to hers, full of shame and regret that she had not had the courage
to open the curtain at the right moment. Nothing could stir her belief,
however, in the evidence of her senses; the boy must have been there, and
must be still concealed somewhere in the gallery, or in some of the rooms
opening into it. Some of these were unoccupied, but they were all locked
up, as Lady Davenant had told her when she had proposed searching them;
one or two they tried and found fastened. She stood at her own door, after
having put down the candle on her table, still giving a lingering look-out,
when, through the darkness in the gallery at the further end, she saw a ray
of light on the floor, which seemed to come from under the door of a room
unoccupied--Mr. Mapletofft's room; he had gone to town with Lord Davenant.
Helen went on tiptoe very softly along the gallery, almost to this door,
when it suddenly opened, and the page stood before her, the lamp in his
hand shining full on his face and on hers. Both started--then both were
motionless for one second--but he, recovering instantly, shot back again
into the room, flung to the door, and locked it.

"Seen him!" cried Lady Davenant, when Helen flew to her room and told her;
"seen him! do you say?" and then ringing her bell, she bade Helen run and
knock at the general's door, while she went herself to Mr. Mapletofft's
room, commanding Carlos to open the door immediately. But he would not open
it, nor make any answer; the servants came, and the general ordered one to
go round to the windows of the room lest the boy should escape that way. It
was too late, he had escaped; when the door was forced, one of the windows
was found open; Carlos was not in the room; he must have swung himself down
from the height by means of a tree which was near the window. The lamp was
still burning, and papers half burnt smouldering on the table. There were
sufficient remains to tell what they had been. Lady Davenant saw, in the
handwriting of Carlos, copies of letters taken from her desk. One half
unburnt cover of the packet he had been making up, showed by its direction
to whom it was to have been sent, and there were a few lines in the boy's
own writing within--side-addressed to his employer, which revealed the whole.
His employer was, as Lady Davenant had suspected--the diplomatist!

A duplicate Bramah key was found under the table, and she recollected that
she had some months ago missed this duplicate key of her desk, and supposed
she had dropped it from her watch-ring while out walking; she recollected,
further, that Carlos had with great zeal assisted her in the search for
it all through the shrubbery walks. The proofs of this boy's artifice and
long-premeditated treachery, accumulating upon Lady Davenant, shocked her
so much that she could not think of anything else. "Is it possible? is
it in human nature?" she exclaimed. "Such falsehood, such art, such
ingratitude!" As she fixed her eyes upon the writing, scarcely yet dry, she
repeated. "It _is_ his writing--I see it, yet can scarcely believe it! I,
who taught him to write myself--guided that little hand to make the first
letters that he ever formed! And this is in human nature! I could not have
conceived it--it is dreadful to be so convinced, it lowers one's confidence
in one's fellow-creatures. That is the worst of all!" She sighed deeply,
and then, turning to Helen, said, "But let us think no more of it to-night,
we can do no more, they are in pursuit of him; I hope I may never, never,
see him more."




CHAPTER XIII.


Some people value their friends most for active service, some for passive
kindness. Some are won by tender expressions, some convinced by solid
proofs of regard; others of a yet nobler kind, and of this sort was Lady
Davenant, are apt to be best pleased, most touched, by proofs that their
own character has been thoroughly understood, and that they have justly
appreciated the good qualities of their friend. More than by all the
kindness and sympathy Helen had ever before shown her was she now pleased
and touched by the respect for her feelings in this affair of the page.
Helen never having at the moment of his detection nor afterwards, by word
or look, indulged in the self-triumph of "You see how right I was!" which
implies, "You see how wrong you were!" On the contrary, she gave what
comfort she honestly could by showing that she knew from what humane
motives and generous feelings Lady Davenant had persisted in supporting
this boy to the last.

As to the little wretch himself, he appeared no more. Search was made for
him in every direction, but he was not to be found, and Helen thought it
was well that Lady Davenant should be spared the pain of seeing or hearing
more about him.

The whole mystery was now solved, the difficulty for Lady Davenant in a
fair way to be ended. She had felt an instinctive aversion to the fawning
tone of the diplomatist, whom she had suspected of caballing against Lord
Davenant secretly, and it was now proved that he had been base beyond what
she could have conceived possible; had been in confederacy with this boy,
whom he had corrupted, purchasing from him copies of private letters, and
bribing him to betray his benefactress. The copy of that letter from an
illustrious personage had been thus obtained. The proofs now brought home
to the guilty person, deprived him at once of all future means of injuring
Lord Davenant. Completely in their power, he would be ready to ensure
silence at any price, and, instead of caballing further, this low intriguer
would now be compelled to return from whence he came, too happy to be
permitted to retreat from his situation, and quit England without being
brought to public disgrace. No notice of the report that had been in
private circulation against Lady Davenant having yet appeared in the public
prints, it was possible to prevent the mischief that even the mention of
her name in such an affair must have occasioned. It was necessary, however,
that letters should be written immediately to the different persons whom
the private reports had reached; and Helen and her daughter trembled for
her health in consequence of this extreme hurry and fatigue, but she
repeated her favourite maxim--"Better to wear out, than to rust out"--and
she accomplished all that was to be done. Lord Davenant wrote in triumph
that all was settled, all difficulties removed, and they were to set out
for Russia immediately.

And now Lady Davenant breathed freely. Relieved from the intolerable
thought that the base finger of suspicion could point at her or at Lord
Davenant, her spirits rose, her whole appearance renovated, and all the
fears that Helen and her daughter had felt, lest she should not be able
to sustain the hardships of a long voyage and the rigour of a northern
climate, were now completely dispelled.

The day of departure was fixed--Lady Davenant remained, however, as long
as she possibly could with her daughter; and she was anxious, too, to see
Granville Beauclerc before she left Clarendon Park.

The number of the days of quarantine were gone over every morning at
breakfast by Lady Cecilia and the general; they looked in the papers
carefully for the arrivals at the hotel which Beauclerc usually frequented.
This morning, in reading the list aloud, the general came to the name of
Sir Thomas D'Aubigny, brother to the colonel. The paragraph stated that
Colonel D'Aubigny had left some manuscripts to his brother, which would
soon be published, and then followed some puff in the usual style, which
the general did not think it necessary to read. But one of the officers,
who knew some of the D'Aubignys, went on talking of the colonel, and
relating various anecdotes to prove that his souvenirs would be amusing.
Helen, who was conscious that she always blushed when Colonel D'Aubigny's
name was mentioned, and that the general had observed it, was glad that he
never looked up from what he was reading, and when she had courage to turn
towards her, she admired Cecilia's perfect self-possession. Beauclerc's
name was not among the arrivals, and it was settled consequently that they
should not see him this day.

Some time after they had left the breakfast-room, Helen found Lady Davenant
in her own apartment, sitting, as it was very unusual with her, perfectly
unemployed--her head leaning on her hand, and an expression of pain in her
countenance. "Are not you well, my dear Lady Davenant?" Helen asked.

"My mind is not well," she replied, "and that always affects my body, and
I suppose my looks." After a moment's silence she fixed her eyes on Helen,
and said, "You tell me that Colonel D'Aubigny never was a lover--never was
an admirer of yours?"

"Never!" said Helen, low, but very decidedly. Lady Davenant sighed, but did
not speak.

After a longer continuance of silence than had almost ever occurred when
they two were alone together, Lady Davenant looked up, and said, "I hope in
God that I am mistaken. I pray that I may never live to see it!"

"To see what?" cried Helen.

"To see that one little black spot, invisible to you, Helen, the speck of
evil in that heart--my daughter's heart--spread and taint, and destroy all
that is good. It must be cut out--at any pain it must be cut away; if any
part be unsound, the corruption will spread."

"Corruption in Cecilia!" exclaimed Helen. "Oh! I know her--I know her from
dear childhood! there is nothing corrupt in her, no, not a thought!"

"My dear Helen, you see her as she has been--as she is. I see her as she
may become--very--frightfully different. Helen! if truth fail, if the
principle of truth fail in her character, all will fail! All that charming
nature, all that fair semblance, all that fair reality, all this bright
summer's dream of happiness, even love--the supreme felicity of her
warm heart--even love will fail her. Cecilia will lose her husband's
affections!"

Helen uttered a faint cry.

"Worse!" continued Lady Davenant. "Worse! she will lose her own esteem, she
will sink, but I shall be gone," cried she, and pressing her hand upon
her heart, she faintly repeated, "Gone!" And then abruptly added, "Call
Cecilia! I must see Cecilia, I must speak to her. But first I will tell
you, from a few words that dropped this morning from General Clarendon, I
suspect--I fear that Cecilia has deceived him!"

"Impossible!--about what--about whom?"

"That Colonel D'Aubigny," said Lady Davenant.

"I know all about it, and it was all nothing but nonsense. Did you look at
her when the general read that paragraph this morning--did you see that
innocent countenance?"

"I saw it, Helen, and thought as you did, but I have been so deceived--so
lately in countenance!"

"Not by hers--never."

"Not by yours, Helen, never. And yet, why should I say so? This very
morning, yours, had I not known you, yours would have misled me."

"Oh, my foolish absurd habit of blushing, how I wish I could prevent it!"
said Helen; "I know it will make me betray somebody some time or other."

"Betray! What have you to betray?" cried Lady Davenant, leaning forward
with an eagerness of eye and voice that startled Helen from all power of
immediate reply. After an instant's pause, however, she answered firmly,
"Nothing, Lady Davenant, and that there is nothing wrong to be known about
Cecilia, I as firmly believe as that I stand here at this moment. Can you
suspect anything really wrong?"

"Suspect!--wrong!" cried Lady Davenant, starting up, with a look in her
eyes which made Helen recoil. "Helen, what can you conceive that I suspect
wrong?--Cecilia?--Captain D'Aubigny?--What did you mean? Wrong did you
say?--of Cecilia? Could you mean--could you conceive, Helen, that I, having
such a suspicion could be here--living with her--or--living anywhere--" And
she sank down on the sofa again, seized with sudden spasm--in a convulsion
of agonising pain. But she held Helen's hand fast grasped, detaining
her--preventing her from pulling the bell; and by degrees the pain passed
off, the livid hue cleared away, the colour of life once more returned, but
more tardily than before, and Helen was excessively alarmed.

"Poor child! my poor, dear child, I feel--I hear your heart beating. You
are a coward, Helen, but a sweet creature; and I love you--and I love my
daughter. What were we saying?"

"Oh, say no more! say no more now, for Heaven's sake," said Helen, kneeling
beside her; and, yielding to that imploring look, Lady Davenant, with a
fond smile, parted the hair on her forehead, kissed her, and remained
perfectly quiet and silent for some time.

"I am quite well again now," said she, "and quite composed. If Cecilia has
told her husband the whole truth, she will continue to be, as she is, a
happy wife; but if she have deceived him in the estimation of a single
word--she is undone. With him, of all men, never will confidence, once
broken, unite again. Now General Clarendon told me this morning--would
I had known it before the marriage!--that he had made one point with my
daughter, and only one, on the faith of which he married: the point was,
that she should tell him, if she had ever loved any other man. And she told
him--I fear from some words which he said afterwards--I am sure he is in
the belief--the certainty, that his wife never loved any man breathing but
himself."

"Nor did she," said Helen. "I can answer for it--she has told him the
truth--and she has nothing to fear, nor have you."

"You give me new life!" cried Lady Davenant, her face becoming suddenly
radiant with hope; "but how can you answer for this, Helen? You had no part
in any deceit, I am sure, but there was something about a miniature of
you, which I found in Colonel D'Aubigny's hands one day. That was done, I
thought at the time, to deceive me, to make me believe that you were his
object.--Deceit there was."

"On his part," said Helen, "much and always; but on Cecilia's there was
only, from her over-awe of you, some little concealment; but the whole was
broken off and repented of, whatever little there was, long since. And as
to loving him, she never did; she told me so then, and often and often she
has told me so since."

"Convince me of that," said Lady Davenant; "convince me that she thought
what she said. I believe, indeed, that till she met General Clarendon
she never felt any enthusiastic attachment, but I thought she liked that
man--it was all coquetry, flirting nonsense perhaps. Be it so--I am willing
to believe it. Convince me but that she is true--there is the only point of
consequence. The man is dead and gone, the whole in oblivion, and all that
is of importance is her truth; convince me but of that, and I am a happy
mother."

Helen brought recollections, and proofs from conversations at the time and
letters since, confirming at least Cecilia's own belief that she had never
loved the man, that it was all vanity on her part and deception on his:
Lady Davenant listened, willing to be convinced.

"And now," said she, "let us put this matter out of our minds entirely--I
want to talk to you of yourself."

She took Helen out with her in her pony-phaeton, and spoke of Granville
Beauclerc, and of his and Helen's prospects of happiness.

Lady Cecilia, who was riding with her husband in some fields adjoining the
park, caught a glimpse of the phaeton as it went along the avenue, and,
while the general was giving some orders to the wood-ranger about a new
plantation, she, telling him that she would be back in two minutes,
cantered off to overtake her mother, and, making a short cut across the
fields, she leaped a wide ha-ha which came in her way. She was an excellent
horse-woman, and Fairy carried her lightly over; and when she heard the
general's voice in dismay and indignation at what she had done, she turned
and laughed, and cantered on till she overtook the phaeton. The breeze had
blown her hair most becomingly, and raised her colour, and her eyes were
joyously bright, and her light figure, always well on horseback, now looked
so graceful as she bent to speak to her mother, that her husband could not
find it in his heart to scold her, and he who came to chide remained to
admire. Her mother, looking up at her, could not help exclaiming,

"Well! certainly, you are an excessively pretty creature!"

"Bearers of good news always look well, I believe," said she, smiling; "so
there is now some goodness in my face."

"That there certainly is," said her mother, fondly.

"But you certainly don't know what it is--you cannot know till I tell
you, my dearest Helen--my dear mother, I mean. Granville Beauclerc will
be here to-day--I am sure of it. So pray do not go far from home--do not
go out of the grounds: this was what I was in such a hurry to say to
you."

"But how do you know, Cecilia?"

"Just because I can read," replied she, "because I can read a newspaper
through, which none of you newspaper-readers by profession could do this
morning. After you all of you laid them down I took them up, and found
in that evening paper which your stupid aide-de-camp had been poring and
boring over, a fresh list of arrivals, and Mr. Granville Beauclerc among
them at full length. Now he would not stay a moment longer in town than was
absolutely necessary, you know, or else he ought to be excommunicated. But
it is not in his nature to delay; he will be here directly--I should not be
surprised--"

"You are right, Cecilia," interrupted the general. "I see a caleche on that
road.--It is he."

The caleche turned into the park, and in a few minutes they
met.--Carriages, horses, and servants, were sent off to the house, while
the whole party walked, and talked, and looked. Lady Cecilia was in
delightful spirits, and so affectionately, so delicately joyful--so kind,
that if Helen and Beauclerc had ever blamed, or had reason to blame her, it
must now be for ever forgotten. As, in their walk, they came near that
seat by the water's side where the lovers had parted, Cecilia whispered
something to her mother, and instantly it was "done as desired." Beauclerc
and Helen were left to their own explanations, and the rest of the party
pursued their walk home. Of what passed in this explanatory scene no note
has been transmitted to the biographer, and we must be satisfied with the
result.




CHAPTER XIV.


"All is right!" cried Lady Cecilia. "O my dear mother, I am the happiest
creature in the world, if you were not going away; could not you stay--a
little, a very little longer--just till--"

"No, no, my dear, do not urge me to stay," said Lady Davenant; "I
cannot--your father expects me to-morrow."

All her preparations were made--in short, it must be so, and Lady Davenant
begged her daughter would not spend the short remaining time they were to
have together in entreaties, distressing and irritating to the feelings of
those who ask and of those who must refuse. "Let us enjoy in peace," said
she, "all that is to be enjoyed this day before I go."

When Helen entered the drawing-room before dinner, knowing that she was
very late, she found assembled Lady Davenant, Beauclerc, and the officers,
but Cecilia was not there, nor did the punctual general make his
appearance; the dinner-hour was passed, a servant had twice looked in to
announce it, and, seeing neither my lady nor the general, had in surprise
retired. Silence prevailed--what could be the matter? So unusual for the
general to be late. The general came in, hurried--very uncommon in him,
and, after saying a few words in a low voice to Lady Davenant, who
immediately went up stairs, he begged pardon, was very sorry he had kept
dinner waiting, but Lady Cecilia had been taken ill--had fainted--she was
better--he hoped it was nothing that would signify--she was lying down--he
begged they would go to dinner. And to dinner they went, and when Lady
Davenant returned she put Helen's mind at ease by saying it was only a
little faintishness from over-fatigue. She had prescribed rest, and Cecilia
had herself desired to be left quite alone. After dinner Lady Davenant went
up again to see her, found her not so well--feverish; she would not let
Helen go to her--they would talk if they were together, and she thought it
necessary to keep Cecilia very quiet. If she would but submit to this, she
would be well again probably in the morning. At tea-time, and in the course
of the evening twice, Cecilia sent to beg to speak to Helen; but Lady
Davenant and the general joined in requesting her not to go. The general
went himself to Lady Cecilia to enforce obedience, and he reported that she
had submitted with a good grace.

Helen was happily engaged by Beauclerc's conversation during the rest of
the evening. It was late before they retired, and when she went up-stairs,
Felicie said that her lady was asleep, and had been asleep for the last two
hours, and she was sure that after such good rest her ladyship would be
perfectly well in the morning. Without further anxiety about her friend,
therefore, Helen went to her own room. It was a fine moonlight night, and
she threw open the shutters, and stood for a long time looking out upon the
moonlight, which she loved; and even after she had retired to bed it was
long before she could sleep. The only painful thought in her mind was of
Lady Davenant's approaching departure; without her, all happiness would
be incomplete; but still, hope and love had much that was delightful to
whisper, and, as she at last sank to sleep, Beauclerc's voice seemed still
speaking to her in soft sounds. Yet the dream which followed was uneasy;
she thought that they were standing together in the library, at the open
door of the conservatory, by moonlight, and he asked her to walk out,
and when she did not comply, all changed, and she saw him walking with
another--with Lady Castlefort; but then the figure changed to one
younger--more beautiful--it must be, as the beating of Helen's heart in
the dream told her--it must be Lady Blanche. Without seeing Helen, however,
they seemed to come on, smiling and talking low to each other along the
matted alley of the conservatory, almost to the very door where she was
still, as she thought, standing with her hand upon the lock, and then they
stopped, and Beauclerc pulled from an orange-tree a blossom which seemed
the very same which Helen had given to him that evening, he offered it to
Lady Blanche, and something he whispered; but at this moment the handle of
the lock seemed to slip, and Helen awoke with a start; and when she was
awake, the noise of her dream seemed to continue; she heard the real sound
of a lock turning--her door slowly opened, and a white figure appeared.
Helen started up in her bed, and awaking thoroughly, saw that it was only
Cecilia in her dressing-gown.

"Cecilia! What's the matter, my dear? are you worse?"

Lady Cecilia put her finger on her lips, closed the door behind her,
and said, "Hush! hush! or you'll waken Felicie; she is sleeping in the
dressing-room to-night. Mamma ordered it, in case I should want her."

"And how are y