stence, poor Kate got into the habit of straying aimlessly about
the streets, and, the inevitable consequence, of seeking warmth and
company in the public-house. Her children lived as the children of
such mothers do: they played on the stairs or on the pavements, had
accidents, were always dirty, cried themselves to sleep in hunger
and pain. When Emma returned, still only fit for a convalescent
home, she had to walk about day after day in search of work,
conciliating the employers whom Mrs. Clay had neglected or
disgusted, undertaking jobs to which her strength was inadequate,
and, not least, striving her hardest to restore order in the
wretched home. It was agreed that Kate should use the machine at
home, whilst Emma got regular employment in a workroom.

Emma never heard of that letter which her sister wrote to Mutimer's
wife. Kate had no expectation that help would come of it; she hoped
that it had done Mutimer harm, and the hope had to satisfy her. She
durst not let Emma suspect that she had done such a thing.

Emma heard, however, of the loan from Daniel Dabbs, and afterwards
thanked him for his kindness, but she resolutely set her face
against the repetition of such favours, though Daniel would have
willingly helped when she came out of the hospital. Kate, of course,
was for accepting anything that was offered; she lost her temper,
and accused Emma of wishing to starve the children. But she was
still greatly under her sister's influence, and when Emma declared
that there must be a parting between them if she discovered that
anything was secretly accepted from Mr. Dabbs, Kate sullenly yielded
the point.

Daniel was aware of all this, and it made an impression upon him.

To-night Emma was as usual left alone with the children. After tea,
when Kate left the house, she sat down to the machine and worked for
a couple of hours; for her there was small difference between Sunday
and week day. Whilst working she told the children stories; it was a
way of beguiling them from their desire to go and play in the
street. They were strange stories, half recollected from a childhood
which, had promised better things than a maidenhood of garret
misery, half Emma's own invention. They had a grace, a spontaneity,
occasionally an imaginative brightness, which would have made them,
if they had been taken down from the lips, models of tale-telling
for children. Emma had two classes of story: the one concerned
itself with rich children, the, other with poor; the one highly
fanciful, the other full of a touching actuality, the very essence
of a life such as that led by the listeners themselves. Unlike the
novel which commends itself to the world's grown children, these
narratives had by no means necessarily a happy ending; for one thing
Emma saw too deeply into the facts of life, and was herself too sad,
to cease her music on a merry chord; and, moreover, it was half a
matter of principle with her to make the little ones thoughtful and
sympathetic; she believed that they would grow up kinder and more
self-reliant if they were in the habit of thinking that we are ever
dependent on each other for solace and strengthening under the
burden of life. The most elaborate of her stories, one wholly of her
own invention, was called 'Blanche and Janey.' It was a double
biography. Blanche and Janey were born on the same day, they lived
ten years, and then died on the same day. But Blanche was, the child
of wealthy parents; Janey was born, in a garret. Their lives were
recounted in parallel, almost year by year, and, there was sadness
in the contrast. Emma had chosen the name of the poor child in
memory of her own sister, her ever dear Jane, whose life had been a
life of sorrow.

The story ended thus:

'Yes, they died on the same day, and they were buried, on the same
day. But not in the same cemetery, oh no! Blanche's grave is far
away over there'--she pointed to the west--'among tombstones
covered with flowers, and her father and mother go every Sunday to
read her name, and think and talk of her. Janey was buried far away
over yonder'--she pointed to the east--'but there is no stone on her
grave, and no one knows the exact place where she lies, and no one,
no one ever goes to think and talk of her.'

The sweetness of the story lay in the fact that the children were
both good, and both deserved to be happy; it never occurred to Emma
to teach her hearers to hate little Blanche just because hers was
the easier lot.

Whatever might be her secret suffering, with the little ones Emma
was invariably patient and tender. However dirty they had made,
themselves during the day, however much they cried when hunger made
them irritable, they went to their aunt's side with the assurance of
finding gentleness in reproof and sympathy with their troubles. Yet
once she was really angry. Bertie told her a deliberate untruth, and
she at once discovered it. She stood silent for a few moments,
looking as Bertie had never seen her look. Then she said:

'Do you know, Bertie, that it is wrong to try and deceive?'

Then she tried to, make him understand why falsehood was evil, and
as she spoke to the child her voice quivered, her breast heaved.
When the little fellow was overcome, and began to sob, Emma checked
herself, recollecting that she had lost sight of the offender's age,
and was using expressions which he could not understand. But the
lesson was effectual. If ever the brother and sister were tempted to
hide anything by a falsehood they remembered 'Aunt Emma's' face, and
durst not incur the danger of her severity.

So she told her stories to the humming of the machine, and when it
was nearly the children's bedtime she broke off to ask them if they
would like some bread and butter. Among all the results of her
poverty the bitterest to Emma was when she found herself _hoping
that the children would not eat much_. If their appetite was poor it
made her anxious about their health, yet it happened sometimes that
she feared to ask them if they were hungry lest the supply of bread
should fail. It was so to-night. The week's earnings had been three
shillings; the rent itself was four. But the children were as ready
to eat as if they had had no tea. It went to her heart to give them
each but one half-slice and tell them that they could have no more.
Gladly she would have robbed herself of breakfast next morning on
their account, but that she durst not do, for she had undertaken to
scrub out an office in Goswell Road, and she knew that her strength
would fail if she went from home fasting.

She put them to bed--they slept together on a small bedstead, which
was a chair during the day--and then sat down to do some patching
at a dress of Kate's. Her face when she communed with her own
thoughts was profoundly sad, but far from the weakness of self-pity.
Indeed she did her best not to think of herself; she knew that to do
so cost her struggles with feelings she held to be evil, resentment
and woe of passion and despair. She tried to occupy herself solely
with her sister and the children, planning how to make Kate more
home-loving and how to find the little ones more food.

She had no companions. The girls whom she came to know in the
workroom for the most part took life very easily; she could not
share in their genuine merriment; she was often revolted by their
way of thinking and speaking. They thought her dull; and paid no
attention to her. She was glad to be relieved of the necessity of
talking.

Her sister thought her hard. Kate believed that she was for ever
brooding over her injury. This was not true, but a certain hardness
in her character there certainly was. For her life, both of soul and
body, was ascetic; she taught herself to expect, to hope for,
nothing. When she was hungry she had a sort of pleasure in enduring;
when weary she worked on as if by effort she could overcome the
feeling. But Kate's chief complaint against her was her
determination to receive no help save in the way of opportunity to
earn money. This was something more than, ordinary pride. Emma
suffered intensely in the recollection that she had lived at
Mutimer's expense during the very months when he was seeking the
love of another woman, and casting about for means of abandoning
herself. When she thought of Alice coming with the proposal that she
and her sister should still occupy the house in Wilton Square, and
still receive money, the heat of shame and anger never failed to
rise to her cheeks. She could never accept from anyone again a penny
which she had not earned. She believed that Daniel Dabbs had been
repaid, otherwise she could not have rested a moment.

It was her terrible misfortune to have feelings too refined for the
position in which fate had placed her. Had she only been like those
other girls in the workroom! But we are interesting in proportion to
our capacity for suffering, and dignity comes of misery nobly borne.

As she sat working on Kate's dress, she was surprised to hear a
heavy step approaching. There came a knock at the door; she
answered, admitting Daniel.

He looked about the room, partly from curiosity, partly through
embarrassment. Dusk was falling.

'Young 'uns in bed?' he said, lowering his voice.

'Yes, they are asleep,' Emma replied.

'You don't mind me coming up?'

'Oh no!'

He went to the window and looked at the houses opposite, then at the
flushed sky.

'Bank holiday to-morrow. I thought I'd like to ask you whether you
and Mrs. Clay and the children 'ud come with me to Epping Forest. If
it's a day like this, it'll be a nice drive--do you good. You look
as if you wanted a breath of fresh air, if you don't mind me sayin'
it.'

'It's very kind of you, Mr. Dabbs,' Emma replied. 'I am very sorry I
can't come myself, but my sister and the children perhaps--'

She could not refuse for them likewise, yet she was troubled to
accept so far.

'But why can't _you_ come?' he asked good-naturedly, slapping his
hat against his leg.

'I have some work that'll take me nearly all day.'

'But you've no business to work on a bank holiday. I'm not sure as
it ain't breakin' the law.'

He laughed, and Emma did her best to show a smile. But she said
nothing.

'But you _will_ come, now? You can lose just the one day? It'll do
you a power o' good. You'll work all the better on Tuesday, now see
if you don't. Why, it ain't worth livin', never to get a holiday.'

'I'm very sorry. It was very kind indeed of you to think of it, Mr.
Dabbs. I really can't come.'

He went again to the window, and thence to the children's bedside.
He bent a little and watched them breathing.

'Bertie's growin' a fine little lad.'

'Yes, indeed, he is.'

'He'll have to go to school soon, I s'pose--I'm afraid he gives you
a good deal of trouble, that is, I mean--you know how I mean it.'

'Oh, he is very good,' Emma said, looking at the sleeping face
affectionately.

'Yes, yes.'

Daniel had meant something different; he saw that Emma would not
understand him.

'We see changes in life,' he resumed, musingly. 'Now who'd a'
thought I should end up with having more money than I. know how to
use? The 'ouse has done well for eight years now, an' it's likely to
do well for a good many years yet, as far as I can see.'

'I am glad to hear that,' Emma replied constrainedly.

'Miss Vine, I wanted you to come to Epping Forest to-morrow because
I thought I should have a chance of a little talk. I don't mean that
was the only reason; it's too bad you never get a holiday, and I
should like it to a' done you good. But I thought I might a' found a
chance o' sayin' something, something I've thought of a long time,
and that's the honest truth. I want to help you and your sister and
the young 'uns, but _you_ most of all. I don't like to see you
livin' such a hard life, 'cause you deserve something better, if
ever anyone did. Now will you let me help you? There's only one way,
and it's the way I'd like best of any. The long an' the short of it
is, I want to ask you if you'll come an' live at the 'ouse, come and
bring Mrs. Clay an' the children?'

Emma looked at him in surprise and felt uncertain of his meaning,
though his speech had painfully prepared her with an answer.

'I'd do my right down best to make you a good 'usband, that I would,
Emma!' Daniel hurried on, getting flustered. 'Perhaps I've been a
bit too sudden? Suppose we leave it till you've had time to think
over? It's no good talking to you about money an' that kind o'
thing; you'd marry a poor man as soon as a rich, if only you cared
in the right way for him. I won't sing my own praises, but I don't
think you'd find much to complain of in me. I'd never ask you to go
into the bar, 'cause I know you ain't suited for that, and, what's
more, I'd rather you didn't. Will you give it a thought?'

It was modest enough, and from her knowledge of the man Emma felt
that he was to be trusted for more than his word. But he asked an
impossible thing. She could not imagine herself consenting to marry
any man, but the reasons why she could not marry Daniel Dabbs were
manifold. She felt them all, but it was only needful to think of
one.

Yet it was a temptation, and the hour of it might have been chosen.
With a scarcity of food for the morrow, with dark fears for her
sister, suffering incessantly on the children's account, Emma might
have been pardoned if she had taken the helping hand. But the
temptation, though it unsteadied her brain for a moment, could never
have overcome her. She would have deemed it far less a crime to go
out and steal a loaf from the baker's shop than to marry Daniel
because he offered rescue from destitution.

She refused him, as gently as she could, but with firmness which
left him no room for misunderstanding her. Daniel was awed by her
quiet sincerity.

'But I can wait,' he stammered; 'if you'd take time to think it
over?'

Useless; the answer could at no time be other.

'Well, I've no call to grumble,' he said. 'You say straight out what
you mean. No woman can do fairer than that.'

His thought recurred for a moment to Alice, whose fault had been
that she was ever ambiguous.

'It's hard to bear. I don't think I shall ever care to marry any
other woman. But you're doin' the right thing and the honest thing;
I wish all women was like you.'

At the door he turned.

'There'd be no harm if I take Mrs. Clay and the children, would
there?'

'I am sure they will thank you, Mr. Dabbs.'

It did not matter now that there was a clear understanding.

At a little distance from the house door Daniel found Mrs. Clay
waiting.

'No good,' he said cheerlessly.

'She won't go?'

'No. But I'll take you and the children, if you'll come.'

Kate did not immediately reply. A grave disappointment showed itself
in her face.

'Can't be helped,' Daniel replied to her look. 'I did my best'

Kate accepted his invitation, and they arranged the hour of meeting.
As she approached the house to enter, flow looking ill-tempered, a
woman of her acquaintance met her. After a few minutes' conversation
they walked away together.

Emma sat up till twelve o'clock. The thought on which she was
brooding was not one to make the time go lightly; it was--how much
and how various evil can be wrought by a single act of treachery.
And the instance in her mind was more fruitful than her knowledge
allowed her to perceive.

Kate appeared shortly after midnight. She had very red cheeks and
very bright eyes, and her mood was quarrelsome. She sat down on the
bed and began to talk of Daniel Dabbs, as she had often done
already, in a maundering way. Emma kept silence; she was beginning
to undress.

'There's a man with money,' said Kate, her voice getting louder;
'money, I tell you, and you've only to say a word. And you won't
even be civil to him. You've got no feeling; you don't care for
nobody but yourself. I'll take the children and leave you to go your
own way, that's what I'll do!'

It was hard to make no reply, but Emma succeeded in commanding
herself. The maundering talk went on for more than an hour. Then
came the wretched silence of night.

Emma did not sleep. She was too wobegone to find a tear. Life stood
before her in the darkness like a hideous spectre.

In the morning she told her sister that Daniel had asked her to
marry him and that she had refused. It was best to have that
understood. Kate heard with black brows. But even yet she knew
something of shame when she remembered her return home the night
before; it kept her from giving utterance to her anger.

There followed a scene such as had occurred two or three times
during the past six months. Emma threw aside all her coldness, and
with passionate entreaty besought her sister to draw back from the
gulf's edge whilst there was yet time. For her own sake, for the
sake of Bertie and the little girl, by the memory of that dear dead
one who lay in the waste cemetery!

'Pity me, too! Think a little of me, Kate dear! You are driving me
to despair.'

Kate was moved, she had not else been human. The children were
looking up with frightened, wondering eyes. She hid her face and
muttered promises of amendment.

Emma kissed her, and strove hard to hope.





CHAPTER XXXI




With his five hundred pounds lodged in the bank, Mutimer felt ill at
ease in the lodgings in Pentonville. He began to look bout for an
abode more suitable to the dignity of his position, and shortly
discovered a house in Holloway, the rent twenty-eight pounds, the
situation convenient for his purposes. By way of making some amends
to Adela for his less than civil behaviour, he took the house and
had it modestly furnished (at the cost of one hundred and ten
pounds) before saying anything to her of his plans. Then, on the
pretext of going to search for pleasanter lodgings, he one day took
her to Holloway and led her into her own dwelling. Adela was
startled, but did her best to seem grateful.

They returned to Pentonville, settled their accounts, packed their
belongings, and by evening were able to sit down to a dinner cooked
by their own servant--under Adela's supervision. Mutimer purchased a
couple of bottles of claret on the way home, that the first evening
might be wholly cheerful. Of a sudden he had become a new man; the
sullenness had passed, and he walked from room to room with much the
same air of lofty satisfaction as when he first surveyed the
interior of Wanley Manor. He made a show of reading in the hour
before dinner, but could not keep still for more than a few minutes
at a time; he wanted to handle the furniture, to survey the prospect
from the windows, to walk out into the road and take a general view
of the house. When their meal had begun, and the servant, instructed
to wait at table, chanced to be out of the room, he remarked:

'We'll begin, of course, to dine at the proper time again. It's far
better, don't you think so?'

'Yes, I think so.'

'And, by-the-by, you'll see that Mary has a cap.'

Adela smiled.

'Yes, I'll see she has.'

Mary herself entered. Some impulse she did not quite understand led
Adela to look at the girl in her yet capless condition. She said
something which would require Mary to answer, and found herself
wondering at the submissive tone, the repeated 'Mum.'

'Yes,' she mused with herself, 'she is our creature. We pay her and
she must attire herself to suit our ideas of propriety. She must
remember her station.'

'What is it?' Mutimer asked, noticing that she bad again smiled.

'Nothing.'

His pipe lit, his limbs reposing in the easy-chair, Mutimer became
expansive. He requested Adela's attention whilst he rendered a full
account of all the moneys he had laid out, and made a computation of
the cost of living on this basis.

'The start once made,' he said, 'you see it isn't a bit dearer than
the lodgings. And the fact is, I couldn't have done much in that
hole. Now here, I feel able to go to work. It isn't in reality
spending money on ourselves, though it may look like it. You see I
must have a place where people can call to see me; we'd no room
before.'

He mused.

'You'll write and tell your mother?'

'Yes.'

'Don't say anything about the money. You haven't done yet, I
suppose?'

'No.'

'Better not That's our own business. You can just say you're more
comfortable. Of course,' he added, 'there's no secret. I shall let
people understand in time that I am carrying out the wishes of a
Socialist friend. That's simple enough. But there's no need to talk
about it just yet. I must get fairly going first.'

His face gathered light as he proceeded.

'Ah, _now_ I'll do something! see if I don't. You see, the fact of
the matter is, there are some men who are cut out for leading in a
movement, and I have the kind of feeling--well, for one thing, I'm
readier at public speaking than most. You think so, don't you?'

Adela was sewing together some chintzes. She kept her eyes closely
on the work.

'Yes, I think so.'

'Now the first thing I shall get done,' her husband pursued, a
little disappointed that she gave no warmer assent, 'is that book,
"My Work at New Wanley." The Union 'll publish it. It ought to have
a good sale in Belwick and round about there. You see I must get my
name well known; that's everything. When I've got that off hand,
then I shall begin on the East End. I mean to make the East End my
own ground. I'll see if something can't be done to stir 'em up. I
haven't quite thought it out yet. There must be some way of getting
them to take an interest in Socialism. Now we'll see what can be
done in twelve months. What'll you bet me that I don't add a
thousand members to the Union in this next year?'

'I dare say you can.'

'There's no "dare say" about it. I mean to! I begin to think I've
special good luck; things always turn out right in the end. When I
lost my work because I was a Socialist, then came Wanley. Now I've
lost Wanley, and here comes five hundred a year for ten years! I
wonder who that poor fellow may be? I suppose he'll die soon, and
then no doubt we shall hear his name. I only wish there were a few
more like him.'

'The East End!' he resumed presently. 'That's my ground. I'll make
the East End know me as well as they know any man in England. What
we want is personal influence. It's no use asking them to get
excited about a _movement_; they must have a _man_. Just the same in
_bourgeois_ politics. It isn't Liberalism they care for; it's
Gladstone. Wait and see!'

He talked for three hours, at times as if he were already on the
platform before a crowd of East Enders who were shouting, 'Mutimer
for ever!' Adela fell into physical weariness; at length she with
difficulty kept her eyes open. His language was a mere buzzing in
her ears; her thoughts were far away.

'My Work at New Wanley' was written and published; Keene had the
glory of revising the manuscript. It made a pamphlet of thirty-two
pages, and was in reality an autobiography. It presented the ideal
working man; the author stood as a type for ever of the noble
possibilities inherent in his class. Written of course in the first
person, it contained passages of monumental self-satisfaction.
Adela, too, was mentioned; to her horror she found a glowing
description of the work she had done among the women and children.
After reading that page she threw the pamphlet aside and hid her
face in her hands. She longed for the earth to cover her.

But the publication had no sale worth speaking of. A hundred copies
were got rid of at the Socialist centres, and a couple of hundred
more when the price was reduced from twopence to a penny. This would
not satisfy Mutimer. He took the remaining three hundred off the
hands of the Union and sowed them broadcast over the East End, where
already he was actively at work. Then he had a thousand more struck
off, and at every meeting which he held gave away numerous copies.
Keene wrote to suggest that in a new edition there should be a
woodcut portrait of the author on the front. Mutimer was delighted
with the idea, and at once had it carried out.

Through. this winter and the spring that followed he worked hard. It
had become a necessity of his existence to hear his name on the lips
of men, to be perpetually in evidence. Adela saw that day by day his
personal vanity grew more absorbing. When he returned from a meeting
he would occupy her for hours with a recitation of the speeches he
had made, with a minute account of what others had said of him. He
succeeded in forming a new branch of the Union in Clerkenwell, and
by contributing half the rent obtained a room for meetings. In this
branch he was King Mutimer.

In the meantime the suit against Rodman was carried through, it
could have of course but one result. Rodman was sold up; but the
profit accruing to Hubert Eldon was trifling, for the costs were
paid out of the estate, and it appeared that Rodman, making hay
whilst the sun shone, had spent all but the whole of his means.
There remained the question whether he was making fraudulent
concealments. Mutimer was morally convinced that this was the case,
and would vastly have enjoyed laying his former friend by the heels
for the statutable six weeks, but satisfactory proofs were not to be
obtained. Through Mr. Yottle, Eldon expressed the desire that, as
far as he was concerned, the matter might rest. But it was by no
means with pure zeal for justice that Mutimer had proceeded thus
far. He began the suit in anger, and, as is wont to be the case with
litigants, grew more bitter as it went on. The selling up of
Rodman's house was an occasion of joy to him; he went about singing
and whistling.

Adela marvelled that he could so entirely forget the sufferings of
his sister; she had had so many proofs of his affection for Alice.
In fact he was far from forgetting her, but he made strange
distinction between her and her husband, and had a feeling that in
doing his utmost to injure Rodman he was in a manner avenging Alice.
His love for Alice was in no degree weakened, but--if the state can
be understood--he was jealous of the completeness with which she had
abandoned him to espouse the cause of her husband. Alice had
renounced her brother; she never saw him, and declared that she
never would speak to him again. And Mutimer had no fear lest she
should suffer want. Rodman had a position of some kind in the City;
he and his wife lived for a while in lodgings, then took a house at
Wimbledon.

One of Mutimer's greatest anxieties had been lest he should have a
difficulty henceforth in supporting his mother in the old house. The
economical plan would have been for Adela and himself to go and live
with the old woman, but he felt that to be impossible. His mother
would never become reconciled to Adela, and, if the truth must be
told, he was ashamed to make known to Adela his mother's excessive
homeliness. Then again he was still estranged from the old woman.
Though he often thought of what Alice had said to him on that point,
month after month went by and he could not make up his mind to go to
Wilton Square. Having let the greater part of her house, Mrs.
Mutimer needed little pecuniary aid; once she returned money which
he had sent to her 'Arry still lived with her, and 'Arry was a
never-ending difficulty. After his appearance in the police court,
he retired for a week or two into private life; that is to say, he
contented himself with loafing about the streets of Hoxton and the
City, and was at home by eleven o'clock nightly, perfectly sober.
The character of this young man was that of a distinct class,
comprising the sons of mechanics who are ruined morally by being
taught to consider themselves above manual labour. Had he from the
first been put to a craft, he would in all likelihood have been no
worse than the ordinary English artisan--probably drinking too much
and loafing on Mondays, but not sinking below the level of his
fellows in the workshop. His positive fault was that shared by his
brother and sister--personal vanity. It was encouraged from the
beginning by immunity from the only kind of work for which he was
fitted, and the undreamt-of revolution in his prospects gave fatal
momentum to all his worst tendencies. Keene and Rodman successively
did their best, though unintentionally, to ruin him. He was now
incapable of earning his living by any continuous work. Since his
return to London he had greatly extended his circle of
acquaintances, which consisted of idle fellows of the same type,
youths who hang about the lowest fringe of clerkdom till they
definitely class themselves either with the criminal community or
with those who make a living by unrecognised pursuits which at any
time may chance to bring them within the clutches of the law. To use
a coarse but expressive word, he was a hopeless blackguard.

Let us be just; 'Arry had, like every other man, his better moments.
He knew that he had made himself contemptible to his mother, to
Richard, and to Alice, and the knowledge was so far from agreeable
that it often drove him to recklessness. That was his way of doing
homage to the better life; he had no power of will to resist
temptation, but he could go to meet it doggedly out of sheer
dissatisfaction with himself. Our social state ensures destruction
to such natures; it has no help for them, no patient encouragement.
Naturally he hardened himself in vicious habits. Despised by his own
people, he soothed his injured vanity by winning a certain
predominance among the contemptible. The fact that he had been on
the point of inheriting a fortune in itself gave him standing; he
told his story in public-houses and elsewhere, and relished the
distinction of having such a story to tell. Even as his brother
Richard could not rest unless he was prominent as an agitator, so it
became a necessity to 'Arry to lead in the gin-palace and the
music-hall. He made himself the aristocrat of rowdyism.

But it was impossible to live without ready money, and his mother,
though supplying him with board and lodging, refused to give him a
penny. He made efforts on his own account to obtain employment, but
without result. At last there was nothing for it but to humble
himself before Richard.

He did it with an ill-enough grace. Early one morning he presented
himself at the house in Holloway. Richard was talking with his wife
in the sitting-room, breakfast being still on the table. On the
visitor's name being brought to him, he sent Adela away and allowed
the scapegrace to be admitted.

'Arry shuffled to a seat and sat leaning forward, holding his hat
between his knees.

'Well, what do you want?' Richard asked severely. He was glad that
'Arry had at length come, and he enjoyed assuming the magisterial
attitude.

'I want to find a place,' 'Arry replied, without looking up, and in
a dogged voice. 'I've been trying to get one, and I can't. I think
you might help a feller.'

'What's the good of helping you? You'll be turned out of any place
in a week or two.'

'No, I shan't!'

'What sort of a place do you want?'

'A clerk's, of course.'

He pronounced the word 'clerk' as it is spelt; it made him seem yet
more ignoble.

'Have you given up drink?'

No answer

'Before I try to help you,' said Mutimer, 'you'll have to take the
pledge.'

'All right!' 'Arry muttered.

Then a thought occurred to Richard. Bidding his brother stay where
he was, he went in search of Adela and found her in an upper room.

'He's come to ask me to help him to get a place,' he said. 'I don't
know very well how to set about it, but I suppose I must do
something. He promises to take the pledge.'

'That will be a good thing,' Adela replied.

'Good if he keeps it. But I can't talk to him; I'm sick of doing so.
And I don't think he even listens to me.' He hesitated. 'Do you
think you--would you mind speaking to him? I believe you might do
him good.'

Adela did not at once reply.

'I know it's a nasty job,' he pursued. 'I wouldn't ask you if I
didn't really think you might do some good. I don't see why he
should go to the dogs. He used to be a good enough fellow when he
was a little lad.'

It was one of the most humane speeches Adela had ever heard from her
husband. She replied with cheerfulness:

'If you really think he won't take it amiss, I shall be very glad to
do my best.'

'That's right; thank you.'

Adela went down and was alone with 'Arry for half-an-hour. She was
young to undertake such an office, but suffering had endowed her
with gravity and understanding beyond her years, and her native
sweetness was such that she could altogether forget herself in
pleading with another for a good end. No human being, however
perverse, could have taken ill the words that were dictated by so
pure a mind, and uttered in so musical and gentle a voice. She led
'Arry to speak frankly.

'It seems to me a precious hard thing,' he said, 'that they've let
Dick keep enough money to live on comfortable, and won't give me a
penny. My right was as good as his.'

'Perhaps it was,' Adela replied kindly. 'But you must remember that
money was left to your brother by the will.'

'But you don't go telling me that he lives on two pounds a week?
Everybody knows he doesn't. Where does the rest come from?'

'I don't think I must talk about that. I think very likely jour
brother will explain if you ask him seriously. But is it really such
a hard thing after all, Harry? I feel so sure that you will only
know real happiness when you are earning a livelihood by steady and
honourable work. You remember how I used to go and see the people in
New Wanley? I shall never forget how happy the best of them were,
those who worked their hardest all day and at night came home to
rest with their families and friends. And you yourself, how
contented you used to be when your time was thoroughly occupied! But
I'm sure you feel the truth of this. You have been disappointed; it
has made you a little careless. Now work hard for a year and then
come and tell me if I wasn't right about that being the way to
happiness. Will you?'

She rose and held her hand to him; the hand to which he should have
knelt. But he said nothing; there was an obstacle in his throat.
Adela understood his silence and left him.

Richard went to work among his friends, and in a fortnight had found
his brother employment of a new kind. It was a place in an
ironmonger's shop in Hoxton; 'Arry was to serve at the counter and
learn the business. For three months he was on trial and would
receive no salary.

Two of the three months passed, and all seemed to be going well.
Then one day there came to Mutimer a telegram from 'Arry's employer;
it requested that he would go to the shop as soon as possible.
Foreseeing some catastrophe, he hastened to Hoxton. His brother was
in custody for stealing money from the till.

The ironmonger was inexorable. 'Arry passed through the judicial
routine and was sentenced to three months of hard labour.

It was in connection with this wretched affair that Richard once
more met his mother. He went from the shop to tell her what had
happened.

He found her in the kitchen, occupied as he had seen her many, many
times, ironing newly washed linen. One of the lodgers happened to
come out from the house as he ascended the steps, so he was able to
go down without announcing himself. The old woman had a nervous
start; the iron stopped in its smooth backward and forward motion;
the hand with which she held it trembled. She kept her eyes on
Richard's face, which foretold evil.

'Mother, I have brought you bad news.'

She pushed the iron aside and stood waiting. Her hard lips grew
harder; her deep-set eyes had a stern light. Not much ill could come
to pass for which she was not prepared.

He tried to break the news. His mother interrupted him.

'What's he been a-doin'? You've no need to go round about. I like
straightforwardness.'

Richard told her. It did not seem to affect her strongly; she turned
to the table and resumed her work. But she could no longer guide the
iron. She pushed it aside and faced her son with such a look as one
may see in the eyes of a weak animal cruelly assailed. Her tongue
found its freedom and bore her whither it would.

'What did I tell you? What was it I said that night you come in and
told me you; was all rich? Didn't I warn you that there'd no good
come of it? Didn't I say you'd remember my words? You laughed at me;
you got sharp-tempered with me an as good as called me a fool. An'
what _has_ come of it? What's come of it to me? I had a 'ome once
an' children about me, an' now I've neither the one nor the other.
You call it a 'ome with strangers takin' up well nigh all the 'ouse?
Not such a ome as I thought to end my days in. It fair scrapes on my
heart every time I hear their feet going up an' down the stairs. An'
where are my children gone? Two of 'em as 'ud never think to come
near me if it wasn't to bring ill news, an' one in prison. How 'ud
that sound in your father's ears, think you? I may have been a fool,
but I knew what 'ud come of a workin' man's children goin' to live
in big 'ouses, with their servants an' their carriages. What better
are you? It's come an' it's gone, an' there's shame an' misery left
be'ind it!'

Richard listened without irritation; he was heavy-hearted, the shock
of his brother's disgrace had disposed him to see his life on its
dark side. And he pitied his poor old mother. She had never been
tender in her words, could not be tender; but he saw in her
countenance the suffering through which she had gone, and read
grievous things in the eyes that could no longer weep. For once he
yielded to rebuke. Her complaint that he had not come to see her
touched him, for he had desired to come, but could not subdue his
pride. Her voice was feebler than when he last heard it raised in
reproach; it reminded him that there would come a day when he might
long to hear even words of upbraiding, but the voice would be mute
for ever. It needed a moment such as this to stir his sluggish
imagination.

'What you say is true, mother, but we couldn't help it. It's turned
out badly because we live in bad times. It's the state of society
that's to blame.'

He was sincere in saying it; that is to say, he used the phrase so
constantly that it had become his natural utterance in difficulty;
it may be that in his heart he believed it. Who, indeed, shall say
that he was wrong? But what made such an excuse so disagreeable in
his case was that he had not--intellectually speaking--the right to
avail himself of it. The difference between truth and cant often
lies only in the lips that give forth the words.

'Yes, that's what you always said,' replied Mrs. Mutimer
impatiently. 'It's always someone else as is to blame, an' never
yourself. The world's a good enough world if folk 'ud only make it
so. Was it the bad times as made you leave a good, honest girl when
you'd promised to marry her? No, you must have a fine lady for your
wife; a plain girl as earnt her own bread, an' often had hard work
to get it, wasn't good enough for you. Don't talk to me about bad
times. There's some men as does right an' some as does wrong; it
always was so, an' the world's no worse nor no better, an' not
likely to be.'

The poor woman could not be generous. A concession only led her on
to speak the thoughts it naturally suggested to her. And her very
bitterness was an outcome of her affection; it soothed her to rail
at her son after so long a silence. He had injured her by his
holding aloof; she was urged on by this feeling quite as much as by
anger with his faults. And still Mutimer showed no resentment. In
him, too, there was a pleasure which came of memories revived. Let
her say to him what she liked, he loved his mother and was glad to
be once more in her presence.

'I wish I could have pleased you better, mother,' he said. 'What's
done can't be helped. We've trouble to bear together, and it won't
be lighter for angry words.'

The old woman muttered something inaudible and, after feeling her
iron and discovering that it was cold, she put it down before the
fire. Her tongue had eased itself, and she fell again into silent
grief.

Mutimer sat listening to the tick of the familiar clock. That and
the smell of the fresh linen made his old life very present to him;
there arose in his heart a longing for the past, it seemed peaceful
and fuller of genuine interests than the life he now led. He
remembered how he used to sit before the kitchen fire reading the
books and papers which stirred his thought to criticism of the order
of things; nothing now absorbed him in the same way. Coming across a
sentence that delighted him, he used to read it aloud to his mother,
who perchance was ironing as now, or sewing, or preparing a meal,
and she would find something to say against it; so that there ensued
a vigorous debate between her old-fashioned ideas and the brand-new
theories of the age of education: Then Alice would come in and make
the dispute a subject for sprightly mockery. Alice was the Princess
in those days. He quarrelled with her often, but only to resume the
tone of affectionate banter an hour after. Alice was now Mrs.
Rodman, and had declared that she hated him, that in her life she
would never speak to him again. Would it not have been better if
things had gone the natural course? Alice would no doubt have
married Daniel Dabbs, and would have made him a good wife, if a
rather wilful one. 'Arry would have given trouble, but surely could
not have come to hopeless shame. He, Richard, would have had Emma
Vine for his wife, a true wife, loving him with all her heart,
thinking him the best and cleverest of working men. Adela did not
love him; what she thought of his qualities it was not easy to say.
Yes, the old and natural way was better. He would have had
difficulties enough, because of his opinions, but at least he would
have continued truly to represent his class. He knew very well that
he did not represent it now; he belonged to no class at all; he was
a professional agitator, and must remain so through his life--or
till the Revolution came. The Revolution? . . .

His mother was speaking to him, asking what he meant to do about
'Arry. He raised his eyes, and for a moment looked at her sadly.

'There's nothing to be done. I can pay a lawyer, but it'll be no
good.'

He remained with his mother for yet an hour; they talked
intermittently, without in appearance coming nearer to each other,
though in fact the barrier was removed. She made tea for him, and
herself made pretence of taking some. When he went away he kissed
her as he had used to. He left her happier than she had been for
years, in spite of the news he had brought.

Thenceforward Mutimer went to Wilton Square regularly once a week.
He let Adela know of this, saying casually one morning that he could
not do something that day because his mother would expect him in the
afternoon as usual. He half hoped that she might put some question
which would lead to talk on the subject, for the reconciliation with
his mother had brought about a change in his feelings, and it would
now have been rather agreeable to him to exhibit his beautiful and
gentle-mannered wife. But Adela merely accepted the remark.

He threw himself into the work of agitation with more energy than
ever. By this time he had elaborated a scheme which was original
enough to ensure him notoriety if only he could advertise it
sufficiently throughout the East End. He hit upon it one evening
when he was smoking his pipe after dinner. Adela was in the room
with him reading. He took her into his confidence at once.

'I've got it at last! I want something that'll attract their
attention. It isn't enough to preach theories to them; they won't
wake up; there's no getting them to feel in earnest about Socialism.
I've been racking my brain for something to set them talking, it
didn't much matter what, but better of course if it was useful in
itself at the same time. Now I think I've got it. It's a plan for
giving them a personal interest, a money interest, in me and my
ideas. I'll go and say to them, "How is it you men never save any
money even when you could? I'll tell you: it's because the savings
would be so little that they don't seem worth while; you think you
might as well go and enjoy yourselves in the public-house while you
can. What's the use of laying up a few shillings? The money comes
and goes, and it's all in a life." Very well, then, I'll put my plan
before them. "Now look here," I'll say, "instead of spending so much
on beer and spirits, come to me and _let me keep your money for
you_!" They'll burst out laughing at me, and say, "Catch us doing
that!" Yes, but I'll persuade them, see if I don't. And in this way.
"Suppose," I'll say, "there's five hundred men bring me threepence
each every week. Now what man of you doesn't spend threepence a week
in drink, get the coppers how he may? Do you know how much that
comes to, five hundred threepenny bits? Why, it's six pounds five
shillings. And do you know what that comes to in a year? Why, no
less than three hundred and twenty-five pounds! Now just listen to
that, and think about it. Those threepenny bits are no use to you;
you _can't_ save them, and you spend them in a way that does you no
good, and it may be harm. Now what do you think I'll do with that
money? Why, I'll use it as the capitalists do. I'll put it out to
interest; I'll get three per cent. for it, and perhaps more. But
let's say three per cent. What's the result? Why, this: in one year
your three hundred and twenty-five pounds has become three hundred
and thirty-four pounds fifteen; I owe each of you thirteen shillings
and fourpence halfpenny, and a fraction more."'

He had already jotted down calculations, and read from them, looking
up between times at Adela with the air of conviction which he would
address to his audience of East Enders.

'"Now if you'd only saved the thirteen shillings--which you wouldn't
and couldn't have done by yourselves--it would be well worth the
while; but you've got the interest as well, and the point I want you
to understand is that you can only get that increase by clubbing
together and investing the savings as a whole. You may say fourpence
halfpenny isn't worth having. Perhaps not, but those of you who've
learnt arithmetic--be thankful if our social state allowed you to
learn anything--will remember that there's such a thing as compound
interest. It's a trick the capitalists found out. Interest was a
good discovery, but compound interest a good deal better. Leave your
money with me a second year, and it'll grow more still, I'll see to
that. You're all able, I've no doubt, to make the calculation for
yourselves."'

He paused to see what Adela would say.

'No doubt it will be a very good thing if you can persuade them to
save in that way,' she remarked.

'Good, yes; but I'm not thinking so much of the money. Don't you see
that it'll give me a hold over them? Every man who wants to save on
my plan must join the Union. They'll come together regularly; I can
get at them and make them listen to me. Why, it's a magnificent
idea! It's fighting the capitalists with their own weapons! You'll
see what the "Tocsin" 'll say. Of course they'll make out that I'm
going against Socialist principles. So I am, but. it's for the sake
of Socialism for all that. If I make Socialists, it doesn't much
matter how I do it.'

Adela could have contested that point, but did not care to do so.
She said:

'Are you sure you can persuade the men to trust you with their
money?'

'That's the difficulty, I know; but see if I don't get over it. I'll
have a committee, holding themselves responsible for all sums paid
to us. I'll publish weekly accounts--just a leaflet, you know. And
do you know what? I'll promise that as soon as they've trusted me
with a hundred pounds, I'll add another hundred of my own. See if
that won't fetch them!'

As usual when he saw a prospect of noisy success he became excited
beyond measure, and talked incessantly till midnight.

'Other men don't have these ideas!' he exclaimed at one moment.
'That's what I meant when I told you I was born to be a leader. And
I've the secret of getting people's confidence. They'll trust me,
see if they don't!'

In spite of Adela's unbroken reserve, he had seldom been other than
cordial in his behaviour to her since the recommencement of his
prosperity. His active life gave him no time to brood over
suspicions, though his mind was not altogether free from them. He
still occasionally came home at hours when he could not be expected,
but Adela was always occupied either with housework or reading, and
received him with the cold self-possession which came of her
understanding his motives. Her life was lonely; since a visit they
had received from Alfred at the past Christmas she had seen no
friend. One day in spring Mutimer asked her if she did not wish to
see Mrs. Westlake; she replied that she had no desire to, and he
said nothing more. Stella did not write; she had ceased to do so
since receiving a certain lengthy letter from Adela, in which the
latter begged that their friendship might feed on silence for a
while. When the summer came there were pressing invitations from
Wanley, but Adela declined them. Alfred and his wife were going
again to South Wales; was it impossible for Adela to join them?
Letty wrote a letter full of affectionate pleading, but it was
useless.

In August, Mutimer proposed to take his wife for a week the Sussex
coast. He wanted a brief rest himself, and he saw that Adela was yet
more in need of change. She never complained of ill-health, but was
weak and pale. With no inducement to leave the house, it was much if
she had an hour's open-air exercise in the week; often the mere
exertion of rising and beginning the day was followed by a sick
languor which compelled her to lie all the afternoon on the couch.
She studied much, reading English and foreign books which required
mental exertion. They were rot works relating to the 'Social
Question'--far other. The volumes she used to study were a burden
and a loathing to her as often as her eyes fell upon them.

In her letters from Wanley there was never a word of what was going
on in the valley. Week after week she looked eagerly for some hint,
yet was relieved when she found none. For it had become her habit to
hand over to Mutimer every letter she received. He read them.

Shortly after their return from the seaside, 'Arry's term of
imprisonment came to an end. He went to his mother's house, and
Richard first saw him there. Punishment had had its usual effect;
'Arry was obstinately taciturn, conscious of his degradation,
inwardly at war with all his kind.

'There's only one thing I can do for you now,' his brother said to
him. 'I'll pay your passage to Australia. Then you must shift for
yourself.'

'Arry refused the offer.

'Give me the money instead,' was his reply.

Argument was vain; Richard and the old woman passed to entreaty, but
with as little result.

'Give me ten pounds and let me go about my business,' 'Arry
exclaimed irritably. 'I want no more from you, and you won't get any
good out o' me by jawin'.'

The money was of course refused, in the hope that a week or two
would change the poor fellow's mind. But two days after he went out
and did not return. Nothing was heard of him. Mrs. Mutimer sat late
every night, listening for a knock at the door. Sometimes she went
and stood on the steps, looking hither and thither in the darkness.
But 'Arry came no more to Wilton Square.

Mutimer had been pressing on his scheme for five months. Every night
he addressed a meeting somewhere or other in the East End; every
Sunday he lectured morning and evening at his head-quarters in
Clerkenwell. Ostensibly he was working on behalf of the Union, but
in reality he was forming a party of his own, and would have started
a paper could he have commanded the means. The 'Tocsin' was savagely
hostile, the 'Fiery Gross.' grew more and more academical, till it
was practically an organ of what is called in Germany
_Katheder-Sozialismus_. Those who wrote for it were quite distinct
from the agitators of the street and of the Socialist halls;
men--and women--with a turn for 'advanced' speculation, with anxiety
for style. At length the name of the paper was changed, and it
appeared as the 'Beacon,' adorned with a headpiece by the well-known
artist, Mr. Boscobel. Mutimer glanced through the pages and flung it
aside in scornful disgust.

'I knew what this was coming to,' he said to Adela 'A deal of good
_they_'ll do! You don't find Socialism in drawing rooms. I wonder
that fellow Westlake has the impudence to call himself a Socialist
at all, living in the way he does. Perhaps he thinks he'll be on the
safe side when the Revolution comes. Ha, ha! We shall see.'

The Revolution. . . . In the meantime the cry was 'Democratic
Capitalism.' That was the name Mutimer gave to his scheme! The
'Fiery Gross' had only noticed his work in a brief paragraph, a few
words of faint and vague praise. 'Our comrade's noteworthy exertions
in the East End. . . . The gain to temperance and self-respecting
habits which must surely result. . . .' The 'Beacon,' however, dealt
with the movement more fully, and on the whole in a friendly spirit.

'Damn their patronage!' cried Mutimer.

You should have seen him addressing a crowd collected by chance in
Hackney or Poplar. The slightest encouragement, even one name to
inscribe in the book which he carried about with him, was enough to
fire his eloquence; nay, it was enough to find himself standing on
his chair above the heads of the gathering. His voice had gained in
timbre; he grew more and more perfect in his delivery, like a
conscientious actor who plays night after night in a part that he
enjoys. And it was well that he had this inner support, this _brio_
of the born demagogue, for often enough he spoke under circumstances
which would have damped the zeal of any other man. The listeners
stood with their hands in their pockets, doubting whether to hear
him to the end or to take their wonted way to the public-house. One
moment their eyes would be fixed upon him, filmy, unintelligent,
then they would look at one another with a leer of cunning, or at
best a doubtful grin. Socialism, forsooth! They were as ready for
translation to supernal spheres. Yet some of them were attracted:
'percentage,' 'interest,' 'compound interest,' after all, there
might be something in this! And perhaps they gave their names and
their threepenny bits, engaging to make the deposit regularly on the
day and at the place arranged for in Mutimer's elaborate scheme.
What is there a man cannot get if he asks for it boldly and
persistently enough?

The year had come full circle; it was time that Mutimer received
another remittance from his anonymous supporter. He needed it, for
he had been laying out money without regard to the future. Not only
did he need it for his own support; already he and his committee
held sixty pounds of trust money, and before long he might be called
upon to fulfil his engagement and contribute a hundred pounds--the
promised hundred which had elicited more threepences than all the
rest of his eloquence. A week, a month, six weeks, and he had heard
nothing. Then there came one day a communication couched in legal
terms, signed by a solicitor. It was to the effect that his
benefactor--name and address given in full--had just died. The
decease was sudden, and though the draft of a will had been
discovered, it had no signature, and was consequently inoperative.
But--pursued the lawyer--it having been the intention of the
deceased to bequeath to Mutimer an annuity of five hundred pounds
for nine years, the administrators were unwilling altogether to
neglect their friend's wish, and begged to make an offer of the. one
year's payment which it seemed was already due. For more than that
they could not hold themselves responsible.

Before speaking to Adela, Mutimer made searching inquiries. He went
to the Midland town where his benefactor had lived, and was only too
well satisfied of the truth of what had been told him. He came back
with his final five hundred pounds.

Then he informed his wife of what had befallen. He was not cheerful,
but with five hundred pounds in his pocket he could not be
altogether depressed. What might not happen in a year? He was
becoming prominent; there had been mention of him lately in London
journals. Pooh! as if he would ever really want!

'The great thing,' he exclaimed, 'is that I can lay down the hundred
pounds! If I'd failed in that it would have been all up. Come, now,
why can't you give me a bit of encouragement, Adela? I tell you what
it is. There's no place where I'm thought so little of as in my own
home, and that's a fact.'

She did not worship him, she made no pretence of it. Her cold, pale
beauty had not so much power over him as formerly, but it still
chagrined him keenly as often as he was reminded that he had no high
place in his wife's judgment. He knew well enough that it was
impossible. for her to: admire him; he was conscious of the thousand
degrading things he had said and done, every one of them stored. in
her memory. Perhaps not once since that terrible day in the
Pentonville lodgings had he looked her straight in the eyes. Yes,
her beauty appealed to him less than even a year ago; Adela knew it,
and it was the one solace in her living death. Perhaps occasion
could again have stung him into jealousy, but Adela was no longer a
vital interest in his existence. He lived in external things, his
natural life. Passion had been an irregularity in his development.
Yet he would gladly have had his wife's sympathy. He neither loved
nor hated her, but she was for ever above him, and, however
unconsciously, he longed. for her regard. Irreproachable, reticent,
it might be dying, Adela would no longer affect interests she did
not feel. To these present words of his she replied only with a
grave, not unkind, look; a look he could not under stand, yet which
humbled rather than irritated him.

The servant opened the door and announced a visitor--'Mr. Hilary.'

Mutimer seemed struck with a thought as he heard the name.

'The very man!' he exclaimed below his breath, with a glance at
Adela. 'Just run off and let us have this room. My luck won't desert
me, see if it does!'





CHAPTER XXXII




Mr. Willis Rodman scarcely relished the process which deprived him
of his town house and of the greater part of his means, but his
exasperation happily did not seek vent for itself in cruelty to his
wife. It might very well have done so, would all but certainly, had
not Alice appealed to his sense of humour by her zeal in espousing
his cause against her brother. That he could turn her round his
finger was an old experience, but to see her spring so actively to
arms on his behalf, when he was conscious that she had every excuse
for detesting him, and even abandoning him, struck him as a highly
comical instance of his power over women, a power on which he had
always prided himself. He could not even explain it as self-interest
in her; numberless things proved the contrary. Alice was still his
slave, though he had not given himself the slightest trouble to
preserve even her respect. He had shown himself to her freely as he
was, jocosely cynical on everything that women prize, brutal when he
chose to give way to his temper, faithless on principle, selfish to
the core; perhaps the secret of the fascination he exercised over
her was his very ingenuousness, his boldness in defying fortune, his
clever grasp of circumstances. She said to him one day, when he had
been telling her that as likely as not she might have to take in
washing or set up a sewing-machine:

'I am not afraid. You can always get money. There's nothing you
can't do.'

He laughed.

'That may be true. But how if I disappear some day and leave you to
take care of yourself?'

He had often threatened this in his genial way, and it never failed
to blanch her cheeks.

'If you do that,' she said, 'I shall kill myself.'

At which he laughed yet more loudly.

In her house at Wimbledon she perished of _ennui_, for she was as
lonely as Adela in Holloway. Much lonelier; she had no resources in
herself. Rodman was away all day in London, and very often he did
not return at night; when the latter was the case, Alice cried
miserably in her bed for hours, so that the next morning her face
was like that of a wax doll that has suffered ill-usage. She had an
endless supply of novels, and day after day bent over them till her
head ached. Poor Princess! She had had her own romance, in its way
brilliant and strange enough, but only the rags of it were left. She
clung to them, she hoped against hope that they would yet recover
their gloss and shimmer. If only he would not so neglect her! All
else affected her but little now that she really knew what it meant
to see her husband utterly careless, not to be held by any pettings
or entreaties. She heard through him of her brother 'Arry's
disgrace; it scarcely touched her. Her brother Richard she was never
tired of railing against, railed so much, indeed, that it showed she
by no means hated him as much as she declared. But nothing would
have mattered if only her husband had cared for her.

She had once said to Adela that she disliked children and hoped
never to have any. It was now her despair that she remained
childless. Perhaps that was why he had lost all affection?

In the summer Rodman once quitted her for nearly three weeks, during
which she only heard from him once. He was in Ireland, and, he
asserted, on business. The famous 'Irish Dairy Company,' soon to
occupy a share of public attention, was getting itself on foot. It
was Rodman who promoted the company and who became its secretary,
though the name of that functionary in all printed matter appeared
as 'Robert Delancey.' However, I only mention it for the present to
explain our friend's absence in Ireland. Alice often worked herself
up to a pitch of terror lest her husband had fulfilled his threat
and really deserted her. He returned when it suited him to do so,
and tortured her with a story of a wealthy Irish widow who had
fallen desperately in love with him.

'And I've a good mind to marry her,' he added with an air of serious
reflection. Of course I didn't let her know my real name. I could
manage it very nicely, and you would never know anything about it; I
should remit you all the money you wanted, you needn't be afraid.'

Alice tried to assume a face of stony indignation, but as usual she
ended by breaking down and shedding tears. Then he told her that she
was getting plainer than ever, and that it all came of her perpetual
'water-works.'

Alice hit upon a brilliant idea. What if she endeavoured to make him
jealous? In spite of her entreaties, he never would take her to
town, though he saw that she was perishing for lack of amusement.
Suppose she made him believe that she had gone on her own account,
and at the invitation of someone whose name she would not divulge? I
believe she found the trick in one of her novels. The poor child
went to work most conscientiously. One morning when he came down to
breakfast she pretended to have been reading a letter, crushed an
old envelope into her pocket on his entering the room, and affected
confusion. He observed her.

'Had a letter?' he asked.

'Yes--no. Nothing of any importance.'

He smiled and applied himself to the ham, then left her in his
ordinary way, without a word of courtesy, and went to town. She had
asked him particularly when he should be back that night He named
the train, which reached Wimbledon a little after ten.

They had only one servant. Alice took the girl into her confidence,
said she was going to play a trick, and it must not be spoilt. By
ten o'clock at night she was dressed for going out, and when she
heard her husband's latch-key at the front door she slipped out at
the back. It was her plan to walk about the roads for half an hour,
then to enter and--make the best of the situation.

Rodman, unable to find his wife, summoned the servant.

'Where is your mistress?'

'Out, sir.'

He examined the girl shrewdly, with his eyes and with words. It was
perfectly true that women--of a kind--could not resist him. In the
end he discovered exactly what had happened. He laughed his wonted
laugh of cynical merriment.

'Go to bed,' he said to the servant. 'And if you hear anyone at the
door, pay no attention.'

Then he locked up the house, front and back, and, having
extinguished all lights except a small lantern by which he could
read in the sitting-room without danger of its being discerned from
outside, sat down with a sense of amusement. Presently there came a
ring at the bell; it was repeated again and again. The month was
October, the night decidedly cool. Rodman chuckled to himself; he
had a steaming glass of whisky before him and sipped it delicately.
The ringing continued for a quarter of an hour, then five minutes
passed, and no sound came. Rodman stepped lightly to the front door,
listened, heard nothing, unlocked and opened. Alice was standing m
the middle of the road, her hands crossed over her breast and
holding her shoulders as though she suffered from the cold. She came
forward and entered the house without speaking.

In the sitting-room she found the lantern and looked at her husband
in surprise. His face was stern.

'What's all this?' he asked sharply.

'I've been to London,' she answered, her teeth chattering with cold
and her voice uncertain from fear.

'Been to London? And what business had you to go without telling
me?'

He spoke savagely. Alice was sinking with dread, but even yet had
sufficient resolve to keep up the comedy.

'I had an invitation. I don't see why I shouldn't go. I don't ask
you who you go about with.'

The table was laid for supper. Rodman darted to it, seized a
carving-knife, and in an instant was holding it to her throat. She
shrieked and fell upon her knees, her face ghastly with mortal
terror. Then Rodman burst out laughing and showed that his anger had
been feigned.

She had barely strength to rise, but at length stood before him
trembling and sobbing, unable to believe that he had not been in
earnest.

'You needn't explain the trick,' he said, with the appearance of
great good-humour, 'but just tell me why you played it. Did you
think I should believe you were up to something queer, eh?'

'You must think what you like,' she sobbed, utterly humiliated.

He roared with laughter.

'What a splendid idea! The Princess getting tired of propriety and
making appointments in London! Little fool! do you think I should
care one straw? Why shouldn't you amuse yourself?'

Alice looked at him with eyes of wondering misery.

'Do you mean that you don't care enough for me to--to--'

'Don't care one farthing's worth! And to think you went and walked
about in the mud and the east wind! Well, if that isn't the best
joke I ever heard! I'll have a rare laugh over this story with some
men I know to-morrow.'

She crept away to her bedroom. He had gone far towards killing the
love that had known no rival in her heart.

He bantered her ceaselessly through breakfast next morning, and for
the first time she could find no word to reply to him. Her head
drooped; she touched nothing on the table. Before going off he asked
her what the appointment was for to-day, and advised her not to
forget her latch-key. Alice scarcely heard him, she was
shame-stricken and wobegone.

Rodman, on the other hand, had never been in better spirits. The
'Irish Dairy Company' was attracting purchasers of shares. It was
the kind of scheme which easily recommended itself to a host of the
foolish people who are ever ready to risk their money, also to some
not quite so foolish. The prospectus could show some respectable
names: one or two Irish lords, a member of Parliament, some known
capitalists. The profits could not but be considerable, and think of
the good to 'the unhappy sister country'--as the circular said.
Butter, cheese, eggs of unassailable genuineness, to be sold in
England at absurdly low prices, yet still putting the producers on a
footing of comfort and proud independence. One of the best ideas
that had yet occurred to Mr. Robert Delancey.

He--the said Mr. Delancey, _alias_ Mr. Willis Rodman, _alias_
certain other names--spent much of his time just now in the society
of a Mr. Hilary, a gentleman who, like himself, had seen men and
manners in various quarters of the globe, and was at present making
a tolerable income by the profession of philanthropy. Mr. Hilary's
name appeared among the directors of the company; it gave confidence
to many who were familiar with it in connection with not a few
enterprises started for the benefit of this or that depressed
nationality, this or the other exploited class. He wrote frequently
to the newspapers on the most various subjects; he was known to
members of Parliament through his persistent endeavours to obtain
legislation with regard to certain manufactures proved to be gravely
deleterious to the health of those employed in them. To-day Mr.
Delancey and Mr. Hilary passed some hours together in the latter's
chambers. Their talk was of the company.

'So you saw Mutimer about it?' Rodman asked, turning to a detail in
which he was specially interested.

'Yes. He is anxious to have shares.'

Mr. Hilary was a man of past middle age, long-bearded, somewhat
cadaverous of hue. His head was venerable.

'You were careful not to mention me?'

'I kept your caution in mind.'

Their tone to each other was one of perfect gravity. Mr. Hilary even
went out of his way to choose becoming phrases.

'He won't have anything to do with it if he gets to know who R.
Delancey is.'

'I was prudent, believe me. I laid before him the aspects of the
undertaking which would especially interest him. I made it clear to
him that our enterprise is no less one of social than of commercial
importance; he entered into our views very heartily. The first time
I saw him, I merely invited him to glance over our prospectus;
yesterday he was more than willing to join our association--and
share our profits.'

'Did he tell you how much he'd got out of those poor devils over
there?'

'A matter of sixty pounds, I gathered. I am not a little astonished
at his success.'

'Oh, he'd talk the devil himself into subscribing to a mission if it
suited him to try.'

'He is clearly very anxious to get the highest interest possible for
his money. His ideas on business seemed, I confess, rather vague. I
did my best to help him with suggestions.'

'Of course.'

'He talked of taking some five hundred pounds' worth of shares on
his own account.'

The men regarded each other. Rodman's lips curled; Mr. Hilary was as
grave as ever.

'You didn't balk him?'

'I commended his discretion.'

Rodman could not check a laugh.

'I am serious,' said Mr. Hilary. 'It may take a little time, but--'

'Just so. Did he question you at all about what we were doing?'

'A good deal. He said he should go and look over the Stores in the
Strand.'

'By all means. He's a clever man if he distinguishes between Irish
butter and English butterine--I'm sure I couldn't. And things really
are looking up at the Stores?'

'Oh, distinctly.'

'By-the-by, I had rather a nasty letter from Lord Mountorry
yesterday. He's beginning to ask questions: wants to know when we're
going to conclude our contract with that tenant of his--I've
forgotten the fellow's name.'

'Well, that must be looked into. There's perhaps no reason why the
contract should not be concluded. Little by little we may come to
justify our name; who knows? In the meantime, we at all events do a
_bona fide_ business.'

'Strictly so.'

Rodman had a good deal of business on hand besides that which arose
from his connection with Irish dairies. If Alice imagined him
strolling at his ease about the fashionable lounges of the town, she
was much mistaken. He worked hard and enjoyed his work, on the sole
condition that he was engaged in overreaching someone. This
flattered his humour.

He could not find leisure to dine till nearly nine o'clock. He had
made up his mind not to return to Wimbledon, but to make use of a
certain _pied-a-terre_ which he had in Pimlico. His day's work
ended in Westminster, he dined at a restaurant with a friend.
Afterwards billiards were proposed. They entered a house which
Rodman did not know, and were passing before the bar to go to the
billiard-room, when a man who stood there taking refreshment called
out, 'Hollo, Rodman!' To announce a man's name in this way is a
decided breach of etiquette in the world to which Rodman belonged.
He looked annoyed, and would have passed on, but his acquaintance,
who had perhaps exceeded the limits of modest refreshment, called
him again and obliged him to approach the bar. As he did so Rodman
happened to glance at the woman who stood ready to fulfil the
expected order. The glance was followed by a short but close
scrutiny, after which he turned his back and endeavoured by a sign
to draw his two acquaintances away. But at the same moment the
barmaid addressed him.

'What is yours, Mr. Rodman?'

He shrugged his shoulders, muttered a strong expression, and turned
round again. The woman met his look steadily. She was perhaps
thirty, rather tall, with features more refined than her position
would have led one to expect. Her figure was good but meagre; her
cheeks were very thin, and the expression of her face, not quite
amiable at any time, was at present almost fierce. She seemed about
to say something further, but restrained herself.

Rodman recovered his good temper.

'How do, Clara?' he said, keeping his eye fixed on hers. 'I'll have
a drop of absinthe, if you please.'

Then he pursued his conversation with the two men. The woman, having
served them, disappeared. Rodman kept looking for her. In a few
minutes he pretended to recollect an engagement and succeeded in
going off alone. As he issued on to the pavement he found himself
confronted by the barmaid, who now wore a hat and cloak.

'Well?' he said, carelessly.

'Rodman's your name, is it?' was the reply.

'To my particular friends. Let's walk on; we can't chat here very
well.'

'What is to prevent me from calling that policeman and giving you in
charge?' she asked, looking into his face with a strange mixture of
curiosity and anger.

'Nothing, except that you have no charge to make against me. The law
isn't so obliging as all that. Come, we'll take a walk.'

She moved along by his side.

'You coward!' she exclaimed, passionately but with none of the
shrieking virulence of women who like to make a scene in the street.
'You mean, contemptible, cold-blooded man! I suppose you hoped I was
starved to death by this time, or in the workhouse, or--what did
_you_ care where I was! I knew I should find you some day.'

'I rather supposed you would stay on the other side of the water,'
Rodman remarked, glancing at her. 'You're changed a good deal. Now
it's a most extraordinary thing. Not so very long ago I was dreaming
about you, and you were serving at a bar--queer thing, wasn't it?'

They were walking towards Whitehall. When they came at length into
an ill-lighted and quiet spot, the woman stopped.

'Where do you live?' she asked.

'Live? Oh, just out here in Pimlico. Like to see my rooms?'

'What do you mean by talking to me like that? Do you make a joke of
deserting your wife and child for seven years, leaving them without
a penny, going about enjoying yourself, when, for anything you knew,
they were begging their bread? You always were heartless--it was the
blackest day of my life that I met you; and you ask me if I'd like
to see your rooms! What thanks to you that I'm not as vile a
creature as there is in London? How was I to support myself and the
child? What was I to do when they turned me into the streets of New
York because I couldn't pay what you owed them nor the rent of a
room to sleep in? You took good care _you_ never went hungry. I'd
only one thing to hold me up: I was an honest woman, and I made up
my mind I'd keep honest, though I had such a man as you for my
husband. I've hungered and worked, and I've made a living for myself
and my child as best I could. I'm not like you: I've done nothing to
disgrace myself. Now I will slave no more. You won't run away from
me this time. Leave me for a single night, and I go to the nearest
police-station and tell all I know about you. If I wasn't a fool I'd
do it now. But I've hungered and worked for seven years, and now
it's time _my husband_ did something for me.'

'You always had a head for argument, Clara,' he replied coolly. 'But
I can't get over that dream of mine. Really a queer thing, wasn't
it? Who'd have thought of you turning barmaid? With your education,
I should have thought you could have done something in the teaching
line. Never mind. The queerest thing of all is that I'm really half
glad to see you. How's Jack?'

The extraordinary conversation went on as they walked towards the
street where Clara lived. It was in a poor part of Westminster.
Reaching the house, Clara opened the door with a latchkey.

Two women were standing in the passage.

'This is my husband, Mrs. Rook,' Clara said to one of them. 'He's
just got back from abroad.'

'Glad to see you, Mr. Williamson,' said the landlady, scrutinising
him with unmistakable suspicion.

The pair ascended the stairs, and Mrs. Williamson--she had always
used the name she received in marriage--opened a door which
disclosed a dark bedroom. A voice came from within--the voice of a
little lad of eight years old.

'That you, mother? Why, I've only just put myself to bed. What time
is it?'

'Then you ought to have gone to bed long ago,' replied his mother
whilst she was striking a light.

It was a very small room, but decent. The boy was discovered sitting
up in bed--a bright-faced little fellow with black hair. Clara
closed the door, then turned and looked at her husband. The light
made a glistening appearance on her eyes; she had become silent,
allowing facts to speak for themselves.

The child stared at the stranger in astonishment.

'Who are you?' he asked at length.

Rodman laughed as heartily as if there had been nothing disagreeable
in the situation.

'I have the honour to be your father, sir,' he replied. 'You're a
fine boy, Jack--a deuced fine boy.'

The child was speechless. Rodman turned to the mother. Her hands
held the rail at the foot of the bed, and as the boy looked up at
her for explanation she let her face fall upon them and sobbed.

'If you're father come back,' exclaimed Jack indignantly, 'why do
you make mother cry?'

Rodman was still mirthful.

'I like you, Jack,' he said. 'You'll make a man some day. Do you
mind if I smoke a cigar, Clara?'

To his astonishment, he felt a weakness which had to be resisted;
tobacco suggested itself as a resource. When he had struck a light,
his wife forced back her tears and seated herself with an
unforgiving countenance.

Rodman began to chat pleasantly as he smoked.

Decidedly it was a _contretemps_. It introduced a number of
difficulties into his life. If he remained away for a night, he had
little doubt that his wife would denounce him; she knew of several
little matters which he on the whole preferred to be reticent about.
She was not a woman like Alice, to be turned round his finger. It
behoved him to be exceedingly cautious.

He had three personalities. As Mr. Willis Rodman his task was
comparatively a light one, at all events for the present. He merely
informed Alice by letter that he was kept in town by business and
would see her in the course of a week. It was very convenient that
Alice had no intercourse with her relatives. Secondly, as Mr.
Williamson his position was somewhat more difficult. Not only had he
to present himself every night at the rooms he had taken in Brixton,
but it was necessary to take precautions lest his abode should be
discovered by those who might make awkward use of the knowledge. He
had, moreover, to keep Clara in the dark as to his real occupations
and prevent her from knowing his resorts in town. Lastly, as Mr.
Robert Delancey he had to deal with matters of a very delicate
nature indeed, in themselves quite enough to occupy a man's mental
energy. But our friend was no ordinary man. If you are not as yet
satisfied of that, it will ere long be made abundantly clear to you.

His spirits were as high as ever. When he said--with an ingenious
brutality all his own--that he was more than half glad to see his
wife, he, for a wonder, told the truth. But perhaps it was little
Jack who gave him most pleasure, and did .most to reconcile him to
the difficulties of his situation. In a day or two be conquered the
child's affections so completely that Jack seemed to care little for
his mother in comparison; Jack could not know the hardships she had
endured for his sake. Rodman--so we will continue to call him for
convenience' sake--already began to talk of what he would make the
lad, who certainly gave promise of parts. The result of this was
that for a week or two our friend became an exemplary family man.
His wife almost dared to believe that her miseries were over. Yet
she watched him with lynx eyes.

The 'Irish Dairy Company' flourished. Rodman rubbed his hands with a
sinister satisfaction when he inscribed among the shareholders the
name of Richard Mutimer, who invested all the money he had collected
from the East-Enders, and three hundred pounds of his own--not five
hundred, as he had at first thought of doing. Mutimer had the
consent of his committee, whom he persuaded without much
difficulty--the money was not theirs--that by this means he would
increase his capital beyond all expectation. He told Adela what he
had done.

'There's not the least risk. They've got the names of several lords!
And it isn't a mere commercial undertaking: the first object is to
benefit the Irish; so that there can be nothing against my
principles in it. They promise a dividend of thirty per cent. What a
glorious day it will be when I tell the people what I have made of
their money! Now confess that it isn't everyone could have hit on
this idea.'

Of course he made no public announcement of his speculation: that
would have been to spoil the surprise. But he could not refrain from
talking a good deal about the Company to his friends. He explained
with zeal the merit of the scheme; it was dealing directly with the
producers, the poor small-farmers who could never get fair
treatment. He saw a great deal of Mr. Hilary, who was vastly
interested in his East-End work. A severe winter had begun.
Threepenny bits came in now but slowly, and Mutimer exerted himself
earnestly to relieve the growing want in what he called his
'parishes.' He began in truth to do some really good work, moving
heaven and earth to find employment for those long out of it, and
even bestowing money of his own. At night he would return to
Holloway worn out, and distress Adela with descriptions of the
misery he had witnessed.

'I'm not sorry for it,' he once exclaimed. 'I cannot be sorry. Let
things get worse and worse the mending'll be all the nearer. Why
don't they march in a body to the West End? I don't mean march in a
violent sense, though that'll have to come, I expect. But why don't
they make a huge procession and go about the streets in an orderly
way--just to let it be seen what their numbers are--just to give
the West End a hint? I'll propose that one of these days. It'll be a
risky business, but we can't think of that when thousands are half
starving. I could lead them, I feel sure I could! It wants someone
with authority over them, and I think I've got that. There's no
telling what I may do yet. I say, Adela, bow would it sound--
"Richard Mutimer, First President of the English Republic"?'

And in the meantime Alice sat in her house at Wimbledon, abandoned.
The solitude seemed to be driving her mad. Rodman came down very
occasionally for a few hours in the daytime, but never passed a
night with her. He told her he had a great affair on hand, a very
great affair, which was to make their fortunes ten times over. She
must be patient; women couldn't understand business. If she resisted
his coaxing and grumbled, he always had his threat ready. He would
realise his profits and make off, leaving her in the lurch. Weeks
became months. In pique at the betrayal of her famous stratagem,
Alice had wanted to dismiss her servant, but Rodman objected to
this. She was driven by desperation to swallow her pride and make a
companion of the girl. But she did not complain to her of her
husband--partly out of self-respect, partly because she was afraid
to. Indeed it was a terrible time for the poor Princess. She spent
the greater part of every day in a state of apathy; for the rest she
wept. Many a time she was on the point of writing to Richard, but
could not quite bring herself to that. She could not leave the
house, for it rained or snowed day after day; the sun seemed to have
deserted the heavens as completely as joy her life. She grew
feeble-minded, tried to amuse herself with childish games, played
'Beggar My Neighbour' with the servant for hours at night. She had
fits of hysteria, and terrified her sole companion with senseless
laughter, or with alarming screams. Reading she was no longer story.
And her glass--as well as her husband--told her that equal to; after
a few pages she lost her understanding of a she suffered daily in
her appearance. Her hair was falling; she one day told the servant
that she would soon have to buy a wig. Poor Alice! And she had not
even the resource of railing against the social state. What a pity
she had never studied that subject!

So the time went on till February of the new year. Alice's release
was at hand.





CHAPTER XXXIII




'Arry Mutimer, not long after he left his mother's house for good,
by chance met Rodman in the City. Presuming on old acquaintance, he
accosted the man of business with some familiarity; it was a chance
of getting much-needed assistance once more. But Rodman was not
disposed to renew the association He looked into 'Arry's face with a
blank stare, asked contemptuously, 'Who are you?' and pursued his
walk.

'Arry hoped that he might some day have a chance of being even with
Mr. Rodman.

As indeed he had. One evening towards the end of February, 'Arry was
loafing about Brixton. He knew a certain licensed victualler in
those parts, a man who had ere now given him casual employment, and
after a day of fasting he trudged southwards to see if his friend
would not at all events be good for a glass of beer and a hunch of
bread and cheese. Perhaps he might also supply the coppers to pay
for a bed in the New Cut. To his great disappointment, the worthy
victualler was away from home; the victualler's wife had no
charitable tendencies. 'Arry whined to her, but only got for an
answer that times was as 'ard with her as with anyone else. The
representative of unemployed labour went his way despondently, hands
thrust deep in pockets, head slouching forwards, shoulders high up
against the night blast.

He was passing a chemist's shop, when a customer came out He
recognised Rodman. After a moment's uncertainty he made up his mind
to follow him, wondering how Rodman came to be in this part of
London. Keeping at a cautious distance, he saw him stop at a small
house and enter it by aid of a latchkey.

'Why, he lives there!' 'Arry exclaimed to himself. 'What's the
meanin' o' this go?'

Rodman, after all, had seriously come down in the world, then. It
occurred to 'Arry that he might do worse than pay his sister a
visit; Alice could not be hard-hearted enough to refuse him a few
coppers. But the call must be made at an hour when Rodman was away.
Presumably that would be some time after eight in the morning.

Our unconventional friend walked many miles that night. It was one
way of keeping warm, and there was always a possibility of aid from
one or other of the acquaintances whom he sought. The net result of
the night's campaign was half-a-pint of 'four-half.' The front of a
draper's shop in Kennington tempted him sorely; he passed it many
times, eyeing the rolls of calico and flannel exposed just outside
the doorway. But either courage failed him or there was no really
good opportunity. Midnight found him still without means of retiring
to that familiar lodging in the New Cut. At half-past twelve sleet
began to fall. He discovered a very dark corner of a very dark slum,
curled himself against the wall, and slept for a few hours in
defiance of wind and weather.

'Arry was used to this kind of thing. On the whole he deemed it
preferable to the life he would have led at his mother's.

By eight o'clock next morning he was back in Brixton, standing just
where he could see the house which Rodman had entered, without
himself attracting attention. Every rag on his back was soaked; he
had not eaten a mouthful for thirty hours. After such a run of bad
luck perhaps something was about to turn up.

But it was ten o'clock before Rodman left home. 'Arry had no feeling
left in any particle of his body. Still here at length was the
opportunity of seeing Alice. He waited till Rodman was out of sight,
then went to the door and knocked.

It was Clara who opened the door. Seeing 'Arry, she took him for a
beggar, shook her head, and was closing the door against him, when
she heard--

'Is Mrs. Rodman in, mum?'

'Mrs.--who?'

'Mrs. Rodman.'

Clara's eyes flashed as they searched his face.

'What do you want with Mrs. Rodman?'

'Want to see her, mum.'

'Do you know her when you see her?'

'Sh' think I do,' replied 'Arry with a grin. But he thought it
prudent to refrain from explanation.

'How do you know she lives here?'

''Cause I just see her 'usband go out.'

Clara hesitated a moment, then bade him enter. She introduced him to
a parlour on the ground floor. He stood looking uneasily about him.
The habits of his life made him at all times suspicious.

'Mrs. Rodman doesn't live here,' Clara began, lowering her voice and
making a great effort to steady it.

'Oh, she don't?' replied 'Arry, beginning to discern that something
was wrong.

'Can you tell me what you want with her?'

He looked her in the eyes and again grinned.

'Dare say I could if it was made worth my while.'

She took a purse from her pocket and laid half-a-crown on the table.
Her hand shook.

'I can't afford more than that. You shall have it if you tell me the
truth.'

'Arry took counsel with himself for an instant. Probably there was
no more to be got, and he saw from the woman's agitation that he had
come upon some mystery. The chance of injuring Rodman was more to
him than several half-crowns.

'I won't ask more,' he said, 'if you'll tell me who _you_ are.
That's fair on both sides, eh?'

'My name is Mrs. Williamson.'

'Oh? And might it 'appen that Mr. Rodman calls himself Mr.
Williamson when it suits him?'

'I don't know what you mean,' she replied hurriedly. 'Tell me who it
is you call Mrs. Rodman.'

'I don't _call_ her so. That's her married name. She's my sister.'

The door opened. Both turned their heads and saw Rodman. He had come
back for a letter he had forgotten to take with him to post At a
glance he saw everything, including the half-crown on the table,
which 'Arry instantly seized. He walked forward, throwing a
murderous look at Clara as he passed her. Then he said to 'Arry, in
a perfectly calm voice--

'There's the door.'

'I see there is,' the other replied, grinning. 'Good-mornin', Mr.
Rodman Williamson.'

Husband and wife faced each other as soon as the front door slammed.
Clara was a tigress; she could not be terrified as Alice might have
been by scowls and savage threats. Rodman knew it, and knew,
moreover, that his position was more perilous than any he had been
in for a long time.

'What do you know?' he asked quietly.

'Enough to send you to prison, Mr. Rodman. You can't do _quite_ what
you like! If there's law in this country I'll see you punished!'

He let her rave for a minute or two, and by that time had laid his
plans.

'Will you let me speak? Now I give you a choice. Either you can do
as you say, or you can be out of this country, with me and Jack,
before to-morrow morning. In a couple of hours I can get more money
than you ever set eyes on; I'll be back here with it'--he looked at
his watch--'by one o'clock. No, that wouldn't be safe either--that
fellow might send someone here by then. I'll meet you on Westminster
Bridge, the north end, at one. Now you've a minute to choose; he may
have gone straight away to the police station. Punish me if you
like--I don't care a curse. But it seems to me the other thing's got
more common sense in it I haven't seen that woman for a month, and
never care to see her again. I don't care over much for you either;
but I do care for Jack, and for his sake I'll take you with me, and
do my best for you. It's no good looking at me like a wild beast
You've sense enough to make a choice.'

She clasped her hands together and moaned, so dreadful was the
struggle in her between passions and temptations and fears. The
mother's heart bade her trust him; yet _could_ she trust him to go
and return?

'You have the cunning of a devil,' she groaned, 'and as little
heart! Let you go, when you only want the chance of deserting me
again!'

'You'll have to be quick,' he replied, holding his watch in his
hand, and smiling at the compliment in spite of his very real
anxiety. 'There may be no choice in a minute or two.'

'I'll go with you now; I'll follow you where you go to get the
money!'

'No, you won't. Either you trust me or you refuse. You've a free
choice, Clara. I tell you plainly I want little Jack, and I'm not
going to lose him if I can help it.'

'Have you any other children?'

'No--never had.'

At least he had not been deceiving her in the matter of Jack. She
knew that he had constantly come home at early hours only for the
sake of playing with the boy.

'I'll go with you. No one shall see that I'm following you.'

'It's impossible. I shall have to go post haste in a cab. I've
half-a-dozen places to go to. Meet me on Westminster Bridge at one.
I may be a few minutes later, but certainly not more than
half-an-hour.'

He went to the window and looked uneasily up and down the street.
Clara pressed her hands upon her head and stared at him like one
distracted.

'Where is she?' came from her involuntarily.

'Don't be a fool, woman!' he replied, walking to the door. She
sprang to hold him. Instead of repulsing her, he folded his arm
about her waist and kissed her lips two or three times.

'I can get thousands of pounds,' he whispered. 'We'll be off before
they have a trace. It's for Jack's sake, and I'll be kind to you as
well, old woman.'

She had suffered him to go; the kisses made her powerless, reminding
her of a long-past dream. A moment after she rushed to the house
door, but only to see him turning the corner of the street Then she
flew to the bedroom. Jack was ill of a cold--she was nursing him in
bed. But now she dressed him hurriedly, as if there were scarcely
time to get to Westminster by the appointed hour. All was ready
before eleven o'clock, but it was now raining, and she durst not
wait with the child in the open air for longer than was necessary.
But all at once the fear possessed her lest the police might come to
the house and she be detained. Ignorant of the law, and convinced
from her husband's words that the stranger in rags had some sinister
aim, she no sooner conceived the dread than she bundled into a
hand-bag such few articles as it would hold and led the child
hastily from the house. They walked to a tramway-line and had soon
reached Westminster Bridge. But it was not half-past eleven, and the
rain descended heavily. She sought a small eating-house not far from
the Abbey, and by paying for some coffee and bread-and-butter, which
neither she nor Jack could touch, obtained leave to sit in shelter
till one o'clock.

At five minutes to the hour she rose and hurried to the north end of
the bridge, and stood there, aside from the traffic, shielding
little Jack as much as she could with her umbrella, careless that
her own clothing was getting wet through. Big Ben boomed its one
stroke. Minute after minute passed, and her body seemed still to
quiver from the sound. She was at once feverishly hot and so deadly
chill that her teeth clattered together; her eyes throbbed with the
intensity of their gaze into the distance. The quarter-past was
chimed. Jack kept talking to her, but she could hear nothing. The
rain drenched her; the wind was so high that she with difficulty
held the umbrella above the child. Half-past, and no sign of her
husband. . . .

She durst not go away from this spot Her eyes were blind with tears.
A policeman spoke to her; she could only chatter meaningless sounds
between her palsied lips. Jack coughed incessantly, begged to be
taken home. 'I'm so cold, mother, so cold!' 'Only a few minutes
more,' she said. He began to cry, though a brave little soul. . . .

Four o'clock struck.

From Brixton our unconventional friend betook himself straight to
Holloway. Having, as he felt sure, the means of making things
decidedly uncomfortable for Mr. Rodman Williamson, it struck him
that the eftest way would be to declare at once to his brother
Richard all he knew and expected; Dick would not be slow in
bestirring himself to make Rodman smart 'Arry was without false
shame; he had no hesitation in facing his brother. But Mr. Mutimer,
he was told, was not at home. Then he would see Mrs. Mutimer. But
the servant was indisposed to admit him, or even to trouble her
mistress. 'Arry had to request her to say that 'Mr. 'Enery Mutimer'
desired to see the lady of the house. He chuckled to see the
astonishment produced by his words. Thus he got admittance to Adela.

She was shocked at the sight of him, could find no words, yet gave
him her hand. He told her he wished to see his brother on very
particular business. But Richard would not be back before eight
o'clock in the evening, and it was impossible to say where he could
be found. 'Arry would not tell Adela what brought him, only assured
her that it had nothing to do with his own affairs. He would call
again in the evening. Adela felt inhuman in allowing him to go out
into the rain, but she could not risk giving displeasure to her
husband by inviting 'Arry to stay.

He came again at half-past eight. Mutimer had been home nearly an
hour and was expecting him. 'Arry lost no time in coming to the
point

'He's married that other woman, I could see that much. Go and see
for yourself. She give me 'alf-a-crown to tell all about him. I'm
only afraid he's got off by this time.'

'Why didn't you go and give information to the police at once?'
Mutimer cried, in exasperation.

'Arry might have replied that he had a delicacy in waiting upon
those gentlemen. But his brother did not stay for an answer. Rushing
from the room, he equipped himself instantly with hat, coat, and
umbrella.

'Show me the way to that house. Come along, there's no time to lose.
Adela!' he called, 'I have to go out; can't say when I shall be
back. Don't sit up if I'm late.'

A hansom bore the brothers southwards as fast as hansom could go.

They found Clara in the house, a haggard, frenzied woman. Already
she had been to the police, but they were not inclined to hurry
matters; she had no satisfactory evidence to give them. To Mutimer,
when he had explained his position, she told everything--of her
marriage in London nine years ago, her going with her husband to
America, his desertion of her. Richard took her at once to the
police-station. They would have to attend at the court next morning
to swear an information.

By ten o'clock Mutimer was at Waterloo, taking train for Wimbledon.
At Rodman's house he found darkness, but a little ringing brought
Alice herself to the door. She thought it was her husband, and, on
recognising Richard, all but dropped with fear; only some ill news
could explain his coming thus. With difficulty he induced her to go
into a room out of the hall. She was in her dressing-gown, her long
beautiful hair in disorder, her pretty face white and distorted.

'What is it, Dick? what is it, Dick?' she kept repeating
mechanically, with inarticulate moanings between. She had forgotten
her enmity against her brother and spoke to him as in the old days.
He, too, was all kindness.

'Try and keep quiet a little, Alice. I want to talk to you. Yes,
it's about your husband, my poor girl; but there's nothing to be
frightened at. He's gone away, that's all. I want you to come to
London with me.'

She had no more control over herself than a terrified child; her
words and cries were so incoherent that Mutimer feared lest she had
lost her senses. She was, in truth, on the borders of idiocy. It was
more than half-an-hour before, with the servant's assistance, he
could allay her hysterical anguish. Then she altogether refused to
accompany him. If she did so she would miss her husband; he would
not go without coming to see her. Richard was reminded by the
servant that it was too late to go by train. He decided to remain in
the house through the night.

He had not ventured to tell her all the truth, nor did her state
encourage him to do so in the morning. But he then succeeded in
persuading her to come with him; Rodman, he assured her, must
already be out of England, for he had committed a criminal offence
and knew that the police were after him. Alice was got to the
station more dead than alive; they were at home in Holloway by
half-past ten. Richard then left her in Adela's hands and sped once
more to Brixton.

He got home again at two. As he entered Adela came down the stairs
to meet him.

'How is she?' he asked anxiously.

'The same. The doctor was here an hour ago. We must keep her as
quiet as possible. But she can't rest for a moment.'

She added--

'Three gentlemen have called to see you. They would leave no name,
and, to tell the truth, were rather rude. They seemed to doubt my
word when I said you were not in.'

At his request she attempted to describe these callers. Mutimer
recognised them as members of his committee.

'Rude to you? You must have mistaken. What did they come here for? I
shall in any case see them to-night.'

They returned to the subject of Alice's illness.

'I've half a mind to tell her the truth,' Mutimer said. 'Surely
she'd put the blackguard out of her head after that.'

'No, no; you mustn't tell her!' Adela interposed. 'I am sure it
would be very unwise.'

Alice was growing worse; in an hour or two delirium began to declare
itself. She had resisted all efforts to put her to bed; at most she
would lie on a couch. Whilst Richard and his wife were debating what
should be done, it was announced to them that the three gentlemen
had called again. Mutimer went oft angrily to see them.

He was engaged for half-an-hour. Then Adela heard the visitors
depart; one of them was speaking loudly and with irritation. She
waited for a moment at the head of the stairs, expecting that
Mutimer would come out to her. As he did not, she went into the
sitting-room.

Mutimer stood before the fireplace, his eyes on the ground, his face
discoloured with vehement emotion.

'What has happened?' she asked.

He looked up and beckoned to her to approach.





CHAPTER XXXIV




Adela bad never seen him so smitten with grave trouble. She knew him
in brutal anger and in surly ill-temper; but his present mood had
nothing of either. He seemed to stagger beneath a blow which had all
but crushed him and left him full of dread. He began to address her
in a voice very unlike his own--thick, uncertain; he used short
sentences, often incomplete.

'Those men are on the committee. One of them got a letter this
morning--anonymous. It said they were to be on their guard against
me. Said the Company's a swindle--that I knew it--that I've got
money out of the people on false pretences. And Hilary's gone--gone
off--taking all he could lay hands on. The letter says so--I don't
know. It says I'm thick with the secretary--a man I never even saw.
That he's a well-known swindler--Delancey his name is. And these
fellows believe it--demand that I shall prove I'm innocent. What
proof can I give? They think I kept out of the way on purpose this
morning.'

He ceased speaking, and Adela stood mute, looking him in the face.
She was appalled on his account. She did not love him; too often his
presence caused her loathing. But of late she had been surprised
into thinking more highly of some of his qualities than it had
hitherto been possible for her to do. She could never forget that he
toiled first and foremost for his own advancement to a very cheap
reputation; he would not allow her to lose sight of it had she
wished. But during the present winter she had discerned in him a
genuine zeal to help the suffering, a fervour in kindly works of
which she had not believed him capable. Very slowly the conviction
had come to her, but in the end she could not resist it. One
evening, in telling her of the hideous misery he had been amongst,
his voice failed and she saw moisture in his eyes. Was his character
changing? Had she wronged him in attaching too much importance to a
fault which was merely on the surface? Oh, but there were too many
indisputable charges against him. Yet a man's moral nature may
sometimes be strengthened by experience of the evil he has wrought.
All this rushed through her mind as she now stood gazing at him.

'But how can they credit an anonymous letter?' she said. 'How can
they believe the worst of you before making inquiries?'

'They have been to the office of the Company. Everything is upside
down. They say Hilary isn't to be found.'

'Who can have written such a letter?'

'How do I know? I have enemies enough, no doubt. Who hasn't that
makes himself a leader?'

There was the wrong note again. It discouraged her; she was silent.

'Look here, Adela,' he said, 'do you believe this?'

'Believe it!'

'Do you think I'm capable of doing a thing like that--scraping
together by pennies the money of the poorest of the poor just to use
it for my own purposes--could I do that?'

'You know I do not believe it.'

'But you don't speak as if you were certain. There's something--But
how am I to prove I'm innocent? How can I make people believe I
wasn't in the plot? They've only my word--who'll think that enough?
Anyone can tell a lie and stick to it, if there's no positive proof
against him. How am I to make _you_ believe that I was taken in?'

'But I tell you that a doubt of your innocence does not enter my
mind. If it were necessary, I would stand up in public before all
who accused you and declare that they were wrong. I do not need your
assurance. I recognise that it would be impossible for you to commit
such a crime.'

'Well, it does me good to hear you say that,' he replied, with light
of hope in his eyes. 'I wanted to feel sure of that. You might have
thought that'--he sank his voice--'that because I could think of
destroying that will--'

'Don't speak of that!' she interrupted, with a gesture of pain. 'I
say that I believe you. It is enough. Don't speak about me any more.
Think of what has to be done.'

'I have promised to be in Clerkenwell at eight o'clock. There'll be
a meeting. I shall do my best to show that I am innocent. You'll
look after Alice? It's awful to have to leave her whilst she's like
that.'

'Trust me. I will not leave her side for a moment. The doctor will
be here again to-night.'

A thought struck him.

'Send out the girl for an evening paper. There may be something in
it.'

The paper was obtained. One of the first headings his eye fell upon
was: 'Rumoured Collapse of a Public Company. Disappearance of the
Secretary.' He showed it to Adela, and they read together. She saw
that the finger with which he followed the lines quivered like a
leaf. It was announced in a brief paragraph that the Secretary of
the Irish Dairy Company was missing: that he seemed to have gone off
with considerable sums. Moreover, that there were rumours in the
City of a startling kind, relative to the character of the Company
itself. The name of the secretary was Mr. Robert Delancey, but that
was now believed to be a mere _alias_. The police were actively at
work.

'It'll be the ruin of me!' Mutimer gasped. 'I can never prove that I
knew nothing. You see, nothing's said about Hilary. It's that fellow
Delancey who has run.'

'You must find Mr. Hilary,' said Adela urgently. 'Where does he
live?'

'I have no idea. I only had the office address. Perhaps it isn't
even his real name. It'll be my ruin.'

Adela was astonished to see him so broken down. He let himself sink
upon a chair; his head and hands fell.

'But I can't understand why you should despair so!' she exclaimed.
'You will speak to the meeting to-night. If the money is lost you
will restore it. If you have been imprudent, that is no crime.'

'It is--it is--when I had money of that kind entrusted to me! They
won't hear me. They have condemned me already. What use is it to
talk to them? They'll say everything comes to smash in my hands.'

She spoke to him with such words of strengthening as one of his
comrades might have used. She did not feel the tenderness of a wife,
and had no power to assume it. But her voice was brave and true. She
had made his interest, his reputation, her own. By degrees he
recovered from the blow, and let her words give him heart.

'You're right,' he said, 'I'm behaving like a fool; I couldn't go on
different if I was really guilty. Who wrote that letter? I never saw
the letter before, as far as I know. I wanted to keep it, but they
wouldn't let me--trust them! What black guards they are I They're
jealous of me. They know they can't speak like I do, that they
haven't the same influence I have. So they're ready to believe the
first lie that's brought against me. Let them look to themselves
to-night! I'll give them a piece of my mind--see if I don't! What's
to-day? Friday. On Sunday I'll have the biggest meeting ever
gathered in the East End. If they shout out against me, I'll tell
them to their faces that they're mean-spirited curs. They haven't
the courage to rise and get by force what they'll never have by
asking for it, and when a man does his best to help them they throw
mud at him!'

'But they won't do so,' Adela urged. 'Don't be unjust. Wait and see.
They will shout _for_, not _against_ you.'

'Why didn't you keep 'Arry here?' he asked suddenly.

'He refused to stay. I gave him money.'

'You should have forced him to stay How can I have a brother of my
own living a life like that? You did wrong to give him money. He'll
only use it to make a beast of himself. I must find him again; I
can't let him go to ruin.'

'Arry had come back to Holloway the previous night to inform Adela
that her husband might not return till morning. As she said, it had
been impossible to detain him. He was too far gone in
unconventionality to spend a night under a decent roof.
Home-sickness for the gutter possessed him.

In the meantime Alice had become quieter. It was half-past six;
Mutimer had to be at the meeting-place in Clerkenwell by eight.
Adela sat by Alice whilst the servant hurriedly prepared a meal;
then the girl took her place, and she went down to her husband. They
were in the middle of their meal when they heard the front-door
slam. Mutimer started up.

'Who's that? Who's gone out?'

Adela ran to the foot of the stairs and called the servant's name
softly. It was a minute before the girl appeared.

'Who has just gone out, Mary?'

'Gone out? No one, mum!'

'Is Mrs. Rodman lying still?'

The girl went to see. She had left Alice for a few moments
previously. She appeared again at the head of the stairs with a face
of alarm.

'Mrs. Rodman isn't there, mum!'

Mutimer flew up the staircase. Alice was nowhere to be found. It
could not be doubted that she had fled in a delirious state. Richard
rushed into the street, but it was very dark, and rain was falling.
There was no trace of the fugitive. He came back to the door, where
Adela stood; he put out his hand and held her arm as if she needed
support.

'Give me my hat! She'll die in the street, in the rain! I'll go one
way; the girl must go the other. My hat!'

'I will go one way myself,' said Adela hurriedly. 'You must take an
umbrella: it pours. Mary! my waterproof!'

They ran in opposite directions. It was a quiet by-street, with no
shops to cast light upon the pavement. Adela encountered a constable
before she had gone very far, and begged for his assistance. He
promised to be on the look-out, but advised her to go on a short
distance to the police-station and leave a description of the
missing woman. She did so; then, finding the search hopeless in this
quarter, turned homewards. Mutimer was still absent, but he appeared
in five minutes; as unsuccessful as herself. She told him of her
visit to the station.

'I must keep going about,' he said. 'She can't be far off; her
strength, surely, wouldn't take her far.'

Adela felt for him profoundly; for once he had not a thought of
himself, his distress was absorbing. He was on the point of leaving
the house again, when she remembered the meeting at which he was
expected. She spoke of it.

'What do I care?' he replied, waving his arm. 'Let them think what
they like. I must find Alice.'

Adela saw in a moment all that his absence would involve. He could
of course explain subsequently, but in the meantime vast harm would
have been done. It was impossible to neglect the meeting altogether.
She ran after him and stopped him on the pavement.

'I will go to this meeting for you,' she said. 'A cab will take me
there and bring me back. I will let them know what keeps you away.'

He looked at her with astonishment.

'You! How can you go? Among those men?'

'Surely I have nothing to fear from them? Have you lost all your
faith suddenly? You cannot go, but someone must. I will speak to
them so that they cannot but believe me. You continue the search; I
will go.'

They stood together in the pouring rain. Mutimer caught her hand.

'I never knew what a wife could be till now,' he exclaimed hoarsely.
'And I never knew _you_!'

'Find me a cab and give the man the address. I will be ready in an
instant.'

Her cheeks were on fire; her nerves quivered with excitement. She
had made the proposal almost involuntarily; only his thanks gave her
some understanding of what she was about to do. But she did not
shrink; a man's--better still, a woman's--noblest courage throbbed
in her. If need were, she too could stand forward in a worthy cause
and speak the truth undauntedly.

The cab was bearing her away. She looked at her watch in the moment
of passing a street lamp and just saw that it was eight o'clock. The
meeting would be full by this; they would already be drawing ill
conclusions from Mutimer's absence Faster, faster! Every moment lost
increased the force of prejudice against him. She could scarcely
have felt more zeal on behalf of the man whom her soul loved. In the
fever of her brain she was conscious of a wish that even now that
love could be her husband's. Ah no, no! But serve him she could and
loyally. The lights flew by in the streets of Islington; the driver
was making the utmost speed he durst. A check among thronging
vehicles anguished her. But it was past, and here at length came the
pause.

A crowd of perhaps a hundred men was gathered about the ill-lighted
entrance to what had formerly been a low-class dancing-saloon. Adela
saw them come thronging about the cab, heard their cries of
discontent and of surprise when she showed herself.

'Wait for me!' she called to the driver, and straightway walked to
the door. The men made way for her. On the threshold she turned.

'I wish to see some member of the committee. I am Mrs. Mutimer.'

There was a coarse laugh from some fellows, but others cried, 'Shut
up! she's a lady.' One stepped forward and announced himself as a
committee-man. He followed her into the passage.

'My husband cannot come,' she said. 'Will you please show me where I
can speak to the meeting and tell them the reason of his absence?'

Much amazed, the committee-man led her into the hall. It was
whitewashed, furnished with plain benches, lit with a few gas-jets.
There was scarcely room to move for the crowd. Every man seemed to
be talking at the pitch of his voice. The effect was an angry roar.
Adela's guide with difficulty made a passage for her to the
platform, for it took some time before the crowd realised what was
going on. At length she stood in a place whence she could survey the
assembly. On the wall behind her hung a great sheet of paper on
which were inscribed the names of all who had deposited money with
Mutimer. Adela glanced at it and understood. Instead of being
agitated she possessed an extraordinary lucidity of mind, a calmness
of nerve which she afterwards remembered as something miraculous.

The committee-man roared for silence, then in a few words explained
Mrs. Mutimer's wish to make 'a speech.' To Adela's ears there seemed
something of malice in this expression; she did not like, either,
the laugh which it elicited. But quiet was speedily restored by a
few men of sturdy lungs. She stepped to the front of the platform.

The scene was a singular one. Adela had thrown off her waterproof in
the cab; she stood in her lady-like costume of home, her hat only
showing that she had come from a distance. For years her cheeks had
been very pale; in this moment her whole face was white as marble.
Her delicate beauty made strange contrast with the faces on each
side and in front of her--faces of rude intelligence, faces of
fathomless stupidity, faces degraded into something less than human.
But all were listening, all straining towards her. There were a few
whispers of honest admiration, a few of vile jest. She began to
speak.

'I have come here because my husband cannot come. It is most
unfortunate that he cannot, for he tells me that someone has been
throwing doubt upon his honesty. He would be here, but that a
terrible misfortune has befallen him. His sister was lying ill in
our house. A little more than an hour ago she was by chance left
alone and, being delirious--out of her mind--escaped from the
house. My husband is now searching for her everywhere; she may be
dying somewhere in the streets. That is the explanation I have come
to give you. But I will say a word more. I do not know who has
spoken ill of my husband; I do not know his reasons for doing so.
This, however, I know, that Richard Mutimer has done you no wrong,
and that he is incapable of the horrible thing of which he is
accused. You must believe it; you wrong yourselves if you refuse to.
To-morrow, no doubt, he will come and speak for himself. Till then I
beg you to take the worthy part and credit good rather than evil.'

She ceased, and, turning to the committee-man, who still stood near
her, requested him to guide her from the room. As she moved down
from the platform the crowd recovered itself from the spell of her
voice. The majority cheered, but there were not a few dissentient
howls. Adela had ears for nothing; a path opened before her, and she
walked along it with bowed head. Her heart was now beating
violently; she felt that she must walk quickly or perchance her
strength would fail her before she reached the door. As she
disappeared there again arose the mingled uproar of cheers and
groans; it came to her like the bellow of a pursuing monster as she
fled along the passage. And in truth Demos was on her track. A few
kept up with her; the rest jammed themselves in the door way,
hustled each other, fought. The dozen who came out to the pavement
altogether helped her into the cab, then gave a hearty cheer as she
drove away.

The voice of Demos, not malevolent at the last, but to Adela none
the less something to be fled from, something which excited thoughts
of horrible possibilities, in its very good-humour and its praise of
her a sound of fear.





CHAPTER XXXV




His search being vain, Mutimer hastened from one police-station to
another, leaving descriptions of his sister at each. When he came
home again Adela had just arrived. She was suffering too much from
the reaction which followed upon her excitement to give him more
than the briefest account of what she had heard and said; but
Mutimer cared little for details. He drew an easy-chair near to the
fire and begged her to rest. As she lay back for a moment with
closed eyes, he took her faint hand and put it to his lips. He had
never done so before; when she glanced at him he averted his face in
embarrassment.

He would have persuaded her to go to bed, but she declared that
sleep was impossible; she had much rather sit up with him till news
came of Alice, as it surely must do in course of the night. For
Mutimer there was no resting; he circled continually about the
neighbouring streets, returning to the house every quarter of an
hour, always to find Adela in the same position. Her heart would not
fall to its normal beat, and the vision of those harsh faces would
not pass from her mind.

At two o'clock they heard that Alice was found. She had been
discovered several miles from home, lying unconscious in the street,
and was now in a hospital. Mutimer set off at once; he returned with
the report that she was between life and death. It was impossible to
remove her.

Adela slept a little between six and eight; her husband took even
shorter rest. When she came down to the sitting-room, he was reading
the morning paper. As she entered he uttered a cry of astonishment
and rage.

'Look here!' he exclaimed to her. 'Read that!'

He pointed to an account of the Irish Dairy Company frauds, in which
it was stated that the secretary, known as Delancey, appeared also
to have borne the name of Rodman.

They gazed at each other.

'Then it was Rodman wrote that letter!' Mutimer cried. 'I'll swear
to it. He did it to injure me at the last moment. Why haven't they
got him yet? The police are useless. But they've got Hilary, I
see--yes, they've got Hilary. He was caught at Dover. Ha, ha! He
denies everything--says he didn't even know of the secretary's
decamping. The lying scoundrel! Says he was going to Paris on
private business. But they've got him! And see here again: "The same
Rodman is at present wanted by the police on a charge of bigamy."
Wanted! If they weren't incompetent fools they'd have had him
already. Ten to one he's out of England.'

It was a day of tumult for Mutimer. At the hospital he found no
encouragement, but he could only leave Alice in the hands of the
doctors. From the hospital he went to his mother's house; he had not
yet had time to let her know of anything. But his main business lay
in Clerkenwell and in various parts of the East End, wherever he
could see his fellow-agitators. In hot haste he wrote an
announcement of a meeting on Clerkenwell Green for Sunday afternoon,
and had thousands of copies printed on slips; by evening these were
scattered throughout his 'parishes.' He found that the calumny
affecting him was already widely known; several members of his
committee met him with black looks. Here and there an ironical
question was put to him about his sister's health. With the
knowledge that Alice might be dying or dead, he could scarcely find
words of reply. His mood changed from fear and indignation to a grim
fury; within a few hours he made many resolute enemies by his
reckless vehemence and vituperation.

The evening papers brought him a piece of intelligence which would
have rejoiced him but for something with which it was coupled.
Delancey, _alias_ Rodman, _alias_ Williamson, was arrested; he had
been caught in Hamburg. The telegram added that he talked freely and
had implicated a number of persons--among them a certain Socialist
agitator, name not given. As Mutimer read this he fell for a moment
into blank despair. He returned at once to Holloway, all but
resolved to throw up the game--to abandon the effort to defend
himself, and wait for what might result from the judicial
investigations. Adela resisted this to the uttermost. She understood
that such appearance of fear would be fatal to him. With a knowledge
of Demos which owed much to her last night's experience, she urged
to him that behind his back calumny would thrive unchecked, would
grow in a day to proportions altogether irresistible. She succeeded
in restoring his courage, though at the same time there revived in
Mutimer the savage spirit which could only result in harm to
himself.

'This is how they repay a man who works for them!' he cried
repeatedly. 'The ungrateful brutes! Let me once clear myself, and
I'll throw it up, bid them find someone else to fight their battles
for them. It's always been the same: history shows it What have I
got for myself out of it all, I'd like to know? Haven't I given them
every penny I had? Let them do their worst! Let them bark and bray
till they are hoarse!'

He would have kept away from Clerkenwell that evening, but even this
Adela would not let him do. She insisted that he must be seen and
heard, that the force of innocence would prevail even with his
enemies. The couple of hours he passed with her were spent in
ceaseless encouragement on her side, in violent tirades on his. He
paced the room like a caged lion, at one moment execrating Rodman,
the next railing against the mob to whose interests he had devoted
himself. Now and then his voice softened, and he spoke of Alice.

'The scoundrel set even her against me! If she lives, perhaps she'll
believe I'm guilty; how can my word stand against her husband's?
Why, he isn't her husband at all! It's a good thing if she dies--the
best thing that could happen. What will become of her? What are we
to call her? She's neither married nor single. Can we keep it from
her, do you think? No, that won't do; she must be free to marry an
honest man. You'll try and make friends with her, Adela--if ever
you've the chance? She'll have to live with us, of course unless
she'd rather live with mother. We mustn't tell her for a long time,
till she's strong enough to bear it.'

He with difficulty ate a few mouthfuls and went off to Clerkenwell.
In the erstwhile dancing-saloon it was a night of tempest. Mutimer
had never before addressed an unfriendly audience. After the first
few interruptions he lost his temper, and with it his cause, as far
as these present hearers were concerned. When he left them, it was
amid the mutterings of a storm which was not quite--only not
quite--ready to burst in fury.

'Who knows you won't take yer 'ook before to-morrow?' cried a voice
as he neared the door.

'Wait and see!' Mutimer shouted in reply, with a savage laugh. 'I've
a word or two to say yet to blackguards like you.'

He could count on some twenty pairs of fists in the room, if it came
to that point; but he was allowed to depart unmolested.

On the way home he called at the hospital. There was no change in
Alice's condition.

The next day he remained at home till it was time to start for
Clerkenwell Green. He was all but worn out, and there was nothing of
any use to be done before the meeting assembled. Adela went for him
to the hospital and brought back still the same report. He ate
fairly well of his midday dinner, seeming somewhat calmer. Adela,
foreseeing his main danger, begged him to address the people without
anger, assured him that a dignified self-possession would go much
farther than any amount of blustering. He was induced to promise
that he would follow her advice.

He purposed walking to the Green; the exercise would perhaps keep
his nerves in order. When it was time to start, he took Adela's
hand, and for a second time kissed it. She made an effort over
herself and held her lips to him. The 'good-bye' was exchanged, with
a word of strengthening from Adela; but still he did not go. He was
endeavouring to speak.

'I don't think I've thanked you half enough,' he said at length,
'for what you did on Friday night.'

'Yes, more than enough,' was the reply.

'You make little of it, but it's a thing very few women would have
done. And it was hard for you, because you're a lady.'

'No less a woman,' murmured Adela, her head bowed.

'And a good woman--I believe with all my heart. I want to ask you to
forgive me--for things I once said to you. I was a brute. Perhaps if
I had been brought up in the same kind of way that you were--that's
the difference between us, you see. But try if you can to forget it.
I'll never think anything but good of you as long as I live.'

She could not reply, for a great sob was choking her. She pressed
his band; the tears broke from her eyes as she turned away.

It being Sunday afternoon, visitors were admitted to the hospital in
which Alice lay. Mutimer had allowed himself time to pass five
minutes by his sister's bedside on the way to Clerkenwell. Alice was
still unconscious; she lay motionless, but her lips muttered
unintelligible words. He bent over her and spoke, but she did not
regard him. It was perhaps the keenest pain Mutimer had ever known
to look into those eyes and meet no answering intelligence. By close
listening he believed he heard her utter the name of her husband. It
was useless to stay; he kissed her and left the ward.

On his arrival at Clerkenwell Green--a large triangular space which
merits the name of Green as much as the Strand--he found a
considerable gathering already assembled about the cart from which
he was to speak. The inner circle consisted of his friends--some
fifty who remained staunch in their faith. Prominent among them was
the man Redgrave, he who had presented the address when Mutimer took
leave of his New Wanley workpeople. He had come to London at the
same time as his leader, and had done much to recommend Mutimer's
scheme in the East End. His muscular height made those about him
look puny. He was red in the face with the excitement of abusing
Mutimer's enemies, and looked as if nothing would please him better
than to second words with arguments more cogent. He and those about
him hailed the agitator's appearance with three ringing cheers. A
little later came a supporter whom Richard had not expected to see--
Mr. Westlake. Only this morning intelligence of what was going on
had reached his ears. At once he had scouted the accusations as
incredible; he deemed it a duty to present himself on Mutimer's
side. Outside this small cluster was an indefinable mob, a portion
of it bitterly hostile, a part indifferent; among the latter a large
element of mere drifting blackguardism, the raff of a city,
anticipating with pleasure an uproar which would give them unwonted
opportunities of violence and pillage. These gentle men would with
equal zeal declare for Mutimer or his opponents, as the fortune of
the day directed them.

The core of the hostile party consisted of those who followed the
banner of Comrade Roodhouse, the ralliers to the 'Tocsin.' For them
it was a great occasion. The previous evening had seen a clamorous
assembly in the room behind the Hoxton coffee-shop. Comrade
Roodhouse professed to have full details of the scandal which had
just come to light. According to him, there was no doubt whatever
that Mutimer had known from the first the character of the bogus
Company, and had wittingly used the money of the East-Enders to aid
in floating a concern which would benefit himself and a few others.
Roodhouse disclosed the identity of Mr. Robert Delancey, and
explained the relations existing between Rodman and Mutimer,
ignoring the fact that a lawsuit had of late turned their friendship
to mutual animosity. It was an opportunity not to be missed for
paying back the hard things Mutimer had constantly said of the
'Tocsin' party. Comrade Roodhouse was busy in the crowd, sowing
calumnies and fermenting wrath. In the crowd were our old
acquaintances Messrs. Cowes and Cullen, each haranguing as many as
could be got to form a circle and listen, indulging themselves in
measureless vituperation, crying shame on traitors to the noble
cause. Here, too, was Daniel Dabbs, mainly interested in the
occasion as an admirable provocative of thirst. He was much disposed
to believe Mutimer guilty, but understood that it was none of his
business to openly take part with either side. He stood well on the
limits of the throng; it was not impossible that the debate might
end in the cracking of crowns, in which case Mr. Dabbs, as a
respectable licensed victualler whose weekly profits had long since
made him smile at the follies of his youth, would certainly incur no
needless risk to his own valuable scalp.

The throng thickened; it was impossible that the speakers should be
audible to the whole assembly. Hastily it was decided to arrange two
centres. Whilst Mutimer was speaking at the lower end of the Green,
Redgrave would lift up his voice in the opposite part, and make it
understood that Mutimer would repeat his address there as soon as he
had satisfied the hearers below. The meeting was announced for three
o'clock, but it was half an hour later before Mutimer stood up on
the cart and extended his hand in appeal for silence. It at first
seemed as if he could not succeed in making his voice heard at all.
A cluster of Roodhouse's followers, under the pretence of demanding
quiet, made incessant tumult. But ultimately the majority, those who
were merely curious, and such of the angry East-Enders as really
wanted to hear what Mutimer had to say for himself, imposed silence.
Richard began his speech.

He had kept Adela's warning in mind, and determined to be calmly
dignified in his refutal of the charges brought against him. For
five minutes he impressed his hearers. He had never spoken better.
In the beginning he briefly referred to the facts of his life, spoke
of the use he had made of wealth when he possessed it, demanded if
it was likely that he should join with swindlers to rob the very
class to which he himself was proud to belong, and for which he had
toiled unceasingly. He spoke of Rodman, and denied that he had ever
known of this man's connection with the Company--a man who was his
worst enemy. He it was, this Rodman, who doubtless had written the
letter which first directed suspicion in the wrong quarter; it was
an act such as Rodman would be capable of, for the sake of
gratifying his enmity. And how had that enmity arisen? He told the
story of the lawsuit; showed how, in that matter, he had stood up
for common honesty, though at the time Rodman was his friend. Then
he passed to the subject of his stewardship. Why had he put that
trust money into a concern without sufficient investigation? He
could make but one straightforward answer: he had believed that the
Company was sound, and he bought shares because the dividends
promised to be large, and it was his first desire to do the very
best he could for those who had laid their hard-earned savings in
his hands.

For some minutes he had had increasing difficulty in holding his
voice above the noise of interruptions, hostile or friendly. It now
became impossible for him to proceed. A man who was lifted on to the
shoulders of two others began to make a counter-speech, roaring so
that those around could not but attend to him. He declared himself
one of those whom Mutimer had robbed; all his savings for seven
months were gone; he was now out of work, and his family would soon
be starving. Richard's blood boiled as he heard these words.

'You lie!' he bellowed in return; 'I know you. You are the fellow
who said last night that I should run away, and never come at all to
this meeting. I called you a blackguard then, and I call you a liar
now. You have put in my hand six threepences, and no more. The money
you might have saved you constantly got drunk upon. Your money is
waiting for you: you have only to come and apply for it. And I say
the same to all the rest. I am ready to pay all the money back, and
pay it too with interest.'

'Of course you are!' vociferated the other. 'You can't steal it, so
you offer to give it back. We know that game.'

It was the commencement of utter confusion. A hundred voices were
trying to make themselves heard. The great crowd swayed this way and
that. Mutimer looked on a tempest of savage faces--a sight which
might have daunted any man in his position. Fists were shaken at
him, curses were roared at him from every direction. It was clear
that the feeling of the mob was hopelessly against him; his
explanations were ridiculed. A second man was reared on others'
shoulders; but instead of speaking from the place where he was, he
demanded to be borne forward and helped to a standing on the cart.
This was effected after a brief struggle with Mutimer's supporters.
Then all at once there was a cessation of the hubbub that the new
speaker might be heard.

'Look at this man!' he cried, pointing at Mutimer, who had drawn as
far aside as the cart would let him. 'He's been a-tellin' you what
he did when somebody died an' left him a fortune. There's just one
thing he's forgot, an' shall I tell you what that is? When he was a
workin' man like ourselves, mates, he was a-goin' to marry a pore
girl, a workin' girl. When he gets his money, what does he do? Why,
he pitches her over, if you please, an' marries a fine lady, as took
him because he was rich--that's the way _ladies_ always chooses
their husbands, y'understand.'

He was interrupted by a terrific yell, but by dint of vigorous
pantomime secured a hearing again.

'But wait a bit, maties; I haven't done yet. He pitches over the
pore girl, but he does worse afterwards. He sets a tale a-goin' as
she'd disgraced herself, as she wasn't fit to be a honest man's
wife. An' it was all a damned lie, as lots of us knows. Now what
d'ye think o' that! This is a friend o' the People, this is! This is
the man as 'as your interests at 'art, mates! If he'll do a thing
like that, won't he rob you of your savin's?'

As soon as he knew what the man was about to speak of, Mutimer felt
the blood rush back upon his heart. It was as when a criminal hears
delivered against him a damning item of evidence. He knew that he
was pale, that every feature declared his consciousness of guilt. In
vain he tried to face the mob and smile contemptuously. His eyes
fell; he stood without the power of speech.

The yell was repeated, and prolonged, owing to another cause than
the accusation just heard. When the accuser was borne forwards to
the cart, a rumour spread among those more remote that an attack was
being made on Mutimer and his friends. The rumour reached that part
of the Green where Redgrave was then haranguing. At once the
listeners faced about in the direction of the supposed conflict.
Redgrave himself leaped down, and called upon all supporters of
Mutimer to follow him. It was the crash between two crowds which led
to the prolonging of the yell.

The meeting was over, the riot had begun.

Picture them, the indignant champions of honesty, the avengers of
virtue defamed! Demos was roused, was tired of listening to mere
articulate speech; it was time for a good wild-beast roar, for a
taste of bloodshed. Scarcely a face in all the mob but distorted
itself to express as much savagery as can be got out of the human
countenance. Mutimer, seeing what had come, sprang down from the
cart. He was at once carried yards away in an irresistible rush.
Impossible for him and his friends to endeavour to hold their
ground: they were too vastly outnumbered; the most they could do was
to hold together and use every opportunity of retreat, standing in
the meanwhile on the defensive. There was no adequate body of police
on the Green; the riot would take its course unimpeded by the hired
servants of the capitalist State. Redgrave little by little fought
his way to within sight of Mutimer; he brought with him a small but
determined contingent. On all sides was the thud of blows, the
indignant shouting of the few who desired to preserve order mingled
with the clamour of those who combated. Demos was having his way;
civilisation was blotted out, and club law proclaimed.

Mutimer lost his hat in jumping from the cart; in five minutes his
waistcoat and shirt were rent open, whether by friends in guarding
him, or by foes in assailing, it was impossible to say. But his
bodyguard held together with wonderful firmness, only now and then
an enemy got near enough to dash a fist in his face. If he fell into
the hands of the mob he was done for; Mutimer knew that, and was
ready to fight for his life. But the direction taken by the main
current of the crowd favoured him. In about twenty minutes he was
swept away from the Green, and into a street. There were now fewer
foes about him; he saw an opportunity, and together with Redgrave
burst away. There was no shame in taking to flight where the odds
against him were so overwhelming. But pursuers were close behind
him; their cry gave a lead to the chase. He looked for some by-way
as he rushed along the pavement. But an unexpected refuge offered
itself. He was passing a little group of women, when a voice from
among them cried loudly--'In here! In here!' He saw that a
house-door was open, saw a hand beckon wildly, and at once sprang
for the retreat. A woman entered immediately behind him and slammed
the door, but he did not see that a stick which the foremost of his
pursuers had flung at him came with a terrible blow full upon his
preserver's face.

For a moment he could only lean against the wall of the passage,
recovering his breath. Where he stood it was almost dark, for the
evening was drawing in. The woman who had rescued him was standing
near, but he could not distinguish her face. He heard the mob
assembling in the narrow street, their shouts, their trampling, and
speedily there began a great noise at the door. A beating with
sticks and fists, a thundering at the knocker.

'Are you the landlady?' Mutimer asked, turning to his silent
companion.

'No,' was the reply. 'She is outside, I must put up the chain. They
might get her latchkey from her.'

At the first syllable he started; the voice was so familiar to him.
The words were spoken with an entire absence of womanish
consternation; the voice trembled a little, but for all that there
was calm courage in its sound. When she had made the door secure and
turned again towards him, he looked into her face as closely as he
could.

'Is it Emma?'

'Yes.'

Both were silent. Mutimer forgot all about his danger; that at this
moment he should meet Emma Vine, that it should be she who saved
him, impressed him with awe which was stronger than all the
multitude of sensations just now battling within him. For it was her
name that had roused the rabble finally against him. For his wrong
to her he knew that he would have suffered justly; yet her hand it
was that barred the door against his brutal pursuers. A sudden
weakness shook his limbs; he had again to lean upon the wall for
support, and, scarcely conscious of what he did, he sobbed three or
four times.

'Are you hurt?' Emma asked.

'No, I'm not hurt, no.'

Two children had come down the stairs, and were clinging to Emma,
crying with fright. For the noise at the door was growing terrific.

'Who is there in the house?' Mutimer asked.

'No one, I think. The landlady and two other women who live here are
outside. My sister is away somewhere.'

'Can I get off by the back?'

'No. There's a little yard, but the walls are far too high.'

'They'll break the door through. If they do, the devils are as
likely to kill you as me. I must go upstairs to a window and speak
to them. I may do something yet. Sooner than put you in danger I'll
go out and let them do their worst Listen to them! That's the
People, that is! I deserve killing, fool that I am, if only for the
lying good I've said of them. Let me go up into your room, if it has
a window in the front.'

He led up the stairs, and Emma showed him the door of her room--the
same in which she had received the visit of Daniel Dabbs. He looked
about it, saw the poverty of it. Then he looked at Emma.

'Good God! Who has hit you?'

There was a great cut on her cheek, the blood was running down upon
her dress.

'Somebody threw a stick,' she answered, trying to smile. 'I don't
feel it; I'll tie a handkerchief on it.'

Again a fit of sobbing seized him; he felt as weak as a child.

'The cowardly roughs! Give me the handkerchief--I'll tie it. Emma!'

'Think of your own safety,' she replied hurriedly. 'I tell you I
don't feel any pain. Do you think you can get them to listen to
you?'

'I'll try. There's nothing else for it. You stand at the back of the
room; they may throw something at me.'

'Oh, then, don't open the window! They can't break the door. Some
help will come.'

'They _will_ break the door. You'd be as safe among wild beasts as
among those fellows if they get into the house.'

He threw up the sash, though Emma would not go from his side. In the
street below was a multitude which made but one ravening monster;
all its eyes were directed to the upper storeys of this house.
Mutimer looked to the right and to the left. In the latter quarter
he saw the signs of a struggle Straining his eyes through the dusk,
he perceived a mounted police-officer forcing his way through the
throng; on either side were visible the helmets of constables. He
drew a deep sigh of relief, for the efforts of the mob against the
house door could scarcely succeed unless they used more formidable
weapons for assault, and that would now be all but impossible.

He drew his bead back into the room and looked at Emma with a laugh
of satisfaction.

'The police are making way! There's nothing to fear now.'

'Come away from the window, then,' Emma urged. 'It is useless to
show yourself.'

'Let them see me, the blackguards! They're so tight packed they
haven't a band among them to aim anything.'

As he spoke, he again leaned forward from the window-sill, and
stretched his arms towards the approaching rescuers. That same
instant a heavy fragment of stone, hurled with deadly force and
precision, struck him upon the temple. The violence of the blow
flung him back into the room; he dropped to his knees, threw out a
hand as if to save himself, then sank face foremost upon the floor.
Not a sound had escaped his lips.

Emma, with a low cry of horror, bent to him and put her arm about
his body. Raising his head, she saw that, though his eyes were
staring, they had no power of sight; on his lips were flecks of
blood. She laid her cheeks to his lips, but could discern no breath;
she tore apart the clothing from his breast, but her hand could not
find his heart. Then she rushed for a pillow, placed it beneath his
head, and began to bathe his face. Not all the great love which
leaped like flame in her bosom could call the dead to life.

The yells which had greeted Mutimer's appearance at the window were
followed by a steady roar, mingled with scornful laughter at his
speedy retreat; only a few saw or suspected that he had been gravely
hit by the missile. Then the tumult began to change its character;
attention was drawn from the house to the advancing police, behind
whom came a band of Mutimer's adherents, led by Redgrave. The latter
were cheering; the hostile rabble met their cheers with defiant
challenges. The police had now almost more than they could do to
prevent a furious collision between the two bodies; but their
numbers kept increasing, as detachments arrived one after another,
and at length the house itself was firmly guarded, whilst the
rioters on both sides were being put to flight. It was not a long
street; the police cleared it completely and allowed no one to enter
at either end.

It was all but dark when at length the door of Emma's room was
opened and six or seven women appeared, searching for Mutimer. The
landlady was foremost; she carried a lamp. It showed the dead man at
full length on the floor, and Emma kneeling beside him, holding his
hand. Near her were the two children, crying miserably. Emma
appeared to have lost her voice; when the light flashed upon her
eyes she covered them with one hand, with the other pointed
downwards. The women broke into cries of fright and lamentation.
They clustered around the prostrate form, examined it, demanded
explanations. One at length sped down to the street and shortly
returned with two policemen. A messenger was despatched for a
doctor.

Emma did not move; she was not weeping, but paid no attention to any
words addressed to her. The room was thronged with curious
neighbours, there was a hubbub of talk. When at length the medical
man arrived, he cleared the chamber of all except Emma. After a
brief examination of the body he said to her:

'You are his wife?'

She, still kneeling, looked up into his face with pained
astonishment.

'His wife? Oh no! I am a stranger.'

The doctor showed surprise.

'He was killed in your presence?'

'He is dead--really dead?' she asked under her breath. And, as she
spoke, she laid her hand upon his arm.

'He must have been killed instantaneously. Did the stone fall in the
room? Was it a stone?'

No one had searched for the missile. The doctor discovered it not
far away. Whilst he was weighing it in his hand there came a knock
at the door. It was Mr. Westlake who entered. He came and looked at
the dead man, then, introducing himself, spoke a few words with the
doctor. Assured that there was no shadow of hope, he withdrew,
having looked closely at Emma, who now stood a little apart, her
hands held together before her.

The doctor departed a few moments later. He had examined the wound
on the girl's face, and found that it was not serious. As he was
going, Emma said to him:

'Will you tell them to keep away--all the people in the house?'

'This is your own room?'

'I live here with my sister.'

'I will ask them to respect your wish. The body must stay here for
the present, though.'

'Oh yes, yes, I know.'

'Is your sister at home?'

'She will be soon. Please tell them not to come here.'

She was alone again with the dead. It cost her great efforts of mind
to convince herself that Mutimer really had breathed his last; it
seemed to her but a moment since she heard him speak, heard him
laugh; was not a trace of the laugh even now discernible on his
countenance? How was it possible for life to vanish in this way? She
constantly touched him, spoke to him. It was incredible that he
should not be able to hear her.

Her love for him was immeasurable. Bitterness she had long since
overcome, and she had thought that love, too, was gone with it. She
had deceived herself. Her heart, incredible as it may seem, had even
known a kind of hope--how else could she have borne the life which
fate laid upon her?--the hope that is one with love, that asks
nothing of the reason, nor yields to reason's contumely. He had been
smitten dead at the moment that she loved him dearest.

Her sister Kate came in. She had been spending the day with friends
in another part of London. When just within the door she stopped and
looked at the body nervously.

'Emma!' she said. 'Why don't you come downstairs? Mrs. Lake'll let
us have her back room, and tea's waiting for you. I wonder how you
_can_ stay here.'

'I can't come. I want to be alone, Kate. Tell them not to come up.'

'But you can't stay here all night, child!'

'I can't talk. I want to be alone. Perhaps I'll come down before
long.'

Kate withdrew and went to gossip with the people who were
incessantly coming and going in the lower part of the house. The
opening and shutting. of the front door, the sound of voices, the
hurrying feet upon the staircase, were audible enough to Emma. She
heard, too, the crowds that kept passing along the street, their
shouts, their laughter, the voices of the policemen bidding them
move on. It was all a nightmare, from which she strove to awake.

At length she was able to weep. Gazing constantly at the dead face,
she linked it at last with some far-off memory of tenderness, and
that brought her tears. She held the cold hand against her heart and
eased herself with passionate sobbing, with low wails, with loving
utterance of his name. Thus it happened that she did not hear when
someone knocked lightly at the door and entered. A shadow across the
still features told her of another's presence. Starting back, she
saw a lady from whose pale, beautiful face a veil had just been
raised. The stranger, who was regarding her with tenderly
compassionate eyes, said:

'I am Mrs. Mutimer.'

Emma rose to her feet and drew a little apart. Her face fell.

'They told me downstairs,' Adela pursued, 'that I should find Miss
Vine in the room. Is your name Emma Vine?'

Emma asked herself whether this lady, his wife, could know anything
of her story. It seemed so, from the tone of the question. She only
replied:

'Yes, it is.'

Then she again ventured to look up at the woman whose beauty had
made her life barren. There were no signs of tears on Adela's face;
to Emma she seemed cold, though so grave and gentle. Adela gazed for
a while at the dead man. She, too, felt as though it were all a
dream. The spectacle of Emma's passionate grief had kept her emotion
within her heart, perhaps had weakened it.

'You have yourself been hurt,' she said, turning again to the other.

Emma only shook her head. She suffered terribly from Adela's
presence.

'I will go,' she said in a whisper.

'This is your room, I think?'

'Yes.'

'May I stay here?'

'Of course--you must.'

Emma was moving towards the door.

'You wish to go?' Adela said, uttering the words involuntarily.

'Yes, I must.'

Adela, left alone, stood gazing at the dead face. She did not kneel
by her husband, as Emma had done, but a terrible anguish came upon
her as she gazed; she buried her face in her hands. Her feeling was
more of horror at the crime that had been committed than of
individual grief. Yet grief she knew. The last words her husband had
spoken to her were good and worthy; in her memory they overcame all
else. That parting when he left home had seemed to her like the
beginning of a new life for him. Could not his faults be atoned for
otherwise than by this ghastly end? She had no need to direct her
thoughts to the good that was in him. Even as she had taken his part
against his traducers, so she now was stirred in spirit against his
murderers. She felt a solemn gladness in remembering that she had
stood before that meeting in the Clerkenwell room and served him as
far as it was in a woman's power to do. All her long sufferings were
forgotten; this supreme calamity of death outweighed them all. His
enemies had murdered him; would they not continue to assail his
name? She resolved that his memory should be her care. That had
nothing to do with love; simple justice demanded it. Justice and
gratitude for the last words he had spoken to her.

She had as yet scarcely noticed the room in which she was. At length
she surveyed it; its poverty brought tears in her eyes. There had
been a fire, but the last spark was dead. She began to feel cold.

Soon there was the sound of someone ascending the stairs, and Emma,
after knocking, again entered. She carried a tray with tea-things,
which she placed upon the table. Then, having glanced at the
fireplace, she took from a cupboard wood and paper and was beginning
to make a fire when Adela stopped her, saying:

'You must not do that for me. I will light the fire myself, if you
will let me.'

Emma looked up in surprise.

'It is kind of you to bring me the tea,' Adela continued. 'But let
me do the rest.'

'If you wish to--yes,' the other replied, without understanding the
thought which prompted Adela. She carefully held herself from
glancing towards the dead man, and moved away.

Adela approached her.

'Have you a room for the night?'

'Yes, thank you.'

'Will you--will you take my hand before you leave me?' She held it
forth; Emma, with eyes turned to the ground, gave her own.

'Look at me,' Adela said, under her breath.

Their eyes met, and at last Emma understood. In that grave, noble
gaze was far more than sympathy and tenderness; it was a look that
besought pardon.

'May I come to you in the night to see if you need anything?' Emma
asked.

'I shall need nothing. Come only if you can't sleep.'

Adela lit the fire and began her night's watching.





CHAPTER XXXVI




A deep breath of country air. It is springtime, and the valley of
Wanley is bursting into green and flowery life, peacefully glad as
if the foot of Demos had never come that way. Incredible that the
fume of furnaces ever desecrated that fleece-sown sky of tenderest
blue, that hammers clanged and engines roared where now the thrush
utters his song so joyously. Hubert Eldon has been as good as his
word. In all the valley no trace is left of what was called New
Wanley. Once more we can climb to the top of Stanbury Hill and enjoy
the sense of remoteness and security when we see that dark patch on
the horizon, the cloud that hangs over Belwick.

Hubert and the vicar of Wanley stood there together one morning in
late April, more than a year after the death of Richard Mutimer.
Generally there was a strong breeze on this point, but to-day the
west was breathing its gentlest, warm upon the cheek.

'Well, it has gone,' Hubert said. 'May will have free
playing-ground.'

'In one sense,' replied the vicar, 'I fear it will never be gone.
Its influence on the life of the people in Wanley and in some of the
farms about has been graver than you imagine. I find discontent
where it was formerly unknown. The typical case is that lad of
Bolton's. They wanted him sadly at home; by this time he would have
been helping his unfortunate father. Instead of that he's the
revolutionary oracle of Belwick pot-houses, and appears on an
average once a fortnight before the magistrates for being drunk and
disorderly.'

'Yes, the march of progress has been hastened a little, doubtless,'
said Hubert. 'I have to content myself with the grass and the trees.
Well, I have done all I could, now other people must enjoy the
results. Ah, look! there is a van of the Edgeworths' furniture
coming to the Manor. They are happy people! Something like an ideal
married couple, and with nothing to do but to wander about the
valley and enjoy themselves.'

'I am rather surprised you gave them so long a lease,' remarked Mr.
Wyvern.

'Why not? I shall never live here again. As long as I had work to do
it was all right; but to continue to live in that house was
impossible. And in twenty years it would be no less impossible. I
should fall into a monomania, and one of a very loathsome kind.'

Mr. Wyvern pondered. They walked on a few paces before Hubert again
spoke.

'There was a. letter from her in the "Belwick Chronicle" yesterday
morning Something on the placard in Agworth station caused me to buy
a copy. The Tory paper, it seems, had a leader a day or two ago on
Socialism, and took occasion to sneer at Mutimer, not by name, but
in an unmistakable way--the old scandal of course. She wrote a
letter to the editor, and he courteously paid no attention to it. So
she wrote to the "Chronicle." They print her in large type, and
devote a leader to the subject--party capital, of course.'

He ceased on a bitter tone, then, before his companion could reply,
added violently:

'It is hideous to see her name in such places!'

'Let us speak freely of this,' returned Mr. Wyvern. 'You seem to me
to be very unjust. Your personal feeling makes you less acute in
judging than I should have expected. Surely her behaviour is very
admirable.'

'Oh, I am not unjust in that sense. I have never refused to believe
in his innocence technically.'

'Excuse me, that has nothing to do with the matter. All we have to
look at is this. She is herself convinced of his innocence, and
therefore makes it her supreme duty to defend his memory. It appears
to me that she acts altogether nobly. In spite of all the evidence
that was brought on his side, the dastardly spirit of politics has
persisted in making Mutimer a sort of historical character, a type
of the hypocritical demagogue, to be cited whenever occasion offers.
Would it be possible to attach a more evil significance to a man's
name than that which Mutimer bears, and will continue to bear, among
certain sections of writing and speechifying vermin? It is a
miserable destiny. If every man who achieves notoriety paid for his
faults in this way, what sort of reputations would history consist
of? I won't say that it isn't a good thing, speaking generally, but
in the individual case it is terribly hard. Would you have his widow
keep silence? That would be the easier thing to do, be sure of it--
for _her_, a thousand times the easier. I regard her as the one
entirely noble woman it has been my lot to know. And if you thought
calmly you could not speak of her with such impatience.'

Hubert kept silence for a moment.

'It is all true. Of course it only means that I am savagely jealous.
But I cannot--upon my life I cannot--understand her having given her
love to such a man as that!'

Mr. Wyvern seemed to regard the landscape. There was a sad smile on
his countenance.

'Let there be an end of it,' Hubert resumed. 'I didn't mean to say
anything to you about the letter. Now, we'll talk of other things.
Well, I am going to have a summer among the German galleries;
perhaps I shall find peace there. You have let your son know that I
am coming?'

The vicar nodded. They continued their walk along the top of the
hill. Presently Mr. Wyvern stopped and faced his companion.

'Are you serious in what you said just now? I mean about her love
for Mutimer?'

'Serious? Of course I am. Why should you ask such a question?'

'Because I find it difficult to distinguish between the things a
young man says in jealous pique and the real belief he entertains
when he is not throwing savage words about. You have convinced
yourself that she loved her husband in the true sense of the word?'

'The conviction was forced upon me. Why did she marry him at all?
What led her to give herself, heart and soul, to Socialism, she who
under ordinary circumstances would have shrunk from that and all
other _isms_? Why should she make it a special entreaty to me to
pursue her husband's work? The zeal for his memory is nothing
unanticipated; it issues naturally from her former state of mind.'

'Your vehemence,' replied the vicar, smiling, 'is sufficient proof
that you don't think it impossible for all these questions to be
answered in another sense. I can't pretend to have read the facts of
her life infallibly, but suppose I venture a hint or two, just to
give you matter for thought. Why she married him I cannot wholly
explain to myself, but remember that she took that step very shortly
after being brought to believe that you, my good friend, were
utterly unworthy of any true woman's devotion. Remember, too, her
brother's influence, and--well, her mother's. Now, on the evening
before she accepted Mutimer she called at the Vicarage alone.
Unfortunately I was away--was walking with you, in fact. What she
desired to say to me I can only conjecture; but it is not impossible
that she was driven by the common impulse which sends young girls to
their pastor when they are in grievous trouble and without other
friends.'

'Why did you never tell me of that?' cried Hubert.

'Because it would have been useless, and, to tell you the truth, I
felt I was in an awkward position, not far from acting indiscreetly.
I did go to see her the next morning, but only saw her mother, and
heard of the engagement. Adela never spoke to me of her visit.'

'But she may have come for quite other reasons. Her subsequent
behaviour remains.'

'Certainly. Here again I may be altogether wrong, but it seems to me
that to a woman of her character there was only one course open.
Having become his wife, it behoved her to be loyal, and
especially--remember this--it behoved her to put her position beyond
doubt in the eyes of others, in the eyes of one, it may be, beyond
all. Does that throw no light on your meeting with her in the wood,
of which you make so much?'

Hubert's countenance shone, but only for an instant.

'Ingenious,' he replied, good-humouredly.

'Possibly no more,' Mr. Wyvern rejoined. 'Take it as a fanciful
sketch of how a woman's life _might_ be ordered. Such a life would
not lack its dignity.'

Neither spoke for a while.

'You will call on Mrs. Westlake as you pass through London?' Mr.
Wyvern next inquired.

'Mrs. Westlake?' the other repeated absently. 'Yes, I dare say I
shall see her.'

'Do, by all means.'

They began to descend the hill.

The Walthams no longer lived in Wanley. A year ago the necessities
of Alfred Waltham's affairs had led to a change; he and his wife and
their two children, together with Mrs. Waltham the dowager, removed
to what the auctioneers call a commodious residence on the outskirts
of Belwick. Alfred remarked that it was as well not to be so far
from civilisation; he pointed out, too, that it was time for him to
have an eye to civic dignities, if only a place on the Board of
Guardians to begin with. Our friend was not quite so uncompromising
in his political and social opinions as formerly. His wife observed
that he ceased to subscribe to Socialist papers, and took in a daily
of orthodox Liberal tendencies--that is to say, an organ of
capitalism. Letty rejoiced at the change, but knew her husband far
too well to make any remark upon it.

To their house, about three months after her husband's death, came
Adela. The intermediate time she had passed with Stella. All were
very glad to have her at Belwick--Letty in particular, who, though a
matron with two bouncing boys, still sat at Adela's feet and deemed
her the model of womanhood. Adela was not so sad as they had feared
to find her. She kept a great deal to her own room, but was always
engaged in study, and seemed to find peace in that way. She was
silent in her habits, scarcely ever joining in general conversation;
but when Letty could steal an hour from household duties and go to
Adela's room she was always sure of hearing wise and tender words in
which her heart delighted. Her pride in Adela was boundless. On the
day when the latter first attired herself in modified mourning,
Letty, walking with her in the garden, could not refrain from saying
how Adela's dress became her.

'You are more beautiful every day, dear,' she added, in spite of a
tremor which almost checked her in uttering a compliment which her
sister might think too frivolous.

But Adela blushed, one would have thought it was with pleasure.
Sadness, however, followed, and Letty wondered whether the beautiful
face was destined to wear its pallor always.

On this same spring morning, when Hubert Eldon was taking leave of
Wanley, Mrs. Waltham and Letty were talking of a visit Adela was
about to pay to Stella in London. They spoke also of a visitor of
their own, or, perhaps, rather of Adela's, who had been in the house
for a fortnight and would return to London on the morrow. This was
Alice Mutimer--no longer to be called Mrs. Rodman. Alice had lived
with her mother in Wilton Square since her recovery from the illness
which for a long time had kept her in ignorance of the double
calamity fallen upon her. It was Adela who at length told her that
she had no husband, and that her brother Richard was dead. Neither
disclosure affected her gravely. The months of mental desolation
followed by physical collapse seemed to have exhausted her powers of
suffering. For several days she kept to herself and cried a good
deal, but she exhibited no bitter grief. It soon became evident that
she thought but little of the man who had so grossly wronged her; he
was quite gone from her heart Even when she was summoned to give
evidence against him in court, she did it without much reluctance,
yet also without revengeful feeling; her state was one of enfeebled
vitality, she was like a child in all the concerns of life. Rodman
went into penal servitude, but it did not distress her, and she
never again uttered his name.

Adela thought it would be a kindness to invite her to Belwick and
Alice at once accepted the invitation. Yet she was not at her ease
in the house. She appeared to have forgiven Adela, overcome by the
latter's goodness, but her nature was not of the kind to grow in
liberal feeling. Mrs. Waltham the elder she avoided as much as
possible. Perhaps Letty best succeeded in conciliating her, for
Letty was homely and had the children to help her.

'I wish I had a child,' Alice said one day when she sat alone with
Letty, and assisted in nursery duties. But at once her cheeks
coloured. 'I suppose you're ashamed of me for saying that I'm not
even a married woman.'

Letty replied, as she well knew how to, very gently and with
comfort.

'I wonder where she goes to when she sets off by herself,' said Mrs.
Waltham this morning. 'She seems to object to walk with any of us.'

'She always comes back in better spirits,' said Letty. 'I think the
change is doing her good.'

'But she won't be sorry to leave us, my dear, I can see that. To be
sure it was like Adela to think of having her here, but I scarcely
think it would be advisable for the visit to be repeated. She is not
at home with us. And how can it be expected? It's in her blood, of
course; she belongs so distinctly to an inferior class.'

'I am so very sorry for her,' Letty replied. 'What dreadful things
she has gone through!'

'Dreadful, indeed, my dear; but after all such things don't happen
to ladies. We must remember that. It isn't as if you or Adela had
suffered in that way. That, of course, would be shocking beyond all
words. I can't think that persons of her class have quite the same
feelings.'

'Oh, mother!' Letty protested. And she added, less seriously, 'You
mustn't let Alfred hear you say such a thing as that.'

'I'm glad to say,' replied Mrs. Waltham, 'that Alfred has grown much
more sensible in his views of late.'

Adela entered the room. Letty was not wrong in saying that she grew
more beautiful. Life had few joys for her, save intellectual, but
you saw on her countenance the light of freedom. In her manner there
was an unconscious dignity which made her position in the house one
of recognised superiority; even her mother seldom ventured to chat
without reserve in her presence. Alfred drew up in the midst of a
tirade if she but seemed about to speak. Yet it was happiness to
live with her; where she moved there breathed an air of purity and
sweetness.

She asked if Alice had returned from her walk. Receiving a reply in
the negative, she went out into the garden.

'Adela looks happy to-day,' said Letty. 'That article in the paper
has pleased her very much.'

'I really hope she won't do such a thing again,' remarked Mrs.
Waltham, with dignified disapproval. 'It seems very unlady-like to
write letters to the newspapers.'

'But it was brave of her.'

'To be sure, we must not judge her as we should ordinary people.
Still, I am not sure that she is always right. I shall never allow
that she did right in paying back that money to those wretches in
London. I am sure she wanted it far more than they did. The
bloodthirsty creatures!'

Letty shuddered, but would not abandon defence of Adela.

'Still it was very honourable of her, mother. She understands those
things better than we can.'

'Perhaps so, my dear,' said Mrs. Waltham, meaning that her own
opinion was not likely to be inferior in justice to that of anyone
else.

Adela had been in the garden for a few minutes when she saw Alice
coming towards her. The poor Princess had a bright look, as if some
joyful news had just come to her. Adela met her with a friendly
smile.

'There is someone you used to know,' Alice said, speaking with
embarrassment, and pointing towards the road. 'You remember Mr.
Keene? I met him. He says he wrote that in the "Chronicle." He would
like to speak to you if you'll let him.'

'I shall be glad to,' Adela replied, with a look of curiosity.

They walked to the garden gate. Mr. Keene was just outside; Alice
beckoned to him to enter. His appearance was a great improvement on
the old days; he had grown a beard, and in his eye you saw the
responsible editor. Altogether he seemed to have gained in moral
solidity. None the less, his manner of approaching Adela, hat in
hand, awoke reminiscences of the footlights.

'It is a great pleasure to me to see you, Mrs. Mutimer. I trust that
my few comments on your admirable letter were of a nature to afford
you satisfaction.'

'Thank you very much, Mr. Keene,' Adela replied. 'You wrote very
kindly.'

'I am amply rewarded,' he said, bowing low. 'And now that I have had
my desire, permit me to hasten away. My duty calls me into the
town.'

He again bowed low to Adela, smiled a farewell to Alice, and
departed.

The two walked together in the garden. Adela turned to her
companion.

'I think you knew Mr. Keene a long time ago?'

'Yes, a long time. He once asked me to marry him.'

Adela replied only with a look.

'And he's asked me again this morning,' Alice pursued, breaking off
a leaf from an elder bush.

'And you--?'

'I didn't refuse him this time,' Alice replied with confidence.

'I am very glad, very glad. He has been faithful to you so long that
I am sure he will make you happy.'

Alice no longer concealed her joy. It was almost exultation. Natural
enough under the circumstances, poor, disinherited Princess! Once
more she felt able to face people; once more she would have a name.
She began to talk eagerly.

'Of course I shall just go back to tell mother, but we are going to
be married in three weeks. He has already decided upon a house; we
went to see it this morning. I didn't like to tell you, but I met
him for the first time a week ago--quite by chance.'

'I'm afraid your mother will be lonely,' Adela said.

'Not she! She'd far rather live alone than go anywhere else. And now
I shall be able to send her money. It isn't fair for you to have to
find everything.'

'I have wanted to ask you,' Adela said presently, 'do you ever hear
of Harry?'

Alice shook her head.

'The less we hear the better,' she replied. 'He's gone to the bad,
and there's no help for it.'

It was true; unfortunate victim of prosperity.

Next morning Adela and Alice travelled to town together. The former
did not go to Wilton Square. On the occasion of Richard's death she
had met Mrs. Mutimer, but the interview had been an extremely
difficult one, in spite of the old woman's endeavour to be
courteous. Adela felt herself to be an object of insuperable
prejudice. Once again she was bidden sound the depth of the gulf
which lies between the educated and the uneducated. The old woman
would not give her hand, but made an old-fashioned curtsey, which
Adela felt to be half ironical. In speaking of her son she was hard.
Pride would not allow her to exhibit the least symptom of the
anguish which wrung her heart. She refused to accept any share of
the income which was continued to her son's widow under the Wanley
will. Alice, however, had felt no scruple in taking the half which
Adela offered her, and by paying her mother for board and lodgings
she supplemented the income derived from letting as much of the
house as possible.

Once more under the roof of her dearest friend, Adela was less
preoccupied with the sad past which afflicted her mind with the
stress of a duty ever harder to perform. After an hour passed with
Stella she could breathe freely the atmosphere of beauty and love.
Elsewhere she too often suffered from a sense of self-reproach;
between her and the book in which she tried to lose herself there
would come importunate visions of woe, of starved faces, of fierce
eyes. The comfort she enjoyed, the affection and respect with which
she was surrounded, were often burdensome to her conscience. In
Stella's presence all that vanished; listening to Stella's voice she
could lay firm hold on the truth that there is a work in the cause
of humanity other than that which goes on so clamorously in lecture
halls and at street corners, other than that which is silently
performed by faithful hearts and hands in dens of misery and amid
the horrors of the lazar-house; the work of those whose soul is
taken captive of loveliness, who pursue the spiritual ideal apart
from the world's tumult, and, ever ready to minister in gentle
offices, know that they serve best when nearest home. She was far
from spiritual arrogance; her natural mood was a profound humility;
she deemed herself rather below than above the active toilers, whose
sweat was sacred; but life had declared that such toil was not for
her, and from Stella she derived the support which enabled her to
pursue her path in peace--a path not one with Stella's. Before that
high-throned poet-soul Adela bent in humble reverence. Between
Stella and those toilers, however noble and devoted, there could be
no question of comparison. She was of those elect whose part it is
to inspire faith and hope, of those highest but for whom the world
would fall into apathy or lose itself among subordinate motives.
Stella never spoke of herself; Adela could not know whether she had
ever stood at the severance of ways and made deliberate choice.
Probably not, for on her brow was visible to all eyes the seal of
election; how could she ever have doubted the leading of that spirit
that used her lips for utterance?

On the morning after her arrival in London Adela took a long journey
by herself to the far East End. Going by omnibus it seemed to her
that she was never to reach that street off Bow Road which she had
occasion to visit. But at last the conductor bade her descend, and
gave her a brief direction The thoroughfare she sought was poor but
not squalid she saw with pleasure that the house of which she had
the number in mind was, if anything, cleaner and more homelike in
appearance than its neighbours. A woman replied to her knock.

She asked if Miss Vine was at home.

'Yes, mum; she's at 'ome. Shall I tell her, or will you go up?'

'I will go up, thank you. Which room is it?'

'Second floor front you'll find her.'

Adela ascended. Standing at the door she heard the hum of a
sewing-machine. It made her heart sink, so clearly did it speak of
incessant monotonous labour.

She knocked loudly. The machine did not stop, but she was bidden to
enter.

Emma was at work, one of her sister's children sitting by her,
writing on a slate. She had expected the appearance of the landlady;
seeing who the visitor was, she let her hands fall abruptly; an
expression of pain passed over her features.

Adela went up to her and kissed her forehead, then exchanged a few
words with the child. Emma placed a chair for her, but without
speaking. The room was much like the other in which the sisters had
lived, save that it had a brighter outlook. There were the two beds
and the table covered with work.

'Do you find it better here?' Adela began by asking.

'Yes, it is. better,' Emma replied quietly. 'We manage to get a good
deal of work, and it isn't badly paid.'

The voice was not uncheerful; it had that serenity which comes of
duties honestly performed and a life tolerably free from sordid
anxiety. More than that could not be said of Emma's existence. But,
such as it was, it depended entirely upon her own effort. Adela, on
the evening when she first met her in the room where Mutimer lay
dead, had read clearly Emma's character; she knew that, though it
was one of her strongest desires to lighten the burden of this so
sorely tried woman, direct aid was not to be dreamt of. She had
taken counsel with Stella, Stella with her husband. After much vain
seeking they discovered an opportunity of work in this part of the
East End. Mr. Westlake made it known to Emma; she acknowledged that
it would be better than the over-swarmed neighbourhood in which she
was living, and took the advice gratefully. She had hopes, too, that
Kate might be got away from her evil companions. And indeed the
change had not been without its effect on Mrs. Clay; she worked more
steadily, and gave more attention to her children.

'She's just gone with the eldest to the hospital,' Emma replied to a
question of Adela's. 'He's got something the matter with his eyes.
And this one isn't at all well. He ought to be at school, only he's
had such a dreadful cough we're afraid to send him out just yet.
They're neither of them strong, I'm afraid.'

'And you--isn't your health better since you have lived here?' Adela
asked.

'I think so. But I never ail much as long as I have plenty of work
to do.'

'I am staying with a friend in London,' Adela said after a pause. 'I
thought I might come to see you. I hoped you would still be in the
same house.'

'Yes, we are very comfortable, very,' Emma replied. 'I hope we
shan't need to move for a long time; I'm sure we couldn't do
better.'

She added, without raising her eyes:

'Thank you for coming.'

Adela knew that constraint between them was inevitable; it was
enough that Emma spoke with good-will.

'If ever you should have to move,' she said, 'will you let me know
where you go? I have written on this paper the address of my
mother's house; I live with her. Will you show me so much
friendship?'

Emma glanced at her, and saw a look which recalled to her something
she had seen in those eyes before.

'I will write and tell you if we do move,' she said.

Adela went away with a heart not altogether sad; it was rather as
though she had been hearing solemn music, which stirred her soul
even while it touched upon the source of tears.

It was only on certain days that Stella sat to receive during
visitors' hours. To-day was not one of them; consequently when
Hubert Eldon called, about half-past four, the servant came up to
the drawing-room to ask if Mrs. Westlake would be at home to him.
Adela was in the room; at the mention of the name she rose.

'I must write a letter before dinner,' she said. 'I win go and get
it done whilst you are engaged.'

'Won't you stay? Do stay!'

'I had much rather not. I don't feel able to talk with anyone just
now.'

She left the room without meeting Stella's look. The latter said she
would receive Mr. Eldon.

Adela went to the exquisitely furnished little boudoir, which was
now always called _her_ room, and sat down with the resolve to write
to her mother on the subjects she had in mind. But her strength of
will proved unequal to the task; after writing a word or two with
shaking hand she laid down her pen and rested her face upon her
hands. A minute or two ago she had been untroubled by a thought
which concerned herself; now her blood was hot, and all her being
moved at the impulse of a passionate desire. She had never known
such a rebellion of her life. In her ears there rang the word 'Free!
free!' She was free, and the man whom she loved with the love of
years, with the first love of maidenhood and the confirmed love of
maturity, was but a few yards from her--it might be, had even come
here on purpose to meet her.

Oh, why was he not poor! Had he but been some struggling artist,
scarce able to support the woman of his choice, how would she have
stood before him and let him read the tenderness on her face!
Hubert's wealth was doubly hateful.

She started from her chair, with difficulty suppressing a cry.
Someone had knocked at her door. Perhaps he was already gone; she
could not say how long she had sat here. It was Stella.

'Mr. Eldon wishes to speak to you, dear.'

She caught her friend's hand and almost crushed it between her own.

'I can't see him! Stella, I dare not see him!'

'But he says it is purely a matter of business he wishes to speak
of,' said Stella with a pained voice.

Adela sank her head in anguish of shame. Stella put an arm about
her, fearing she would fall. But in an instant pride had sprung up;
Adela freed herself, now deadly pale.

'I will go.'

She moved mechanically, spoke mechanically the conventional words
when she found that somehow she was in his presence.

'I hope I do not disturb you,' Hubert said with equal self-control.
'I was about to address a letter to you before I left England. I did
not know that you were here. It is better, perhaps, to do my
business by word of mouth, if you will allow me.'

He was very courteous, but she could not distinguish a note in his
voice that meant more than courtesy. She prayed him to be seated,
and herself took a place on an ottoman. She was able very calmly to
regard his face. He leaned forward with his hands together and spoke
with his eyes on her.

'It is with regard to the legacy which is due to you under Mr.
Mutimer's will. You will remember that, as trustee, I have it in my
power to make over to you the capital sum which produces the
annuity, if there should be reason for doing so. I am about to leave
England, perhaps for some few years; I have let the Manor to some
friends of mine on a twenty years' lease. I think I should like to
transfer the money to you before I go. It is simpler, better. Will
you let me do that, Mrs. Mutimer?'

His words chilled her. His voice seemed harder as he proceeded; it
had the ring of metal, of hard cash counted down.

What was his object? He wished to have done with her, to utterly
abolish all relations between them. It might well be that he was
about to marry, and someone abroad, someone who would not care to
live in an English country house. Why otherwise should he have let
the Manor for so long a period? She felt as she had done long ago,
when she heard of that other foreign woman. Cold as ice; not a spark
of love in all her being.

She replied:

'Thank you. If you are willing to make that change, perhaps it will
be best.'

Hubert, his eyes still on her, imagined he saw pleasure in her face.
She might have a project for the use of the money, some Socialist
scheme, something perhaps to preserve the memory of her husband. He
rose.

'In that case I will have a deed prepared at once, and you shall be
informed when it is ready for signature.'

He said to himself that she could not forgive his refusal of her
request that day in the wood.

They shook hands, Adela saying:

'You are still busy with art?'

'In my dilettante way,' he replied smiling.

Adela returned to her room, and there remained till the hour of
dinner. At the meal she was her ordinary self. Afterwards Mr.
Westlake asked her to read in proof an article about to appear in
the 'Beacon'; she did so, and commented upon it with a clear mind.
In the course of the evening she told her friends of the arrangement
between Mr. Eldon and herself.

Two days later she had to call at the solicitor's office to sign the
deed of release. Incidentally she learnt that Hubert was leaving
England the same evening.

Had she been at home, these days would have been spent in solitude.
For the first time she suffered in Stella's company. All allusion to
Hubert was avoided between them. Sometimes she could hardly play her
part; sickness of the soul wasted her.

It was morning; he was now on the Continent, perhaps already talking
with someone he loved.

She was ashamed to have so deceived herself; she had feared him,
because she believed he loved her, and that by sympathy he might see
into her heart. Had it been so, he could not have gone from her in
this way. Forgetting her own pride, her own power of dissimulation,
she did not believe it possible for him so to disguise tenderness.
She would listen to no argument of hope, but crushed her heart with
perverse cruelty.

The annual payment of money had been a link between him and her;
when she signed the deed releasing him, the cold sweat stood on her
forehead.

She would reason. Of what excellence was he possessed that her life
should so abandon itself at his feet? In what had he proved himself
generous or capable of the virtues that subdue? Such reasoning led
to self-mockery. She was no longer the girl who questioned her heart
as to the significance of the vows required in the marriage service;
in looking back upon those struggles she could have wept for pity.
Love would submit to no analysis; it was of her life; as easy to
account for the power of thought. Her soul was bare to her and all
its needs. There was no refuge in ascetic resolve, in the
self-deceit of spiritual enthusiasm. She could say to herself: You
are free to love him; then love and be satisfied. Could she, when
a-hungered, look on food, and bid her hunger be appeased by the act
of sight?

Thus long she had held up, but despair was closing in upon her, and
an anguish worse than death. She must leave this house and go where
she might surrender herself to misery. There was no friend whose
comfort could be other than torment and bitter vanity; such woe as
hers only time and weariness could aid.

She was rising with the firm purpose of taking leave of Stella when
a servant came to her door, announcing that Mr. Eldon desired to see
her.

She was incredulous, required the servant to repeat the name. Mr.
Eldon was in the drawing-room and desired to see her.

There must have been some error, some oversight in the legal
business. Oh, it was inhuman to torture her in this way! Careless of
what her countenance might indicate, she hastened to the
drawing-room. She could feign no longer. Let him think what he
would, so that he spoke briefly and released her.

But as soon as she entered the room she knew that he had not come to
talk of business. He was pale and agitated. As he did not speak at
once she said:

'I thought you were gone. I thought you left England last night.'

'I meant to do so, but found it impossible. I could not go till I
had seen you once more.'

'What more have you to say to me?'

She knew that she was speaking recklessly, without a thought for
dignity. Her question sounded as if it had been extorted from her by
pain.

'That if I go away from you now and finally, I go without a hope to
support my life. You are everything to me. You are offended; you
shrink from me. It is what I expected. Years ago, when I loved you
without knowing what my love really meant, I flung away every chance
in a moment of boyish madness. When I should have consecrated every
thought to the hope of winning you, I made myself contemptible in
your eyes--worse, I made you loathe me. When it was too late I
understood what I had done. Then I loved you as a man loves the one
woman whom he supremely reverences, as I love you, and, I believe,
shall always love you. I could not go without saying this to you. I
am happier in speaking the words than I ever remember to have been
in my life before.'

Adela's bosom heaved, but excess of joy seemed to give her power to
deal lightly with the gift that was offered her.

'Why did you not say this the last time?' she asked. One would have
said, from her tone, that it was a question of the merest curiosity.
She did not realise the words that passed her lips.

'Because the distance between us seemed too great. I began to speak
of that money in the thought that it might lead me on. It had the
opposite effect. You showed me how cold you could be. It is natural
enough. Perhaps your sympathies are too entirely remote; and yet not
long ago you talked with me as if your interests could be much the
same as mine. I can understand that you suppress that side of your
nature. You think me useless in the world. And indeed my life has
but one purpose, which is a vain one. I can do nothing but feed my
love for you. You have convictions and purposes; you feel that they
are opposed to mine. All that is of the intellect; I only live in my
passion. We are different and apart.'

'Why do you say that, as if you were glad of it?'

'Glad? I speak the words that come to my tongue. I say aloud to you
what I have been repeating again and again to myself. It is mere
despair.'

She drew one step nearer to him.

'You disregard those differences which you say are only of the
intellect, and still love me. Can I not do the same? There _was_ a
distance between us, and my ends were other than yours. That is the
past; the present is mine to make myself what you would have me. I
have no law but your desire--so much I love you.'

How easily said after all! And when he searched her face with eyes
on fire with their joy, when he drew her to his heart in passionate
triumph, the untruth of years fell from her like a veil, and she had
achieved her womanhood.







This Etext prepared by Sue Asscher   asschers@dingoblue.net.au





THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF FLOWERS ON PLANTS OF THE SAME SPECIES

by CHARLES DARWIN, M.A., F.R.S.




TO

PROFESSOR ASA GRAY

THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR
AS A SMALL TRIBUTE OF RESPECT AND AFFECTION.




CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.


CHAPTER I.
HETEROSTYLED DIMORPHIC PLANTS: PRIMULACEAE.

Primula veris or the cowslip.--Differences in structure between the two forms.--
Their degrees of fertility when legitimately and illegitimately united.--P.
elatior, vulgaris, Sinensis, auricula, etc.--Summary on the fertility of the
heterostyled species of Primula.--Homostyled species of Primula.--Hottonia
palustris.--Androsace vitalliana.


CHAPTER II.
HYBRID PRIMULAS.

The oxlip a hybrid naturally produced between Primula veris and vulgaris.--The
differences in structure and function between the two parent-species.--Effects
of crossing long-styled and short-styled oxlips with one another and with the
two forms of both parent-species.--Character of the offspring from oxlips
artificially self-fertilised and cross-fertilised in a state of nature.--Primula
elatior shown to be a distinct species.--Hybrids between other heterostyled
species of Primula.--Supplementary note on spontaneously produced hybrids in the
genus Verbascum.


CHAPTER III.
HETEROSTYLED DIMORPHIC PLANTS--continued.

Linum grandiflorum, long-styled form utterly sterile with own-form pollen.--
Linum perenne, torsion of the pistils in the long-styled form alone.--Homostyled
species of Linum.--Pulmonaria officinalis, singular difference in self-fertility
between the English and German long-styled plants.--Pulmonaria angustifolia
shown to be a distinct species, long-styled form completely self-sterile.--
Polygonum fagopyrum.--Various other heterostyled genera.--Rubiaceae.--Mitchella
repens, fertility of the flowers in pairs.--Houstonia.--Faramea, remarkable
difference in the pollen-grains of the two forms; torsion of the stamens in the
short-styled form alone; development not as yet perfect.--The heterostyled
structure in the several Rubiaceous genera not due to descent in common.


CHAPTER IV.
HETEROSTYLED TRIMORPHIC PLANTS.

Lythrum salicaria.--Description of the three forms.--Their power and complex
manner of fertilising one another.--Eighteen different unions possible.--Mid-
styled form eminently feminine in nature.--Lythrum Graefferi likewise
trimorphic.--L. hymifolia dimorphic.--L. hyssopifolia homostyled.--Nesaea
verticillata trimorphic.--Lagerstroemia, nature doubtful.--Oxalis, trimorphic
species of.--O. Valdiviana.--O. Regnelli, the illegitimate unions quite barren.-
-O. speciosa.--O. sensitiva.--Homostyled species of Oxalis.--Pontederia, the one
monocotyledonous genus known to include heterostyled species.


CHAPTER V.
ILLEGITIMATE OFFSPRING OF HETEROSTYLED PLANTS.

Illegitimate offspring from all three forms of Lythrum salicaria.--Their dwarfed
stature and sterility, some utterly barren, some fertile.--Oxalis, transmission
of form to the legitimate and illegitimate seedlings.--Primula Sinensis,
illegitimate offspring in some degree dwarfed and infertile.--Equal-styled
varieties of P. Sinensis, auricula, farinosa, and elatior.--P. vulgaris, red-
flowered variety, illegitimate seedlings sterile.--P. veris, illegitimate plants
raised during several successive generations, their dwarfed stature and
sterility.--Equal-styled varieties of P. veris.--Transmission of form by
Pulmonaria and Polygonum.--Concluding remarks.--Close parallelism between
illegitimate fertilisation and hybridism.


CHAPTER VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS ON HETEROSTYLED PLANTS.

The essential character of heterostyled plants.--Summary of the differences in
fertility between legitimately and illegitimately fertilised plants.--Diameter
of the pollen-grains, size of anthers and structure of stigma in the different
forms.--Affinities of the genera which include heterostyled species.--Nature of
the advantages derived from heterostylism.--The means by which plants became
heterostyled.--Transmission of form.--Equal-styled varieties of heterostyled
plants.--Final remarks.


CHAPTER VII.
POLYGAMOUS, DIOECIOUS, AND GYNO-DIOECIOUS PLANTS.

The conversion in various ways of hermaphrodite into dioecious plants.--
Heterostyled plants rendered dioecious.--Rubiaceae.--Verbenaceae.--Polygamous
and sub-dioecious plants.--Euonymus.--Fragaria.--The two sub-forms of both sexes
of Rhamnus and Epigaea.--Ilex.--Gyno-dioecious plants.--Thymus, difference in
fertility of the hermaphrodite and female individuals.--Satureia.--Manner in
which the two forms probably originated.--Scabiosa and other gyno-dioecious
plants.--Difference in the size of the corolla in the forms of polygamous,
dioecious, and gyno-dioecious plants.


CHAPTER VIII.
CLEISTOGAMIC FLOWERS.

General character of cleistogamic flowers.--List of the genera producing such
flowers, and their distribution in the vegetable series.--Viola, description of
the cleistogamic flowers in the several species; their fertility compared with
that of the perfect flowers.--Oxalis acetosella.--O. sensitiva, three forms of
cleistogamic flowers.--Vandellia.--Ononis.--Impatiens.--Drosera.--Miscellaneous
observations on various other cleistogamic plants.--Anemophilous species
producing cleistogamic flowers.--Leersia, perfect flowers rarely developed.--
Summary and concluding remarks on the origin of cleistogamic flowers.--The chief
conclusions which may be drawn from the observations in this volume.


INDEX.


...


THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF FLOWERS ON PLANTS OF THE SAME SPECIES.


INTRODUCTION.

The subject of the present volume, namely the differently formed flowers
normally produced by certain kinds of plants, either on the same stock or on
distinct stocks, ought to have been treated by a professed botanist, to which
distinction I can lay no claim. As far as the sexual relations of flowers are
concerned, Linnaeus long ago divided them into hermaphrodite, monoecious,
dioecious, and polygamous species. This fundamental distinction, with the aid of
several subdivisions in each of the four classes, will serve my purpose; but the
classification is artificial, and the groups often pass into one another.

The hermaphrodite class contains two interesting sub-groups, namely,
heterostyled and cleistogamic plants; but there are several other less important
subdivisions, presently to be given, in which flowers differing in various ways
from one another are produced by the same species.

Some plants were described by me several years ago, in a series of papers read
before the Linnean Society, the individuals of which exist under two or three
forms, differing in the length of their pistils and stamens and in other
respects. (Introduction/1. "On the Two Forms or Dimorphic Condition in the
Species of Primula, and on their remarkable Sexual Relations" 'Journal of the
Proceedings of the Linnean Society' volume 6 1862 page 77. "On the Existence of
Two Forms, and on their Reciprocal Sexual Relation, in several Species of the
Genus Linum" Ibid volume 7 1863 page 69. "On the Sexual Relations of the Three
Forms of Lythrum salicaria" Ibid volume 8 1864 page 169. "On the Character and
Hybrid-like Nature of the Offspring from the Illegitimate Unions of Dimorphic
and Trimorphic Plants" Ibid volume 10 1868 page 393. "On the Specific
Differences between Primula veris, Brit. Fl. (var. officinalis, Linn.), P.
vulgaris, Brit. Fl. (var. acaulis, Linn.), and P. elatior, Jacq.; and on the
Hybrid Nature of the Common oxlip. With Supplementary Remarks on Naturally
Produced Hybrids in the Genus Verbascum" Ibid volume 10 1868 page 437.) They
were called by me dimorphic and trimorphic, but have since been better named by
Hildebrand, heterostyled. (Introduction/2. The term "heterostyled" does not
express all the differences between the forms; but this is a failure common in
many cases. As the term has been adopted by writers in various countries, I am
unwilling to change it for that of heterogone or heterogonous, though this has
been proposed by so high an authority as Professor Asa Gray: see the 'American
Naturalist' January 1877 page 42.) As I have many still unpublished observations
with respect to these plants, it has seemed to me advisable to republish my
former papers in a connected and corrected form, together with the new matter.
It will be shown that these heterostyled plants are adapted for reciprocal
fertilisation; so that the two or three forms, though all are hermaphrodites,
are related to one another almost like the males and females of ordinary
unisexual animals. I will also give a full abstract of such observations as have
been published since the appearance of my papers; but only those cases will be
noticed, with respect to which the evidence seems fairly satisfactory. Some
plants have been supposed to be heterostyled merely from their pistils and
stamens varying greatly in length, and I have been myself more than once thus
deceived. With some species the pistil continues growing for a long time, so
that if old and young flowers are compared they might be thought to be
heterostyled. Again, a species tending to become dioecious, with the stamens
reduced in some individuals and with the pistils in others, often presents a
deceptive appearance. Unless it be proved that one form is fully fertile only
when it is fertilised with pollen from another form, we have not complete
evidence that the species is heterostyled. But when the pistils and stamens
differ in length in two or three sets of individuals, and this is accompanied by
a difference in the size of the pollen-grains or in the state of the stigma, we
may infer with much safety that the species is heterostyled. I have, however,
occasionally trusted to a difference between the two forms in the length of the
pistil alone, or in the length of the stigma together with its more or less
papillose condition; and in one instance differences of this kind have been
proved by trials made on the fertility of the two forms, to be sufficient
evidence.

The second sub-group above referred to consists of hermaphrodite plants, which
bear two kinds of flowers--the one perfect and fully expanded--the other minute,
completely closed, with the petals rudimentary, often with some of the anthers
aborted, and the remaining ones together with the stigmas much reduced in size;
yet these flowers are perfectly fertile. They have been called by Dr. Kuhn
cleistogamic, and they will be described in the last chapter of this volume.
(Introduction/3. 'Botanische Zeitung' 1867 page 65. Several plants are known
occasionally to produce flowers destitute of a corolla; but they belong to a
different class of cases from cleistogamic flowers. This deficiency seems to
result from the conditions to which the plants have been subjected, and partakes
of the nature of a monstrosity. All the flowers on the same plant are commonly
affected in the same manner. Such cases, though they have sometimes been ranked
as cleistogamic, do not come within our present scope: see Dr. Maxwell Masters
'Vegetable Teratology' 1869 page 403.) They are manifestly adapted for self-
fertilisation, which is effected at the cost of a wonderfully small expenditure
of pollen; whilst the perfect flowers produced by the same plant are capable of
cross-fertilisation. Certain aquatic species, when they flower beneath the
water, keep their corollas closed, apparently to protect their pollen; they
might therefore be called cleistogamic, but for reasons assigned in the proper
place are not included in the present sub-group. Several cleistogamic species,
as we shall hereafter see, bury their ovaries or young capsules in the ground;
but some few other plants behave in the same manner; and, as they do not bury
all their flowers, they might have formed a small separate subdivision.

Another interesting subdivision consists of certain plants, discovered by H.
Muller, some individuals of which bear conspicuous flowers adapted for cross-
fertilisation by the aid of insects, and others much smaller and less
conspicuous flowers, which have often been slightly modified so as to ensure
self-fertilisation. Lysimachia vulgaris, Euphrasia officinalis, Rhinanthus
crista-galli, and Viola tricolor come under this head. (Introduction/4. H.
Muller 'Nature' September 25, 1873 volume 8 page 433 and November 20, 1873
volume 9 page 44. Also 'Die Befruchtung der Blumen' etc. 1873 page 294.) The
smaller and less conspicuous flowers are not closed, but as far as the purpose
which they serve is concerned, namely, the assured propagation of the species,
they approach in nature cleistogamic flowers; but they differ from them by the
two kinds being produced on distinct plants.

With many plants, the flowers towards the outside of the inflorescence are much
larger and more conspicuous than the central ones. As I shall not have occasion
to refer to plants of this kind in the following chapters, I will here give a
few details respecting them. It is familiar to every one that the ray-florets of
the Compositae often differ remarkably from the others; and so it is with the
outer flowers of many Umbelliferae, some Cruciferae and a few other families.
Several species of Hydrangea and Viburnum offer striking instances of the same
fact. The Rubiaceous genus Mussaenda presents a very curious appearance from
some of the flowers having the tip of one of the sepals developed into a large
petal-like expansion, coloured either white or purple. The outer flowers in
several Acanthaceous genera are large and conspicuous but sterile; the next in
order are smaller, open, moderately fertile and capable of cross-fertilisation;
whilst the central ones are cleistogamic, being still smaller, closed and highly
fertile; so that here the inflorescence consists of three kinds of flowers.
(Introduction/5. J. Scott 'Journal of Botany' London new series volume 1 1872
pages 161-164.) From what we know in other cases of the use of the corolla,
coloured bracteae, etc., and from what H. Muller has observed on the frequency
of the visits of insects to the flower-heads of the Umbelliferae and Compositae
being largely determined by their conspicuousness, there can be no doubt that
the increased size of the corolla of the outer flowers, the inner ones being in
all the above cases small, serves to attract insects. (Introduction/6. 'Die
Befruchtung der Blumen' pages 108, 412.) The result is that cross-fertilisation
is thus favoured. Most flowers wither soon after being fertilised, but
Hildebrand states that the ray-florets of the Compositae last for a long time,
until all those on the disc are impregnated; and this clearly shows the use of
the former. (Introduction/7. See his interesting memoir 'Ueber die
Geschlechtsverhaltniss bei den Compositen' 1869 page 92.) The ray-florets,
however, are of service in another and very different manner, namely, by folding
inwards at night and during cold rainy weather, so as to protect the florets of
the disc. (Introduction/8. Kerner clearly shows that this is the case: 'Die
Schutzmittel des Pollens' 1873 page 28.) Moreover they often contain matter
which is excessively poisonous to insects, as may be seen in the use of flea-
powder, and in the case of Pyrethrum, M. Belhomme has shown that the ray-florets
are more poisonous than the disc-florets in the ratio of about three to two. We
may therefore believe that the ray-florets are useful in protecting the flowers
from being gnawed by insects. (Introduction/9. 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1861 page
1067. Lindley 'Vegetable Kingdom' on Chrysanthemum 1853 page 706. Kerner in his
interesting essay 'Die Schutzmittel der Bluthen gegen unberufene Gaste' 1875
page 19, insists that the petals of most plants contain matter which is
offensive to insects, so that they are seldom gnawed, and thus the organs of
fructification are protected. My grandfather in 1790 'Loves of the Plants' canto
3 note to lines 184, 188, remarks that "The flowers or petals of plants are
perhaps in general more acrid than their leaves; hence they are much seldomer
eaten by insects.")

It is a well-known yet remarkable fact that the circumferential flowers of many
of the foregoing plants have both their male and female reproductive organs
aborted, as with the Hydrangea, Viburnum and certain Compositae; or the male
organs alone are aborted, as in many Compositae. Between the sexless, female and
hermaphrodite states of these latter flowers, the finest gradations may be
traced, as Hildebrand has shown. (Introduction/10. 'Ueber die
Geschlechtsverhaltnisse bei den Compositen' 1869 pages 78-91.) He also shows
that there is a close relation between the size of the corolla in the ray-
florets and the degree of abortion in their reproductive organs. As we have good
reason to believe that these florets are highly serviceable to the plants which
possess them, more especially by rendering the flower-heads conspicuous to
insects, it is a natural inference that their corollas have been increased in
size for this special purpose; and that their development has subsequently led,
through the principle of compensation or balancement, to the more or less
complete reduction of the reproductive organs. But an opposite view may be
maintained, namely, that the reproductive organs first began to fail, as often
happens under cultivation, and, as a consequence, the corolla became, through
compensation, more highly developed. (Introduction/11. I have discussed this
subject in my 'Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication' chapter 18
2nd edition volume 2 pages 152, 156.) This view, however, is not probable, for
when hermaphrodite plants become dioecious or gyno-dioecious--that is, are
converted into hermaphrodites and females--the corolla of the female seems to be
almost invariably reduced in size in consequence of the abortion of the male
organs. The difference in the result in these two classes of cases, may perhaps
be accounted for by the matter saved through the abortion of the male organs in
the females of gyno-dioecious and dioecious plants being directed (as we shall
see in a future chapter) to the formation of an increased supply of seeds;
whilst in the case of the exterior florets and flowers of the plants which we
are here considering, such matter is expended in the development of a
conspicuous corolla. Whether in the present class of cases the corolla was first
affected, as seems to me the more probable view, or the reproductive organs
first failed, their states of development are now firmly correlated. We see this
well-illustrated in Hydrangea and Viburnum; for when these plants are
cultivated, the corollas of both the interior and exterior flowers become
largely developed, and their reproductive organs are aborted.

There is a closely analogous subdivision of plants, including the genus Muscari
(or Feather Hyacinth) and the allied Bellevalia, which bear both perfect flowers
and closed bud-like bodies that never expand. The latter resemble in this
respect cleistogamic flowers, but differ widely from them in being sterile and
conspicuous. Not only the aborted flower-buds and their peduncles (which are
elongated apparently through the principle of compensation) are brightly
coloured, but so is the upper part of the spike--all, no doubt, for the sake of
guiding insects to the inconspicuous perfect flowers. From such cases as these
we may pass on to certain Labiatae, for instance, Salvia Horminum in which (as I
hear from Mr. Thiselton Dyer) the upper bracts are enlarged and brightly
coloured, no doubt for the same purpose as before, with the flowers suppressed.

In the Carrot and some allied Umbelliferae, the central flower has its petals
somewhat enlarged, and these are of a dark purplish-red tint; but it cannot be
supposed that this one small flower makes the large white umbel at all more
conspicuous to insects. The central flowers are said to be neuter or sterile,
but I obtained by artificial fertilisation a seed (fruit) apparently perfect
from one such flower. (Introduction/12. 'The English Flora' by Sir J.E. Smith
1824 volume 2 page 39.) Occasionally two or three of the flowers next to the
central one are similarly characterised; and according to Vaucher "cette
singuliere degeneration s'etend quelquefois a l'ombelle entiere."
(Introduction/13. 'Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe' 1841 tome 2 page 614. On
the Echinophora page 627.) That the modified central flower is of no functional
importance to the plant is almost certain. It may perhaps be a remnant of a
former and ancient condition of the species, when one flower alone, the central
one, was female and yielded seeds, as in the Umbelliferous genus Echinophora.
There is nothing surprising in the central flower tending to retain its former
condition longer than the others; for when irregular flowers become regular or
peloric, they are apt to be central; and such peloric flowers apparently owe
their origin either to arrested development--that is, to the preservation of an
early stage of development--or to reversion. Central and perfectly developed
flowers in not a few plants in their normal condition (for instance, the common
Rue and Adoxa) differ slightly in structure, as in the number of the parts, from
the other flowers on the same plant. All such cases seem connected with the fact
of the bud which stands at the end of the shoot being better nourished than the
others, as it receives the most sap. (Introduction/14. This whole subject,
including pelorism, has been discussed, and references given in my 'Variation of
Animals and Plants under Domestication' chapter 26 2nd edition volume 2 page
338.)

The cases hitherto mentioned relate to hermaphrodite species which bear
differently constructed flowers; but there are some plants that produce
differently formed seeds, of which Dr. Kuhn has given a list. (Introduction/15.
'Botanische Zeitung' 1867 page 67.) With the Umbelliferae and Compositae, the
flowers that produce these seeds likewise differ, and the differences in the
structure of the seeds are of a very important nature. The causes which have led
to differences in the seeds on the same plant are not known; and it is very
doubtful whether they subserve any special end.

We now come to our second Class, that of monoecious species, or those which have
their sexes separated but borne on the same plant. The flowers necessarily
differ, but when those of one sex include rudiments of the other sex, the
difference between the two kinds is usually not great. When the difference is
great, as we see in catkin-bearing plants, this depends largely on many of the
species in this, as well as in the next or dioecious class, being fertilised by
the aid of the wind; for the male flowers have in this case to produce a
surprising amount of incoherent pollen. (Introduction/16. Delpino 'Studi sopra
uno Lignaggio Anemofilo' Firenze 1871.) Some few monoecious plants consist of
two bodies of individuals, with their flowers differing in function, though not
in structure; for certain individuals mature their pollen before the female
flowers on the same plant are ready for fertilisation, and are called
proterandrous; whilst conversely other individuals, called proterogynous, have
their stigmas mature before their pollen is ready. The purpose of this curious
functional difference obviously is to favour the cross-fertilisation of distinct
plants. A case of this kind was first observed by Delpino in the Walnut (Juglans
regia), and has since been observed with the common Nut (Corylus avellana). I
may add that according to H. Muller the individuals of some few hermaphrodite
plants differ in a like manner; some being proterandrous and others
proterogynous. (Introduction/17. Delpino 'Ult. Osservazioni sulla Dicogamia'
part 2 fasc 2 page 337. Mr. Wetterhan and H. Muller on Corylus 'Nature' volume
11 page 507 and 1875 page 26. On proterandrous and proterogynous hermaphrodite
individuals of the same species, see H. Muller 'Die Befruchtung' etc. pages 285,
339.) On cultivated trees of the Walnut and Mulberry, the male flowers have been
observed to abort on certain individuals, which have thus been converted into
females; but whether there are any species in a state of nature which co-exist
as monoecious and female individuals, I do not know. (Introduction/18.
'Gardener's Chronicle' 1847 pages 541, 558.)

The third Class consists of dioecious species, and the remarks made under the
last class with respect to the amount of difference between the male and female
flowers are here applicable. It is at present an inexplicable fact that with
some dioecious plants, of which the Restiaceae of Australia and the Cape of Good
Hope offer the most striking instance, the differentiation of the sexes has
affected the whole plant to such an extent (as I hear from Mr. Thiselton Dyer)
that Mr. Bentham and Professor Oliver have often found it impossible to match
the male and female specimens of the same species. In my seventh chapter some
observations will be given on the gradual conversion of heterostyled and of
ordinary hermaphrodite plants into dioecious or sub-dioecious species.

The fourth and last Class consists of the plants which were called polygamous by
Linnaeus; but it appears to me that it would be convenient to confine this term
to the species which coexist as hermaphrodites, males and females; and to give
new names to several other combinations of the sexes--a plan which I shall here
follow. Polygamous plants, in this confined sense of the term, may be divided
into two sub-groups, according as the three sexual forms are found on the same
individual or on distinct individuals. Of this latter or trioicous sub-group,
the common Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) offers a good instance: thus, I examined
during the spring and autumn fifteen trees growing in the same field; and of
these, eight produced male flowers alone, and in the autumn not a single seed;
four produced only female flowers, which set an abundance of seeds; three were
hermaphrodites, which had a different aspect from the other trees whilst in
flower, and two of them produced nearly as many seeds as the female trees,
whilst the third produced none, so that it was in function a male. The
separation of the sexes, however, is not complete in the Ash; for the female
flowers include stamens, which drop off at an early period, and their anthers,
which never open or dehisce, generally contain pulpy matter instead of pollen.
On some female trees, however, I found a few anthers containing pollen grains
apparently sound. On the male trees most of the flowers include pistils, but
these likewise drop off at an early period; and the ovules, which ultimately
abort, are very small compared with those in female flowers of the same age.

Of the other or monoicous sub-group of polygamous plants, or those which bear
hermaphrodite, male and female flowers on the same individual, the common Maple
(Acer campestre) offers a good instance; but Lecoq states that some trees are
truly dioecious, and this shows how easily one state passes into another.
(Introduction/19. 'Geographie Botanique' tome 5 page 367.)

A considerable number of plants generally ranked as polygamous exist under only
two forms, namely, as hermaphrodites and females; and these may be called gyno-
dioecious, of which the common Thyme offers a good example. In my seventh
chapter I shall give some observations on plants of this nature. Other species,
for instance several kinds of Atriplex, bear on the same plant hermaphrodite and
female flowers; and these might be called gyno-monoecious, if a name were
desirable for them.

Again there are plants which produce hermaphrodite and male flowers on the same
individual, for instance, some species of Galium, Veratrum, etc.; and these
might be called andro-monoecious. If there exist plants, the individuals of
which consist of hermaphrodites and males, these might be distinguished as
andro-dioecious. But, after making inquiries from several botanists, I can hear
of no such cases. Lecoq, however, states, but without entering into full
details, that some plants of Caltha palustris produce only male flowers, and
that these live mingled with the hermaphrodites. (Introduction/20. 'Geographie
Botanique' tome 4 page 488.) The rarity of such cases as this last one is
remarkable, as the presence of hermaphrodite and male flowers on the same
individual is not an unusual occurrence; it would appear as if nature did not
think it worth while to devote a distinct individual to the production of
pollen, excepting when this was indispensably necessary, as in the case of
dioecious species.

I have now finished my brief sketch of the several cases, as far as known to me,
in which flowers differing in structure or in function are produced by the same
species of plant. Full details will be given in the following chapters with
respect to many of these plants. I will begin with the heterostyled, then pass
on to certain dioecious, sub-dioecious, and polygamous species, and end with the
cleistogamic. For the convenience of the reader, and to save space, the less
important cases and details have been printed in smaller type [].

I cannot close this Introduction without expressing my warm thanks to Dr. Hooker
for supplying me with specimens and for other aid; and to Mr. Thiselton Dyer and
Professor Oliver for giving me much information and other assistance. Professor
Asa Gray, also, has uniformly aided me in many ways. To Fritz Muller of St.
Catharina, in Brazil, I am indebted for many dried flowers of heterostyled
plants, often accompanied with valuable notes.


CHAPTER I.

HETEROSTYLED DIMORPHIC PLANTS: PRIMULACEAE.

Primula veris or the cowslip.
Differences in structure between the two forms.
Their degrees of fertility when legitimately and illegitimately united.
P. elatior, vulgaris, Sinensis, auricula, etc.
Summary on the fertility of the heterostyled species of Primula.
Homostyled species of Primula.
Hottonia palustris.
Androsace vitalliana.

(FIGURE 1.1. Primula veris.
Left: Long-styled form.
Right: Short-styled form.)

It has long been known to botanists that the common cowslip (Primula veris,
Brit. Flora, var. officinalis, Lin.) exists under two forms, about equally
numerous, which obviously differ from each other in the length of their pistils
and stamens. (1/1. This fact, according to Von Mohl 'Botanische Zeitung' 1863
page 326, was first observed by Persoon in the year 1794.) This difference has
hitherto been looked at as a case of mere variability, but this view, as we
shall presently see, is far from the true one. Florists who cultivate the
Polyanthus and Auricula have long been aware of the two kinds of flowers, and
they call the plants which display the globular stigma at the mouth of the
corolla, "pin-headed" or "pin-eyed," and those which display the anthers,
"thrum-eyed." (1/2. In Johnson's Dictionary, "thrum" is said to be the ends of
weavers' threads; and I suppose that some weaver who cultivated the Polyanthus
invented this name, from being struck with some degree of resemblance between
the cluster of anthers in the mouth of the corolla and the ends of his threads.)
I will designate the two forms as the long-styled and short-styled.

The pistil in the long-styled form is almost exactly twice as long as that of
the short-styled. The stigma stands in the mouth of the corolla or projects just
above it, and is thus externally visible. It stands high above the anthers,
which are situated halfway down the tube and cannot be easily seen. In the
short-styled form the anthers are attached near the mouth of the tube, and
therefore stand above the stigma, which is seated in about the middle of the
tubular corolla. The corolla itself is of a different shape in the two forms;
the throat or expanded portion above the attachment of the anthers being much
longer in the long-styled than in the short-styled form. Village children notice
this difference, as they can best make necklaces by threading and slipping the
corollas of the long-styled flowers into one another. But there are much more
important differences. The stigma in the long-styled form is globular; in the
short-styled it is depressed on the summit, so that the longitudinal axis of the
former is sometimes nearly double that of the latter. Although somewhat variable
in shape, one difference is persistent, namely, in roughness: in some specimens
carefully compared, the papillae which render the stigma rough were in the long-
styled form from twice to thrice as long as in the short-styled. The anthers do
not differ in size in the two forms, which I mention because this is the case
with some heterostyled plants. The most remarkable difference is in the pollen-
grains. I measured with the micrometer many specimens, both dry and wet, taken
from plants growing in different situations, and always found a palpable
difference. The grains distended with water from the short-styled flowers were
about .038 millimetres (10 to 11/7000 of an inch) in diameter, whilst those from
the long-styled were about .0254 millimetres (7/7000 of an inch), which is in
the ratio of 100 to 67. The pollen-grains therefore from the longer stamens of
the short-styled form are plainly larger than those from the shorter stamens of
the long-styled. When examined dry, the smaller grains are seen under a low
power to be more transparent than the larger grains, and apparently in a greater
degree than can be accounted for by their less diameter. There is also a
difference in shape, the grains from the short-styled plants being nearly
spherical, those from the long-styled being oblong with the angles rounded; this
difference disappears when the grains are distended with water. The long-styled
plants generally tend to flower a little before the short-styled: for instance,
I had twelve plants of each form growing in separate pots and treated in every
respect alike; and at the time when only a single short-styled plant was in
flower, seven of the long-styled had expanded their flowers.

We shall, also, presently see that the short-styled plants produce more seed
than the long-styled. It is remarkable, according to Professor Oliver, that the
ovules in the unexpanded and unimpregnated flowers of the latter are
considerably larger than those of the short-styled flowers (1/3. 'Natural
History Review' July 1862 page 237.); and this I suppose is connected with the
long-styled flowers producing fewer seeds, so that the ovules have more space
and nourishment for rapid development.

To sum up the differences:--The long-styled plants have a much longer pistil,
with a globular and much rougher stigma, standing high above the anthers. The
stamens are short; the grains of pollen smaller and oblong in shape. The upper
half of the tube of the corolla is more expanded. The number of seeds produced
is smaller and the ovules larger. The plants tend to flower first.

The short-styled plants have a short pistil, half the length of the tube of the
corolla, with a smooth depressed stigma standing beneath the anthers. The
stamens are long; the grains of pollen are spherical and larger. The tube of the
corolla is of uniform diameter except close to the upper end. The number of
seeds produced is larger.

I have examined a large number of flowers; and though the shape of the stigma
and the length of the pistil both vary, especially in the short-styled form, I
have never met with any transitional states between the two forms in plants
growing in a state of nature. There is never the slightest doubt under which
form a plant ought to be classed. The two kinds of flowers are never found on
the same individual plant. I marked many cowslips and primroses, and on the
following year all retained the same character, as did some in my garden which
flowered out of their proper season in the autumn. Mr. W. Wooler, of Darlington,
however, informs us that he has seen early blossoms on the Polyanthus, which
were not long-styled, but became so later in the season. (1/4. I have proved by
numerous experiments, hereafter to be given, that the Polyanthus is a variety of
Primula veris.) Possibly in this case the pistils may not have been fully
developed during the early spring. An excellent proof of the permanence of the
two forms may be seen in nursery-gardens, where choice varieties of the
Polyanthus are propagated by division; and I found whole beds of several
varieties, each consisting exclusively of the one or the other form. The two
forms exist in the wild state in about equal numbers: I collected 522 umbels
from plants growing in several stations, taking a single umbel from each plant;
and 241 were long-styled, and 281 short-styled. No difference in tint or size
could be perceived in the two great masses of flowers.

We shall presently see that most of the species of Primula exist under two
analogous forms; and it may be asked what is the meaning of the above-described
important differences in their structure? The question seems well worthy of
careful investigation, and I will give my observations on the cowslip in detail.
The first idea which naturally occurred to me was, that this species was tending
towards a dioecious condition; that the long-styled plants, with their longer
pistils, rougher stigmas, and smaller pollen-grains, were more feminine in
nature, and would produce more seed;--that the short-styled plants, with their
shorter pistils, longer stamens and larger pollen-grains, were more masculine in
nature. Accordingly, in 1860, I marked a few cowslips of both forms growing in
my garden, and others growing in an open field, and others in a shady wood, and
gathered and weighed the seed. In all the lots the short-styled plants yielded,
contrary to my expectation, most seed. Taking the lots together, the following
is the result:--

TABLE 1.1.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels Produced.
Column 4: Number of Capsules Produced.
Column 5: Weight of Seed In Grains.

Short-styled cowslips :  9 : 33 : 199 : 83.
Long-styled cowslips  : 13 : 51 : 261 : 91.

If we compare the weight from an equal number of plants, and from an equal
number of umbels, and from an equal number of capsules of the two forms, we get
the following results:--

TABLE 1.2.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 4: Number of Umbels.
Column 5: Weight of Seed.
...
Column 6: Number of Capsules.
Column 7: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 10 : 92 :: 100 : 251 :: 100 : 41.
Long-styled cowslips : 10 : 70 :: 100 : 178 :: 100 : 34.

So that, by all these standards of comparison, the short-styled form is the more
fertile; if we take the number of umbels (which is the fairest standard, for
large and small plants are thus equalised), the short-styled plants produce more
seed than the long-styled, in the proportion of nearly four to three.

In 1861 the trial was made in a fuller and fairer manner. A number of wild
plants had been transplanted during the previous autumn into a large bed in my
garden, and all were treated alike; the result was:--

TABLE 1.3.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels.
Column 4: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 47 : 173 : 745.
Long-styled cowslips  : 58 : 208 : 692.

These figures give us the following proportions:--

TABLE 1.4.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 4: Number of Umbels.
Column 5: Weight of Seed in grains.

Short-styled cowslips : 100 : 1585 :: 100 : 430.
Long-styled cowslips  : 100 : 1093 :: 100 : 332.

The season was much more favourable this year than the last; the plants also now
grew in good soil, instead of in a shady wood or struggling with other plants in
the open field; consequently the actual produce of seed was considerably larger.
Nevertheless we have the same relative result; for the short-styled plants
produced more seed than the long-styled in nearly the proportion of three to
two; but if we take the fairest standard of comparison, namely, the product of
seeds from an equal number of umbels, the excess is, as in the former case,
nearly as four to three.

Looking to these trials made during two successive years on a large number of
plants, we may safely conclude that the short-styled form is more productive
than the long-styled form, and the same result holds good with some other
species of Primula. Consequently my anticipation that the plants with longer
pistils, rougher stigmas, shorter stamens and smaller pollen-grains, would prove
to be more feminine in nature, is exactly the reverse of the truth.

In 1860 a few umbels on some plants of both the long-styled and short-styled
form, which had been covered by a net, did not produce any seed, though other
umbels on the same plants, artificially fertilised, produced an abundance of
seed; and this fact shows that the mere covering in itself was not injurious.
Accordingly, in 1861, several plants were similarly covered just before they
expanded their flowers; these turned out as follows:--

TABLE 1.5.

Column 1: Plant.
Column 2: Number of Plants.
Column 3: Number of Umbels produced.
Column 4: Product of Seed.

Short-styled :  6 : 24 : 1.3 grain weight of seed, or about 50 in number.
Long-styled  : 18 : 74 : Not one seed.

Judging from the exposed plants which grew all round in the same bed, and had
been treated in the same manner, excepting that they had been exposed to the
visits of insects, the above six short-styled plants ought to have produced 92
grains' weight of seed instead of only 1.3; and the eighteen long-styled plants,
which produced not one seed, ought to have produced above 200 grains' weight.
The production of a few seeds by the short-styled plants was probably due to the
action of Thrips or of some other minute insect. It is scarcely necessary to
give any additional evidence, but I may add that ten pots of Polyanthuses and
cowslips of both forms, protected from insects in my greenhouse, did not set one
pod, though artificially fertilised flowers in other pots produced an abundance.
We thus see that the visits of insects are absolutely necessary for the
fertilisation of Primula veris. If the corolla of the long-styled form had
dropped off, instead of remaining attached in a withered state to the ovarium,
the anthers attached to the lower part of the tube with some pollen still
adhering to them would have been dragged over the stigma, and the flowers would
have been partially self-fertilised, as is the case with Primula Sinensis
through this means. It is a rather curious fact that so trifling a difference as
the falling-off of the withered corolla, should make a very great difference in
the number of seeds produced by a plant if its flowers are not visited by
insects.

The flowers of the cowslip and of the other species of the genus secrete plenty
of nectar; and I have often seen humble bees, especially B. hortorum and
muscorum, sucking the former in a proper manner, though they sometimes bite
holes through the corolla. (1/5. H. Muller has also seen Anthophora pilipes and
a Bombylius sucking the flowers. 'Nature' December 10, 1874 page 111.) No doubt
moths likewise visit the flowers, as one of my sons caught Cucullia verbasci in
the act. The pollen readily adheres to any thin object which is inserted into a
flower. The anthers in the one form stand nearly, but not exactly, on a level
with the stigma of the other; for the distance between the anthers and stigma in
the short-styled form is greater than that in the long-styled, in the ratio of
100 to 90. This difference is the result of the anthers in the long-styled form
standing rather higher in the tube than does the stigma in the short-styled, and
this favours their pollen being deposited on it. It follows from the position of
the organs that if the proboscis of a dead humble-bee, or a thick bristle or
rough needle, be pushed down the corolla, first of one form and then of the
other, as an insect would do in visiting the two forms growing mingled together,
pollen from the long-stamened form adheres round the base of the object, and is
left with certainty on the stigma of the long-styled form; whilst pollen from
the short stamens of the long-styled form adheres a little way above the
extremity of the object, and some is generally left on the stigma of the other
form. In accordance with this observation I found that the two kinds of pollen,
which could easily be recognised under the microscope, adhered in this manner to
the proboscides of the two species of humble-bees and of the moth, which were
caught visiting the flowers; but some small grains were mingled with the larger
grains round the base of the proboscis, and conversely some large grains with
the small grains near the extremity of the proboscis. Thus pollen will be
regularly carried from the one form to the other, and they will reciprocally
fertilise one another. Nevertheless an insect in withdrawing its proboscis from
the corolla of the long-styled form cannot fail occasionally to leave pollen
from the same flower on the stigma; and in this case there might be self-
fertilisation. But this will be much more likely to occur with the short-styled
form; for when I inserted a bristle or other such object into the corolla of
this form, and had, therefore, to pass it down between the anthers seated round
the mouth of the corolla, some pollen was almost invariably carried down and
left on the stigma. Minute insects, such as Thrips, which sometimes haunt the
flowers, would likewise be apt to cause the self-fertilisation of both forms.

The several foregoing facts led me to try the effects of the two kinds of pollen
on the stigmas of the two forms. Four essentially different unions are possible;
namely, the fertilisation of the stigma of the long-styled form by its own-form
pollen, and by that of the short-styled; and the stigma of the short-styled form
by its own-form pollen, and by that of the long-styled. The fertilisation of
either form with pollen from the other form may be conveniently called a
LEGITIMATE UNION, from reasons hereafter to be made clear; and that of either
form with its own-form pollen an ILLEGITIMATE UNION. I formerly applied the term
"heteromorphic" to the legitimate unions, and "homomorphic" to the illegitimate
unions; but after discovering the existence of trimorphic plants, in which many
more unions are possible, these two terms ceased to be applicable. The
illegitimate unions of both forms might have been tried in three ways; for a
flower of either form may be fertilised with pollen from the same flower, or
with that from a another flower on the same plant, or with that from a distinct
plant of the same form. But to make my experiments perfectly fair, and to avoid
any evil result from self-fertilisation or too close interbreeding, I have
invariably employed pollen from a distinct plant of the same form for the
illegitimate unions of all the species; and therefore it may be observed that I
have used the term "own-form pollen" in speaking of such unions. The several
plants in all my experiments were treated in exactly the same manner, and were
carefully protected by fine nets from the access of insects, excepting Thrips,
which it is impossible to exclude. I performed all the manipulations myself, and
weighed the seeds in a chemical balance; but during many subsequent trials I
followed the more accurate plan of counting the seeds. Some of the capsules
contained no seeds, or only two or three, and these are excluded in the column
headed "good capsules" in several of the following tables:--

TABLE 1.6. Primula veris.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Capsules produced.
Column 4: Number of good Capsules.
Column 5: Weight of Seed in grains.
Column 6: Calculated Weight of Seed from 100 good Capsules.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
22 : 15 : 14 :  8.8 : 62.

Long-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
20 :  8 :  5 :  2.1 : 42.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union :
13 : 12 : 11 :  4.9 : 44.

Short-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
15 :  8 :  6 :  1.8 : 30.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions :
35 : 27 : 25 : 13.7 : 54.

The two illegitimate unions :
35 : 16 : 11 :  3.9 : 35.

The results may be given in another form (Table 1.7) by comparing, first, the
number of capsules, whether good or bad, or of the good alone, produced by 100
flowers of both forms when legitimately and illegitimately fertilised; secondly,
by comparing the weight of seed in 100 of these capsules, whether good or bad;
or, thirdly, in 100 of the good capsules.

TABLE 1.7. Primula veris.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Capsules.
Column 4: Number of good Capsules.
Column 5: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 6: Number of Capsules.
Column 7: Weight of Seed in grains.
...
Column 8: Number of good Capsules.
Column 9: Weight of Seed in grains.

The two legitimate unions :
100 : 77 : 71 : 39 :: 100 : 50 :: 100 : 54.

The two illegitimate unions :
100 : 45 : 31 : 11 :: 100 : 24 :: 100 : 35.

We here see that the long-styled flowers fertilised with pollen from the short-
styled yield more capsules, especially good ones (i.e. containing more than one
or two seeds), and that these capsules contain a greater proportional weight of
seeds than do the flowers of the long-styled when fertilised with pollen from a
distinct plant of the same form. So it is with the short-styled flowers, if
treated in an analogous manner. Therefore I have called the former method of
fertilisation a legitimate union, and the latter, as it fails to yield the full
complement of capsules and seeds, an illegitimate union. These two kinds of
union are graphically represented in Figure 1.2.

(FIGURE 1.2. Primula veris.
Graphic representation of two kinds of union between:
Left: Long-styled form.
Right: Short-styled form.)

If we consider the results of the two legitimate unions taken together and the
two illegitimate ones, as shown in Table 1.7, we see that the former compared
with the latter yielded capsules, whether containing many seeds or only a few,
in the proportion of 77 to 45, or as 100 to 58. But the inferiority of the
illegitimate unions is here perhaps too great, for on a subsequent occasion 100
long-styled and short-styled flowers were illegitimately fertilised, and they
together yielded 53 capsules: therefore the rate of 77 to 53, or as 100 to 69,
is a fairer one than that of 100 to 58. Returning to Table 1.7, if we consider
only the good capsules, those from the two legitimate unions were to those from
the two illegitimate in number as 71 to 31, or as 100 to 44. Again, if we take
an equal number of capsules, whether good or bad, from the legitimately and
illegitimately fertilised flowers, we find that the former contained seeds by
weight compared with the latter as 50 to 24, or as 100 to 48; but if all the
poor capsules are rejected, of which many were produced by the illegitimately
fertilised flowers, the proportion is 54 to 35, or as 100 to 65. In this and all
other cases, the relative fertility of the two kinds of union can, I think, be
judged of more truly by the average number of seeds per capsule than by the
proportion of flowers which yield capsules. The two methods might have been
combined by giving the average number of seeds produced by all the flowers which
were fertilised, whether they yielded capsules or not; but I have thought that
it would be more instructive always to show separately the proportion of flowers
which produced capsules, and the average number of apparently good seeds which
the capsules contained.

Flowers legitimately fertilised set seeds under conditions which cause the
almost complete failure of illegitimately fertilised flowers. Thus in the spring
of 1862 forty flowers were fertilised at the same time in both ways. The plants
were accidentally exposed in the greenhouse to too hot a sun, and a large number
of umbels perished. Some, however, remained in moderately good health, and on
these there were twelve flowers which had been fertilised legitimately, and
eleven which had been fertilised illegitimately. The twelve legitimate unions
yielded seven fine capsules, containing on an average each 57.3 good seeds;
whilst the eleven illegitimate unions yielded only two capsules, of which one
contained 39 seeds, but so poor, that I do not suppose one would have
germinated, and the other contained 17 fairly good seeds.

From the facts now given the superiority of a legitimate over an illegitimate
union admits of not the least doubt; and we have here a case to which no
parallel exists in the vegetable or, indeed, in the animal kingdom. The
individual plants of the present species, and as we shall see of several other
species of Primula, are divided into two sets or bodies, which cannot be called
distinct sexes, for both are hermaphrodites; yet they are to a certain extent
sexually distinct, for they require reciprocal union for perfect fertility. As
quadrupeds are divided into two nearly equal bodies of different sexes, so here
we have two bodies, approximately equal in number, differing in their sexual
powers and related to each other like males and females. There are many
hermaphrodite animals which cannot fertilise themselves, but most unite with
another hermaphrodite. So it is with numerous plants; for the pollen is often
mature and shed, or is mechanically protruded, before the flower's own stigma is
ready; and such flowers absolutely require the presence of another hermaphrodite
for sexual union. But with the cowslip and various other species of Primula
there is this wide difference, that one individual, though it can fertilise
itself imperfectly, must unite with another individual for full fertility; it
cannot, however, unite with any other individual in the same manner as an
hermaphrodite plant can unite with any other one of the same species; or as one
snail or earth-worm can unite with any other hermaphrodite individual. On the
contrary, an individual belonging to one form of the cowslip in order to be
perfectly fertile must unite with one of the other form, just as a male
quadruped must and can unite only with the female.

I have spoken of the legitimate unions as being fully fertile; and I am fully
justified in doing so, for flowers artificially fertilised in this manner
yielded rather more seeds than plants naturally fertilised in a state of nature.
The excess may be attributed to the plants having been grown separately in good
soil. With respect to the illegitimate unions, we shall best appreciate their
degree of lessened fertility by the following facts. Gartner estimated the
sterility of the unions between distinct species, in a manner which allows of a
strict comparison with the results of the legitimate and illegitimate unions of
Primula. (1/6. 'Versuche uber die Bastarderzeugung' 1849 page 216.) With P.
veris, for every 100 seeds yielded by the two legitimate unions, only 64 were
yielded by an equal number of good capsules from the two illegitimate unions.
With P. Sinensis, as we shall hereafter see, the proportion was nearly the same-
-namely, as 100 to 62. Now Gartner has shown that, on the calculation of
Verbascum lychnitis yielding with its own pollen 100 seeds, it yielded when
fertilised by the pollen of Verbascum Phoeniceum 90 seeds; by the pollen of
Verbascum nigrum, 63 seeds; by that of Verbascum blattaria, 62 seeds. So again,
Dianthus barbatus fertilised by the pollen of D. superbus yielded 81 seeds, and
by the pollen of D. japonicus 66 seeds, relatively to the 100 seeds produced by
its own pollen. We thus see--and the fact is highly remarkable--that with
Primula the illegitimate unions relatively to the legitimate are more sterile
than crosses between distinct species of other genera relatively to their pure
unions. Mr. Scott has given a still more striking illustration of the same fact:
he crossed Primula auricula with pollen of four other species (P. palinuri,
viscosa, hirsuta, and verticillata), and these hybrid unions yielded a larger
average number of seeds than did P. auricula when fertilised illegitimately with
its own-form pollen. (1/7. 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8 1864
page 93.)

The benefit which heterostyled dimorphic plants derive from the existence of the
two forms is sufficiently obvious, namely, the intercrossing of distinct plants
being thus ensured. (1/8. I have shown in my work on the 'Effects of Cross and
Self-fertilisation' how greatly the offspring from intercrossed plants profit in
height, vigour, and fertility.) Nothing can be better adapted for this end than
the relative positions of the anthers and stigmas in the two forms, as shown in
Figure 1.2; but to this whole subject I shall recur. No doubt pollen will
occasionally be placed by insects or fall on the stigma of the same flower; and
if cross-fertilisation fails, such self-fertilisation will be advantageous to
the plant, as it will thus be saved from complete barrenness. But the advantage
is not so great as might at first be thought, for the seedlings from
illegitimate unions do not generally consist of both forms, but all belong to
the parent form; they are, moreover, in some degree weakly in constitution, as
will be shown in a future chapter. If, however, a flower's own pollen should
first be placed by insects or fall on the stigma, it by no means follows that
cross-fertilisation will be thus prevented. It is well known that if pollen from
a distinct species be placed on the stigma of a plant, and some hours afterwards
its own pollen be placed on it, the latter will be prepotent and will quite
obliterate any effect from the foreign pollen; and there can hardly be a doubt
that with heterostyled dimorphic plants, pollen from the other form will
obliterate the effects of pollen from the same form, even when this has been
placed on the stigma a considerable time before. To test this belief, I placed
on several stigmas of a long-styled cowslip plenty of pollen from the same
plant, and after twenty-four hours added some from a short-styled dark-red
Polyanthus, which is a variety of the cowslip. From the flowers thus treated 30
seedlings were raised, and all these, without exception, bore reddish flowers;
so that the effect of pollen from the same form, though placed on the stigmas
twenty-four hours previously, was quite destroyed by that of pollen from a plant
belonging to the other form.

Finally, I may remark that of the four kinds of unions, that of the short-styled
illegitimately fertilised with its own-form pollen seems to be the most sterile
of all, as judged by the average number of seeds, which the capsules contained.
A smaller proportion, also, of these seeds than of the others germinated, and
they germinated more slowly. The sterility of this union is the more remarkable,
as it has already been shown that the short-styled plants yield a larger number
of seeds than the long-styled, when both forms are fertilised, either naturally
or artificially, in a legitimate manner.

In a future chapter, when I treat of the offspring from heterostyled dimorphic
and trimorphic plants illegitimately fertilised with their own-form pollen, I
shall have occasion to show that with the present species and several others,
equal-styled varieties sometimes appear.

Primula elatior, Jacq.
Bardfield oxlip of English authors.

This plant, as well as the last or cowslip (P. veris, vel officinalis), and the
primrose (P. vulgaris, vel acaulis) have been considered by some botanists as
varieties of the same species. But they are all three undoubtedly distinct, as
will be shown in the next chapter. The present species resembles to a certain
extent in general appearance the common oxlip, which is a hybrid between the
cowslip and primrose. Primula elatior is found in England only in two or three
of the eastern counties; and I was supplied with living plants by Mr. Doubleday,
who, as I believe, first called attention to its existence in England. It is
common in some parts of the Continent; and H. Muller has seen several kinds of
humble-bees and other bees, and Bombylius, visiting the flowers in North
Germany. (1/9. 'Die Befruchtung der Blumen' page 347.)

The results of my trials on the relative fertility of the two forms, when
legitimately and illegitimately fertilised, are given in Table 1.8.

TABLE 1.8. Primula elatior.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of good Capsules produced.
Column 4: Maximum Number of Seeds in any one Capsule.
Column 5: Minimum Number of Seeds in any one Capsule.
Column 6: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
10 :  6 : 62  : 34 : 46.5.

Long-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
20 :  4 : 49* :  2 : 27.7.
(*These seeds were so poor and small that they could hardly have germinated.)

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
10 :  8 : 61  : 37 : 47.7.

Short-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
17 :  3 : 19  :  9 : 12.1.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together :
20 : 14 : 62  : 37 : 47.1.

The two illegitimate unions together :
37 :  7 : 49* :  2 : 35.5.
(*These seeds were so poor and small that they could hardly have germinated.)

If we compare the fertility of the two legitimate unions taken together with
that of the two illegitimate unions together, as judged by the proportional
number of flowers which when fertilised in the two methods yielded capsules, the
ratio is as 100 to 27; so that by this standard the present species is much more
sterile than P. veris, when both species are illegitimately fertilised. If we
judge of the relative fertility of the two kinds of unions by the average number
of seeds per capsule, the ratio is as 100 to 75. But this latter number is
probably much too high, as many of the seeds produced by the illegitimately
fertilised long-styled flowers were so small that they probably would not have
germinated, and ought not to have been counted. Several long-styled and short-
styled plants were protected from the access of insects, and must have been
spontaneously self-fertilised. They yielded altogether only six capsules,
containing any seeds; and their average number was only 7.8 per capsule. Some,
moreover, of these seeds were so small that they could hardly have germinated.

Herr W. Breitenbach informs me that he examined, in two sites near the Lippe (a
tributary of the Rhine), 894 flowers produced by 198 plants of this species; and
he found 467 of these flowers to be long-styled, 411 short-styled, and 16 equal-
styled. I have heard of no other instance with heterostyled plants of equal-
styled flowers appearing in a state of nature, though far from rare with plants
which have been long cultivated. It is still more remarkable that in eighteen
cases the same plant produced both long-styled and short-styled, or long-styled
and equal-styled flowers; and in two out of the eighteen cases, long-styled,
short-styled, and equal-styled flowers. The long-styled flowers greatly
preponderated on these eighteen plants,--61 consisting of this form, 15 of
equal-styled, and 9 of the short-styled form.

Primula vulgaris (var. acaulis, Linn.)
The primrose of English Writers.

(FIGURE 1.3. Outlines of pollen-grains of Primula vulgaris, distended with
water, much magnified and drawn under the camera lucida. The upper and smaller
grains from the long-styled form; the lower and larger grains from the short-
styled.)

Mr. J. Scott examined 100 plants growing near Edinburgh, and found 44 to be
long-styled, and 56 short-styled; and I took by chance 79 plants in Kent, of
which 39 were long-styled and 40 short-styled; so that the two lots together
consisted of 83 long-styled and 96 short-styled plants. In the long-styled form
the pistil is to that of the short-styled in length, from an average of five
measurements, as 100 to 51. The stigma in the long-styled form is conspicuously
more globose and much more papillose than in the short-styled, in which latter
it is depressed on the summit; it is equally broad in the two forms. In both it
stands nearly, but not exactly, on a level with the anthers of the opposite
form; for it was found, from an average of 15 measurements, that the distance
between the middle of the stigma and the middle of the anthers in the short-
styled form is to that in the long-styled as 100 to 93. The anthers do not
differ in size in the two forms. The pollen-grains from the short-styled flowers
before they were soaked in water were decidedly broader, in proportion to their
length, than those from the long-styled; after being soaked they were relatively
to those from the long-styled as 100 to 71 in diameter, and more transparent. A
large number of flowers from the two forms were compared, and 12 of the finest
flowers from each lot were measured, but there was no sensible difference
between them in size. Nine long-styled and eight short-styled plants growing
together in a state of nature were marked, and their capsules collected after
they had been naturally fertilised; and the seeds from the short-styled weighed
exactly twice as much as those from an equal number of long-styled plants. So
that the primrose resembles the cowslip in the short-styled plants, being the
more productive of the two forms. The results of my trials on the fertility of
the two forms, when legitimately and illegitimately fertilised, are given in
Table 1.9.

TABLE 1.9. Primula vulgaris.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of good Capsules produced.
Column 4: Maximum Number of Seeds in any one Capsule.
Column 5: Minimum Number of Seeds in any one Capsule.
Column 6: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
12 : 11 : 77 : 47 : 66.9.

Long-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
21 : 14 : 66 : 30 : 52.2.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
 8 :  7 : 75 : 48 : 65.0.

Short-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
18 :  7 : 43 :  5 : 18.8 (This average is perhaps rather too low).

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together :
20 : 18 : 77 : 47 : 66.0.

The two illegitimate unions together :
39 : 21 : 66 :  5 : 35.5 (This average is perhaps rather too low).

We may infer from this table that the fertility of the two legitimate unions
taken together is to that of the two illegitimate unions together, as judged by
the proportional number of flowers which when fertilised in the two methods
yielded capsules, as 100 to 60. If we judge by the average number of seeds per
capsule produced by the two kinds of unions, the ratio is as 100 to 54; but this
latter figure is perhaps rather too low. It is surprising how rarely insects can
be seen during the day visiting the flowers, but I have occasionally observed
small kinds of bees at work; I suppose, therefore, that they are commonly
fertilised by nocturnal Lepidoptera. The long-styled plants when protected from
insects yield a considerable number of capsules, and they thus differ remarkably
from the same form of the cowslip, which is quite sterile under the same
circumstances. Twenty-three spontaneously self-fertilised capsules from this
form contained, on an average, 19.2 seeds. The short-styled plants produced
fewer spontaneously self-fertilised capsules, and fourteen of them contained
only 6.2 seeds per capsule. The self-fertilisation of both forms was probably
aided by Thrips, which abounded within the flowers; but these minute insects
could not have placed nearly sufficient pollen on the stigmas, as the
spontaneously self-fertilised capsules contained much fewer seeds, on an
average, than those (as may be seen in Table 1.9.) which were artificially
fertilised with their own-form pollen. But this difference may perhaps be
attributed in part to the flowers in the table having been fertilised with
pollen from a distinct plant belonging to the same form; whilst those which were
spontaneously self-fertilised no doubt generally received their own pollen. In a
future part of this volume some observations will be given on the fertility of a
red-coloured variety of the primrose.

Primula Sinensis.

In the long-styled form the pistil is about twice as long as that of the short-
styled, and the stamens differ in a corresponding, but reversed, manner. The
stigma is considerably more elongated and rougher than that of the short-styled,
which is smooth and almost spherical, being somewhat depressed on the summit;
but the stigma varies much in all its characters, the result, probably, of
cultivation. The pollen-grains of the short-styled form, according to
Hildebrand, are 7 divisions of the micrometer in length and 5 in breadth;
whereas those of the long-styled are only 4 in length and 3 in breadth. (1/10.
After the appearance of my paper this author published some excellent
observations on the present species 'Botanische Zeitung' January 1, 1864, and he
shows that I erred greatly about the size of the pollen-grains in the two forms.
I suppose that by mistake I measured twice over pollen-grains from the same
form.) The grains, therefore, of the short-styled are to those of the long-
styled in length as 100 to 57. Hildebrand also remarked, as I had done in the
case of P. veris, that the smaller grains from the long-styled are much more
transparent than the larger ones from the short-styled form. We shall hereafter
see that this cultivated plant varies much in its dimorphic condition and is
often equal-styled. Some individuals may be said to be sub-heterostyled; thus in
two white-flowered plants the pistil projected above the stamens, but in one of
them it was longer and had a more elongated and rougher stigma, than in the
other; and the pollen-grains from the latter were to those from the plant with a
more elongated pistil only as 100 to 88 in diameter, instead of as 100 to 57.
The corolla of the long-styled and short-styled form differs in shape, in the
same manner as in P. veris. The long-styled plants tend to flower before the
short-styled. When both forms were legitimately fertilised, the capsules from
the short-styled plants contained, on an average, more seeds than those from the
long-styled, in the ratio of 12.2 to 9.3 by weight, that is, as 100 to 78. In
Table 1.10 we have the results of two sets of experiments tried at different
periods.

TABLE 1.10. Primula Sinensis.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of good Capsules produced.
Column 4: Average Weight of Seeds per Capsule.
...
Column 5: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule as ascertained on a subsequent
occasion.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
24 : 16 : 0.58 :: 50.

Long-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
20 : 13 : 0.45 :: 35.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
 8 :  8 : 0.76 :: 64.

Short-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
 7 :  4 : 0.23 :: 25.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together :
32 : 24 : 0.64 :: 57.

The two illegitimate unions together :
27 : 17 : 0.40 :: 30.

The fertility, therefore, of the two legitimate unions together to that of the
two illegitimate unions, as judged by the proportional number of flowers which
yielded capsules, is as 100 to 84. Judging by the average weight of seeds per
capsule produced by the two kinds of unions, the ratio is as 100 to 63. On
another occasion a large number of flowers of both forms were fertilised in the
same manner, but no account of their number was kept. The seeds, however, were
carefully counted, and the averages are shown in the right hand column. The
ratio for the number of seeds produced by the two legitimate compared with the
two illegitimate unions is here 100 to 53, which is probably more accurate than
the foregoing one of 100 to 63.

TABLE 1.11. Primula Sinensis (from Hildebrand).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of good Capsules produced.
Column 4: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
14 : 14 : 41.

Long-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union :
26 : 26 : 18.

Long-styled by pollen from same flower. Illegitimate union :
27 : 21 : 17.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
14 : 14 : 44.

Short-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union :
16 : 16 : 20.

Short-styled by pollen from the same flower. Illegitimate union :
21 : 11 : 8.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together :
28 : 28 : 43.

The two illegitimate unions together (own-form pollen):
42 : 42 : 18.

The two illegitimate unions together (pollen from the same flower ):
48 : 32 : 13.

Hildebrand in the paper above referred to gives the results of his experiments
on the present species; and these are shown in a condensed form in Table 1.11.
Besides using for the illegitimate unions pollen from a distinct plant of the
same form, as was always done by me, he tried, in addition, the effects of the
plant's own pollen. He counted the seeds.

It is remarkable that here all the flowers which were fertilised legitimately,
as well as those fertilised illegitimately with pollen from a distinct plant
belonging to the same form, yielded capsules; and from this fact it might be
inferred that the two forms were reciprocally much more fertile in his case than
in mine. But his illegitimately fertilised capsules from both forms contained
fewer seeds relatively to the legitimately fertilised capsules than in my
experiments; for the ratio in his case is as 42 to 100, instead of, as in mine,
as 53 to 100. Fertility is a very variable element with most plants, being
determined by the conditions to which they are subjected, of which fact I have
observed striking instances with the present species; and this may account for
the difference between my results and those of Hildebrand. His plants were kept
in a room, and perhaps were grown in too small pots or under some other
unfavourable conditions, for his capsules in almost every case contained a
smaller number of seeds than mine, as may be seen by comparing the right hand
columns in Tables 1.10 and 1.11.

The most interesting point in Hildebrand's experiments is the difference in the
effects of illegitimate fertilisation with a flower's own pollen, and with that
from a distinct plant of the same form. In the latter case all the flowers
produced capsules, whilst only 67 out of 100 of those fertilised with their own
pollen produced capsules. The self-fertilised capsules also contained seeds, as
compared with capsules from flowers fertilised with pollen from a distinct plant
of the same form, in the ratio of 72 to 100.

In order to ascertain how far the present species was spontaneously self-
fertile, five long-styled plants were protected by me from insects; and they
bore up to a given period 147 flowers which set 62 capsules; but many of these
soon fell off, showing that they had not been properly fertilised. At the same
time five short-styled plants were similarly treated, and they bore 116 flowers
which ultimately produced only seven capsules. On another occasion 13 protected
long-styled plants yielded by weight 25.9 grains of spontaneously self-
fertilised seeds. At the same time seven protected short-styled plants yielded
only half-a-grain weight of seeds. Therefore the long-styled plants yielded
nearly 24 times as many spontaneously self-fertilised seeds as did the same
number of short-styled plants. The chief cause of this great difference appears
to be, that when the corolla of a long-styled plant falls off, the anthers, from
being situated near the bottom of the tube are necessarily dragged over the
stigma and leave pollen on it, as I saw when I hastened the fall of nearly
withered flowers; whereas in the short-styled flowers, the stamens are seated at
the mouth of the corolla, and in falling off do not brush over the lowly-seated
stigmas. Hildebrand likewise protected some long-styled and short-styled plants,
but neither ever yielded a single capsule. He thinks that the difference in our
results may be accounted for by his plants having been kept in a room and never
having been shaken; but this explanation seems to me doubtful; his plants were
in a less fertile condition than mine, as shown by the difference in the number
of seeds produced, and it is highly probable that their lessened fertility would
have interfered with especial force with their capacity for producing self-
fertilised seeds.

[Primula auricula. (1/11. According to Kerner our garden auriculas are descended
from P. pubescens, Jacq., which is a hybrid between the true P. auricula and
hirsuta. This hybrid has now been propagated for about 300 years, and produces,
when legitimately fertilised, a large number of seeds; the long-styled forms
yielding an average number of 73, and the short-styled 98 seeds per capsule: see
his "Geschichte der Aurikel" 'Zeitschr. des Deutschen und Oest. Alpen-Vereins'
Band 6 page 52. Also 'Die Primulaceen-Bastarten' 'Oest. Botanische Zeitschrift'
1835 Numbers 3, 4 and 5.)

This species is heterostyled, like the preceding ones; but amongst the varieties
distributed by florists the long-styled form is rare, as it is not valued. There
is a much greater relative inequality in the length of the pistil and stamens in
the two forms of the auricula than in the cowslip; the pistil in the long-styled
being nearly four times as long as that in the short-styled, in which it is
barely longer than the ovarium. The stigma is nearly of the same shape in both
forms, but is rougher in the long-styled, though the difference is not so great
as between the two forms of the cowslip. In the long-styled plants the stamens
are very short, rising but little above the ovarium. The pollen-grains of these
short stamens, when distended with water, were barely 5/6000 of an inch in
diameter, whereas those from the long stamens of the short-styled plants were
barely 7/6000, showing a relative difference of about 71 to 100. The smaller
grains of the long-styled plant are also much more transparent, and before
distention with water more triangular in outline than those of the other form.
Mr. Scott compared ten plants of both forms growing under similar conditions,
and found that, although the long-styled plant produced more umbels and more
capsules than the short-styled, yet they yielded fewer seeds, in the ratio of 66
to 100. (1/12. 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8 1864 page 86.)
Three short-styled plants were protected by me from the access of insects, and
they did not produce a single seed. Mr. Scott protected six plants of both
forms, and found them excessively sterile. The pistil of the long-styled form
stands so high above the anthers, that it is scarcely possible that pollen
should reach the stigma without some aid; and one of Mr. Scott's long-styled
plants which yielded a few seeds (only 18 in number) was infested by aphides,
and he does not doubt that these had imperfectly fertilised it.

I tried a few experiments by reciprocally fertilising the two forms in the same
manner as before, but my plants were unhealthy, so I will give, in a condensed
form, the results of Mr. Scott's experiments. For fuller particulars with
respect to this and the five following species, the paper lately referred to may
be consulted. In each case the fertility of the two legitimate unions, taken
together, is compared with that of the two illegitimate unions together, by the
same two standards as before, namely, by the proportional number of flowers
which produced good capsules, and by the average number of seeds per capsule.
The fertility of the legitimate unions is always taken at 100.

By the first standard, the fertility of the two legitimate unions of the
auricula is to that of the two illegitimate unions as 100 to 80; and by the
second standard as 100 to 15.

Primula Sikkimensis.

According to Mr. Scott, the pistil of the long-styled form is fully four times
as long as that of the short-styled, but their stigmas are nearly alike in shape
and roughness. The stamens do not differ so much in relative length as the
pistils. The pollen-grains differ in a marked manner in the two forms; "those of
the long-styled plants are sharply triquetrous, smaller, and more transparent
than those of the short-styled, which are of a bluntly triangular form." The
fertility of the two legitimate unions to that of the two illegitimate unions is
by the first standard as 100 to 95, and by the second standard as 100 to 31.

Primula cortusoides.

The pistil of the long-styled form is about thrice as long as that of the short-
styled, the stigma being double as long and covered with much longer papillae.
The pollen-grains of the short-styled form are, as usual, "larger, less
transparent, and more bluntly triangular than those from the long-styled
plants." The fertility of the two legitimate unions to that of the two
illegitimate unions is by the first standard as 100 to 74, and by the second
standard as 100 to 66.

Primula involucrata.

The pistil of the long-styled form is about thrice as long as that of the short-
styled; the stigma of the former is globular and closely beset with papillae,
whilst that of the short-styled is smooth and depressed on the apex. The pollen-
grains of the two forms differ in size and transparency as before, but not in
shape. The fertility of the two legitimate to that of the two illegitimate
unions is by the first standard as 100 to 72; and by the second standard as 100
to 47.

Primula farinosa.

According to Mr. Scott, the pistil of the long-styled form is only about twice
as long as that of the short-styled. The stigmas of the two forms differ but
little in shape. The pollen-grains differ in the usual manner in size, but not
in form. The fertility of the two legitimate to that of the two illegitimate
unions is by the first standard as 100 to 71, and by the second standard as 100
to 44.]

SUMMARY ON THE FOREGOING HETEROSTYLED SPECIES OF PRIMULA.

TABLE 1.12. Summary on the Fertility of the two Legitimate Unions, compared with
that of the two Illegitimate Unions, in the genus Primula. The former taken at
100.

Column 1: Name of Species.
Column 2: Illegitimate Unions, Judged of by the Proportional Number of Flowers
which produced Capsules.
Column 3: Illegitimate Unions, Judged of by the Average Number (or Weight in
some cases) of Seeds per Capsule.

Primula veris : 69 : 65.

Primula elatior : 27 : 75 (Probably too high).

Primula vulgaris : 60 : 54 (Perhaps too low).

Primula Sinensis : 84 : 63.

Primula Sinensis (second trial) : ? : 53.
Primula Sinensis (after Hildebrand) : 100 : 42.

Primula auricula (Scott) : 80 : 15.

Primula Sikkimensis (Scott): 95 : 31.

Primula cortusoides (Scott): 74 : 66.

Primula involucrata (Scott): 72 : 48.

Primula farinosa (Scott): 71 : 44.

Average of the nine species : 88.4 : 61.8.

The fertility of the long-and short-styled plants of the above species of
Primula, when the two forms are fertilised legitimately, and illegitimately with
pollen of the same form taken from a distinct plant, has now been given. The
results are seen in Table 1.12; the fertility being judged by two standards,
namely, by that of the proportional number of flowers which yielded capsules,
and by that of the average number of seeds per capsule. But for full accuracy
many more observations, under varied conditions, would be requisite.

With plants of all kinds some flowers generally fail to produce capsules, from
various accidental causes; but this source of error has been eliminated, as far
as possible, in all the previous cases, by the manner in which the calculations
have been made. Supposing, for instance, that 20 flowers were fertilised
legitimately and yielded 18 capsules, and that 30 flowers were fertilised
illegitimately and yielded 15 capsules, we may assume that on an average an
equal proportion of the flowers in both lots would fail to produce capsules from
various accidental causes; and the ratio of 18/20 to 15/30, or as 100 to 56 (in
whole numbers), would show the proportional number of capsules due to the two
methods of fertilisation; and the number 56 would appear in the left-hand column
of Table 1.12, and in my other tables. With respect to the average number of
seeds per capsule hardly anything need be said: supposing that the legitimately
fertilised capsules contained, on an average, 50 seeds, and the illegitimately
fertilised capsules 25 seeds; then as 50 is to 25 so is 100 to 50; and the
latter number would appear in the right hand column.

It is impossible to look at the above table and doubt that the legitimate unions
between the two forms of the above nine species of Primula are much more fertile
than the illegitimate unions; although in the latter case pollen was always
taken from a distinct plant of the same form. There is, however, no close
correspondence in the two rows of figures, which give, according to the two
standards, the difference of fertility between the legitimate and illegitimate
unions. Thus all the flowers of P. Sinensis which were illegitimately fertilised
by Hildebrand produced capsules; but these contained only 42 per cent of the
number of seeds yielded by the legitimately fertilised capsules. So again, 95
per cent of the illegitimately fertilised flowers of P. Sikkimensis produced
capsules; but these contained only 31 per cent of the number of seeds in the
legitimate capsules. On the other hand, with P. elatior only 27 per cent of the
illegitimately fertilised flowers yielded capsules; but these contained nearly
75 per cent of the legitimate number of seeds. It appears that the setting of
the flowers, that is, the production of capsules whether good or bad, is not so
much influenced by legitimate and illegitimate fertilisation as is the number of
seeds which the capsules contain. For, as may be seen at the bottom of Table
1.12, 88.4 per cent of the illegitimately fertilised flowers yielded capsules;
but these contained only 61.8 per cent of seeds, in comparison, in each case,
with the legitimately fertilised flowers and capsules of the same species.
There is another point which deserves notice, namely, the relative degree of
infertility in the several species of the long-styled and short-styled flowers,
when both are illegitimately fertilised. The data may be found in the earlier
tables, and in those given by Mr. Scott in the Paper already referred to. If we
call the number of seeds per capsule produced by the illegitimately fertilised
long-styled flowers 100, the seeds from the illegitimately fertilised short-
styled flowers will be represented by the following numbers (Table 1.a.):--

TABLE 1.a.

Primula veris : 71.

Primula elatior : 44 (Probably too low).

Primula vulgaris : 36 (Perhaps too low).

Primula Sinensis : 71.

Primula auricula : 119.

Primula Sikkimensis : 57.

Primula cortusoides : 93.

Primula involucrata : 74.

Primula farinosa : 63.

We thus see that, with the exception of P. auricula, the long-styled flowers of
all nine species are more fertile than the short-styled flowers, when both forms
are illegitimately fertilised. Whether P. auricula really differs from the other
species in this respect I can form no opinion, as the result may have been
accidental. The degree of self-fertility of a plant depends on two elements,
namely, on the stigma receiving its own pollen and on its more or less efficient
action when placed there. Now as the anthers of the short-styled flowers of
several species of Primula stand directly above the stigma, their pollen is more
likely to fall on it, or to be carried down to it by insects, than in the case
of the long-styled form. It appears probable, therefore, at first sight, that
the lessened capacity of the short-styled flowers to be fertilised with their
own pollen, is a special adaptation for counteracting their greater liability to
receive their own pollen, and thus for checking self-fertilisation. But from
facts with respect to other species hereafter to be given, this view can hardly
be admitted. In accordance with the above liability, when some of the species of
Primula were allowed to fertilise themselves spontaneously under a net, all
insects being excluded, except such minute ones as Thrips, the short-styled
flowers, notwithstanding their greater innate self-sterility, yielded more seed
than did the long-styled. None of the species, however, when insects were
excluded, made a near approach to full fertility. But the long-styled form of P.
Sinensis gave, under these circumstances, a considerable number of seeds, as the
corolla in falling off drags the anthers, which are seated low down in the tube,
over the stigma, and thus leaves plenty of pollen on it.

HOMOSTYLED SPECIES OF PRIMULA.

It has now been shown that nine of the species in this genus exist under two
forms, which differ not only in structure but in function. Besides these Mr.
Scott enumerates 27 other species which are heterostyled (1/13. H. Muller has
given in 'Nature' December 10, 1874 page 110, a drawing of one of these species,
viz. The alpine P. villosa, and shows that it is fertilised exclusively by
Lepidoptera.); and to these probably others will be hereafter added.
Nevertheless, some species are homostyled; that is, they exist only under a
single form; but much caution is necessary on this head, as several species when
cultivated are apt to become equal-styled. Mr. Scott believes that P. Scotica,
verticillata, a variety of Sibirica, elata, mollis, and longiflora, are truly
homostyled; and to these may be added, according to Axell, P. stricta. (1/14.
Koch was aware that this species was homostyled: see "Treviranus uber Dichogamie
nach Sprengel und Darwin" 'Botanische Zeitung' January 2, 1863 page 4.) Mr.
Scott experimented on P. Scotica, mollis, and verticillata, and found that their
flowers yielded an abundance of seeds when fertilised with their own pollen.
This shows that they are not heterostyled in function. P. Scotica is, however,
only moderately fertile when insects are excluded, but this depends merely on
the coherent pollen not readily falling on the stigma without their aid. Mr.
Scott also found that the capsules of P. verticillata contained rather more seed
when the flowers were fertilised with pollen from a distinct plant than when
with their own pollen; and from this fact he infers that they are sub-
heterostyled in function, though not in structure. But there is no evidence that
two sets of individuals exist, which differ slightly in function and are adapted
for reciprocal fertilisation; and this is the essence of heterostylism. The mere
fact of a plant being more fertile with pollen from a distinct individual than
with its own pollen, is common to very many species, as I have shown in my work
'On the Effects of Cross and Self-fertilisation.'

Hottonia palustris.

This aquatic member of the Primulaceae is conspicuously heterostyled, as the
pistil of the long-styled form projects far out of the flower, the stamens being
enclosed within the tube; whilst the stamens of the short-styled flower project
far outwards, the pistil being enclosed. This difference between the two forms
has attracted the attention of various botanists, and that of Sprengel, in 1793,
who, with his usual sagacity, adds that he does not believe the existence of the
two forms to be accidental, though he cannot explain their purpose. (1/15. 'Das
entdeckte Geheimniss der Nature' page 103.) The pistil of the long-styled form
is more than twice as long as that of the short-styled, with the stigma rather
smaller, though rougher. H. Muller gives figures of the stigmatic papillae of
the two forms, and those of the long-styled are seen to be more than double the
length, and much thicker than the papillae of the short-styled form. (1/16. 'Die
Befruchtung' etc. page 350.) The anthers in the one form do not stand exactly on
a level with the stigma in the other form; for the distance between the organs
is greater in the short-styled than in the long-styled flowers in the proportion
of 100 to 71. In dried specimens soaked in water the anthers of the short-styled
form are larger than those of the long-styled, in the ratio of 100 to 83. The
pollen-grains, also, from the short-styled flowers are conspicuously larger than
those from the long-styled; the ratio between the diameters of the moistened
grains being as 100 to 64, according to my measurements, but according to the
measurements of H. Muller as 100 to 61; and his are probably the more accurate
of the two. The contents of the larger pollen-grains appear more coarsely
granular and of a browner tint, than those in the smaller grains. The two forms
of Hottonia thus agree closely in most respects with those of the heterostyled
species of Primula. The flowers of Hottonia are cross-fertilised, according to
Muller, chiefly by Diptera.

Mr. Scott made a few trials on a short-styled plant, and found that the
legitimate unions were in all ways more fertile than the illegitimate (1/17.
'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8 1864 page 79.); but since the
publication of his paper H. Muller has made much fuller experiments, and I give
his results in Table 1.13, drawn up in accordance with my usual plan:--

TABLE 1.13. Hottonia palustris (from H. Muller).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Capsules examined.
Column 3: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union:
34 : 91.4.

Long-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union:
18 : 77.5.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
30 : 66.2.

Short-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union:
19 : 18.7.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together:
64 : 78.8.

The two illegitimate unions together:
37 : 48.1.

The most remarkable point in this table is the small average number of seeds
from the short-styled flowers when illegitimately fertilised, and the unusually
large average number of seeds yielded by the illegitimately fertilised long-
styled flowers, relatively in both cases to the product of the legitimately
fertilised flowers. (1/18. H. Muller says 'Die Befruchtung' etc. page 352, that
the long-styled flowers, when illegitimately fertilised, yield as many seeds as
when legitimately fertilised; but by adding up the number of seeds from all the
capsules produced by the two methods of fertilisation, as given by him, I arrive
at the results shown in Table 1.13. The average number in the long-styled
capsules, when legitimately fertilised, is 91.4, and when illegitimately
fertilised, 77.5; or as 100 to 85. H. Muller agrees with me that this is the
proper manner of viewing the case.) The two legitimate unions compared with the
two illegitimate together yield seeds in the ratio of 100 to 61.

H. Muller also tried the effects of illegitimately fertilising the long-styled
and short-styled flowers with their own pollen, instead of with that from
another plant of the same form; and the results are very striking. For the
capsules from the long-styled flowers thus treated contained, on an average,
only 15.7 seeds instead of 77.5; and those from the short-styled 6.5, instead of
18.7 seeds per capsule. The number 6.5 agrees closely with Mr. Scott's result
from the same form similarly fertilised.

From some observations by Dr. Torrey, Hottonia inflata, an inhabitant of the
United States, does not appear to be heterostyled, but is remarkable from
producing cleistogamic flowers, as will be seen in the last chapter of this
volume.

Besides the genera Primula and Hottonia, Androsace (vel Gregoria, vel Aretia)
vitalliana is heterostyled. Mr. Scott fertilised with their own pollen 21
flowers on three short-styled plants in the Edinburgh Botanic Gardens, and not
one yielded a single seed; but eight of them which were fertilised with pollen
from one of the other plants of the same form, set two empty capsules. (1/19.
See also Treviranus in 'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 6 on this plant being
dimorphic.) He was able to examine only dried specimens of the long-styled
forms. But the evidence seems sufficient to leave hardly a doubt that Androsace
is heterostyled. Fritz Muller sent me from South Brazil dried flowers of a
Statice which he believed to be heterostyled. In the one form the pistil was
considerably longer and the stamens slightly shorter than the corresponding
organs in the other form. But as in the shorter-styled form the stigmas reached
up to the anthers of the same flower, and as I could not detect in the dried
specimens of the two forms any difference in their stigmas, or in the size of
their pollen-grains, I dare not rank this plant as heterostyled. From statements
made by Vaucher I was led to think that Soldanella alpina was heterostyled, but
it is impossible that Kerner, who has closely studied this plant, could have
overlooked the fact. So again from other statements it appeared probable that
Pyrola might be heterostyled, but H. Muller examined for me two species in North
Germany, and found this not to be the case.


CHAPTER II.

HYBRID PRIMULAS.

The oxlip a hybrid naturally produced between Primula veris and vulgaris.
The differences in structure and function between the two parent-species.
Effects of crossing long-styled and short-styled oxlips with one another and
with the two forms of both parent-species.
Character of the offspring from oxlips artificially self-fertilised and cross-
fertilised in a state of nature.
Primula elatior shown to be a distinct species.
Hybrids between other heterostyled species of Primula.
Supplementary note on spontaneously produced hybrids in the genus Verbascum.

The various species of Primula have produced in a state of nature throughout
Europe an extraordinary number of hybrid forms. For instance, Professor Kerner
has found no less than twenty-five such forms in the Alps. (2/1. "Die
Primulaceen-Bastarten" 'Oesterr. Botanische Zeitschrift' Jahr 1875 Numbers 3, 4
and 5. See also Godron on hybrid Primulas in 'Bull. Soc. Bot. de France' tome 10
1853 page 178. Also in 'Revue des Sciences Nat.' 1875 page 331.) The frequent
occurrence of hybrids in this genus no doubt has been favoured by most of the
species being heterostyled, and consequently requiring cross-fertilisation by
insects; yet in some other genera, species which are not heterostyled and which
in some respects appear not well adapted for hybrid-fertilisation, have likewise
been largely hybridised. In certain districts of England, the common oxlip--a
hybrid between the cowslip (P. veris, vel officinalis) and the primrose (P.
vulgaris, vel acaulis)--is frequently found, and it occurs occasionally almost
everywhere. Owing to the frequency of this intermediate hybrid form, and to the
existence of the Bardfield oxlip (P. elatior), which resembles to a certain
extent the common oxlip, the claim of the three forms to rank as distinct
species has been discussed oftener and at greater length than that of almost any
other plant. Linnaeus considered P. veris, vulgaris and elatior to be varieties
of the same species, as do some distinguished botanists at the present day;
whilst others who have carefully studied these plants do not doubt that they are
distinct species. The following observations prove, I think, that the latter
view is correct; and they further show that the common oxlip is a hybrid between
P. veris and vulgaris.

The cowslip differs so conspicuously in general appearance from the primrose,
that nothing need here be said with respect to their external characters. (2/2.
The Reverend W.A. Leighton has pointed out certain differences in the form of
the capsules and seed in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History' 2nd series
volume 2 1848 page 164.) But some less obvious differences deserve notice. As
both species are heterostyled, their complete fertilisation depends on insects.
The cowslip is habitually visited during the day by the larger humble-bees
(namely Bombus muscorum and hortorum), and at night by moths, as I have seen in
the case of Cucullia. The primrose is never visited (and I speak after many
years' observation) by the larger humble-bees, and only rarely by the smaller
kinds; hence its fertilisation must depend almost exclusively on moths. There is
nothing in the structure of the flowers of the two plants which can determine
the visits of such widely different insects. But they emit a different odour,
and perhaps their nectar may have a different taste. Both the long-styled and
short-styled forms of the primrose, when legitimately and naturally fertilised,
yield on an average many more seeds per capsule than the cowslip, namely, in the
proportion of 100 to 55. When illegitimately fertilised they are likewise more
fertile than the two forms of the cowslip, as shown by the larger proportion of
their flowers which set capsules, and by the larger average number of seeds
which the capsules contain. The difference also between the number of seeds
produced by the long-styled and short-styled flowers of the primrose, when both
are illegitimately fertilised, is greater than that between the number produced
under similar circumstances by the two forms of the cowslip. The long-styled
flowers of the primrose when protected from the access of all insects, except
such minute ones as Thrips, yield a considerable number of capsules containing
on an average 19.2 seeds per capsule; whereas 18 plants of the long-styled
cowslip similarly treated did not yield a single seed.

The primrose, as every one knows, flowers a little earlier in the spring than
the cowslip, and inhabits slightly different stations and districts. The
primrose generally grows on banks or in woods, whilst the cowslip is found in
more open places. The geographical range of the two forms is different. Dr.
Bromfield remarks that "the primrose is absent from all the interior region of
northern Europe, where the cowslip is indigenous." (2/3. 'Phytologist' volume 3
page 694.) In Norway, however, both plants range to the same degree of north
latitude. (2/4. H. Lecoq 'Geograph. Bot. de l'Europe' tome 8 1858 pages 141,
144. See also 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History' 9 1842 pages 156, 515.
Also Boreau 'Flore du centre de la France' 1840 tome 2 page 376. With respect to
the rarity of P. veris in western Scotland, see H.C. Watson 'Cybele Britannica'
2 page 293.)

The cowslip and primrose, when intercrossed, behave like distinct species, for
they are far from being mutually fertile. Gartner crossed 27 flowers of P.
vulgaris with pollen of P. veris, and obtained 16 capsules; but these did not
contain any good seed. (2/5. 'Bastarderzeugung' 1849 page 721.) He also crossed
21 flowers of P. veris with pollen of P. vulgaris; and now he got only five
capsules, containing seed in a still less perfect condition. Gartner knew
nothing about heterostylism; and his complete failure may perhaps be accounted
for by his having crossed together the same forms of the cowslip and primrose;
for such crosses would have been of an illegitimate as well as of a hybrid
nature, and this would have increased their sterility. My trials were rather
more fortunate. Twenty-one flowers, consisting of both forms of the cowslip and
primrose, were intercrossed legitimately, and yielded seven capsules (i.e. 33
per cent), containing on an average 42 seeds; some of these seeds, however, were
so poor that they probably would not have germinated. Twenty-one flowers on the
same cowslip and primrose plants were also intercrossed illegitimately, and they
likewise yielded seven capsules (or 33 per cent), but these contained on an
average only 13 good and bad seeds. I should, however, state that some of the
above flowers of the primrose were fertilised with pollen from the polyanthus,
which is certainly a variety of the cowslip, as may be inferred from the perfect
fertility inter se of the crossed offspring from these two plants. (2/6. Mr.
Scott has discussed the nature of the polyanthus ('Proceedings of the Linnean
Society' 8 Botany 1864 page 103), and arrives at a different conclusion; but I
do not think that his experiments were sufficiently numerous. The degree of
infertility of a cross is liable to much fluctuation. Pollen from the cowslip at
first appears rather more efficient on the primrose than that of the polyanthus;
for 12 flowers of both forms of the primrose, fertilised legitimately and
illegitimately with pollen of the cowslip gave five capsules, containing on an
average 32.4 seeds; whilst 18 flowers similarly fertilised by polyanthus-pollen
yielded only five capsules, containing only 22.6 seeds. On the other hand, the
seeds produced by the polyanthus-pollen were much the finest of the whole lot,
and were the only ones which germinated.) To show how sterile these hybrid
unions were I may remind the reader that 90 per cent of the flowers of the
primrose fertilised legitimately with primrose-pollen yielded capsules,
containing on an average 66 seeds; and that 54 per cent of the flowers
fertilised illegitimately yielded capsules containing on an average 35.5 seeds
per capsule. The primrose, especially the short-styled form, when fertilised by
the cowslip, is less sterile, as Gartner likewise observed, than is the cowslip
when fertilised by the primrose. The above experiments also show that a cross
between the same forms of the primrose and cowslip is much more sterile than
that between different forms of these two species.

The seeds from the several foregoing crosses were sown, but none germinated
except those from the short-styled primrose fertilised with pollen of the
polyanthus; and these seeds were the finest of the whole lot. I thus raised six
plants, and compared them with a group of wild oxlips which I had transplanted
into my garden. One of these wild oxlips produced slightly larger flowers than
the others, and this one was identical in every character (in foliage, flower-
peduncle, and flowers) with my six plants, excepting that the flowers of the
latter were tinged of a dingy red colour, from being descended from the
polyanthus.

We thus see that the cowslip and primrose cannot be crossed either way except
with considerable difficulty, that they differ conspicuously in external
appearance, that they differ in various physiological characters, that they
inhabit slightly different stations and range differently. Hence those botanists
who rank these plants as varieties ought to be able to prove that they are not
as well fixed in character as are most species; and the evidence in favour of
such instability of character appears at first sight very strong. It rests,
first, on statements made by several competent observers that they have raised
cowslips, primroses, and oxlips from seeds of the same plant; and, secondly, on
the frequent occurrence in a state of nature of plants presenting every
intermediate gradation between the cowslip and primrose.

The first statement, however, is of little value; for, heterostylism not being
formerly understood, the seed-bearing plants were in no instance protected from
the visits of insects (2/7. One author states in the 'Phytologist' volume 3 page
703 that he covered with bell-glasses some cowslips, primroses, etc., on which
he experimented. He specifies all the details of his experiment, but does not
say that he artificially fertilised his plants; yet he obtained an abundance of
seed, which is simply impossible. Hence there must have been some strange error
in these experiments, which may be passed over as valueless.); and there would
be almost as much risk of an isolated cowslip, or of several cowslips if
consisting of the same form, being crossed by a neighbouring primrose and
producing oxlips, as of one sex of a dioecious plant, under similar
circumstances, being crossed by the opposite sex of an allied and neighbouring
species. Mr. H.C. Watson, a critical and most careful observer, made many
experiments by sowing the seeds of cowslips and of various kinds of oxlips, and
arrived at the following conclusion, namely, "that seeds of a cowslip can
produce cowslips and oxlips, and that seeds of an oxlip can produce cowslips,
oxlips, and primroses." (2/8. 'Phytologist' 2 pages 217, 852; 3 page 43.) This
conclusion harmonises perfectly with the view that in all cases, when such
results have been obtained, the unprotected cowslips have been crossed by
primroses, and the unprotected oxlips by either cowslips or primroses; for in
this latter case we might expect, by the aid of reversion, which notoriously
comes into powerful action with hybrids, that the two parent-forms in appearance
pure, as well as many intermediate gradations, would be occasionally produced.
Nevertheless the two following statements offer considerable difficulty. The
Reverend Professor Henslow raised from seeds of a cowslip growing in his garden,
various kinds of oxlips and one perfect primrose; but a statement in the same
paper perhaps throws light on this anomalous result. (2/9. Loudon's 'Magazine of
Natural History' 3 1830 page 409.) Professor Henslow had previously transplanted
into his garden a cowslip, which completely changed its appearance during the
following year, and now resembled an oxlip. Next year again it changed its
character, and produced, in addition to the ordinary umbels, a few single-
flowered scapes, bearing flowers somewhat smaller and more deeply coloured than
those of the common primrose. From what I have myself observed with oxlips, I
cannot doubt that this plant was an oxlip in a highly variable condition, almost
like that of the famous Cytisus adami. This presumed oxlip was propagated by
offsets, which were planted in different parts of the garden; and if Professor
Henslow took by mistake seeds from one of these plants, especially if it had
been crossed by a primrose, the result would be quite intelligible. Another case
is still more difficult to understand: Dr. Herbert raised, from the seeds of a
highly cultivated red cowslip, cowslips, oxlips of various kinds, and a
primrose. (2/10. 'Transactions of the Horticultural Society' 4 page 19.) This
case, if accurately recorded, which I much doubt, is explicable only on the
improbable assumption that the red cowslip was not of pure parentage. With
species and varieties of many kinds, when intercrossed, one is sometimes
strongly prepotent over the other; and instances are known of a variety crossed
by another, producing offspring which in certain characters, as in colour,
hairiness, etc., have proved identical with the pollen-bearing parent, and quite
dissimilar to the mother-plant (2/11. I have given instances in my work 'On the
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication' chapter 15 2nd edition
volume 2 page 69.); but I do not know of any instance of the offspring of a
cross perfectly resembling, in a considerable number of important characters,
the father alone. It is, therefore, very improbable that a pure cowslip crossed
by a primrose should ever produce a primrose in appearance pure. Although the
facts given by Dr. Herbert and Professor Henslow are difficult to explain, yet
until it can be shown that a cowslip or a primrose, carefully protected from
insects, will give birth to at least oxlips, the cases hitherto recorded have
little weight in leading us to admit that the cowslip and primrose are varieties
of one and the same species.

Negative evidence is of little value; but the following facts may be worth
giving:--Some cowslips which had been transplanted from the fields into a
shrubbery were again transplanted into highly manured land. In the following
year they were protected from insects, artificially fertilised, and the seed
thus procured was sown in a hotbed. The young plants were afterwards planted
out, some in very rich soil, some in stiff poor clay, some in old peat, and some
in pots in the greenhouse; so that these plants, 765 in number, as well as their
parents, were subjected to diversified and unnatural treatment; but not one of
them presented the least variation except in size--those in the peat attaining
almost gigantic dimensions, and those in the clay being much dwarfed.

I do not, of course, doubt that cowslips exposed during SEVERAL successive
generations to changed conditions would vary, and that this might occasionally
occur in a state of nature. Moreover, from the law of analogical variation, the
varieties of any one species of Primula would probably in some cases resemble
other species of the genus. For instance I raised a red primrose from seed from
a protected plant, and the flowers, though still resembling those of the
primrose, were borne during one season in umbels on a long foot-stalk like that
of a cowslip.

With regard to the second class of facts in support of the cowslip and primrose
being ranked as mere varieties, namely, the well-ascertained existence in a
state of nature of numerous linking forms (2/12. See an excellent article on
this subject by Mr. H.C. Watson in the 'Phytologist' volume 3 page 43.):--If it
can be shown that the common wild oxlip, which is intermediate in character
between the cowslip and primrose, resembles in sterility and other essential
respects a hybrid plant, and if it can further be shown that the oxlip, though
in a high degree sterile, can be fertilised by either parent-species, thus
giving rise to still finer gradational links, then the presence of such linking
forms in a state of nature ceases to be an argument of any weight in favour of
the cowslip and primrose being varieties, and becomes, in fact, an argument on
the other side. The hybrid origin of a plant in a state of nature can be
recognised by four tests: first, by its occurrence only where both presumed
parent-species exist or have recently existed; and this holds good, as far as I
can discover, with the oxlip; but the P. elatior of Jacq., which, as we shall
presently see, constitutes a distinct species, must not be confounded with the
common oxlip. Secondly, by the supposed hybrid plant being nearly intermediate
in character between the two parent-species, and especially by its resembling
hybrids artificially made between the same two species. Now the oxlip is
intermediate in character, and resembles in every respect, except in the colour
of the corolla, hybrids artificially produced between the primrose and the
polyanthus, which latter is a variety of the cowslip. Thirdly, by the supposed
hybrids being more or less sterile when crossed inter se: but to try this fairly
two distinct plants of the same parentage, and not two flowers on the same
plant, should be crossed; for many pure species are more or less sterile with
pollen from the same individual plant; and in the case of hybrids from
heterostyled species the opposite forms should be crossed. Fourthly and lastly,
by the supposed hybrids being much more fertile when crossed with either pure
parent-species than when crossed inter se, but still not as fully fertile as the
parent-species.

For the sake of ascertaining the two latter points, I transplanted a group of
wild oxlips into my garden. They consisted of one long-styled and three short-
styled plants, which, except in the corolla of one being slightly larger,
resembled each other closely. The trials which were made, and the results
obtained, are shown in tables 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.17 and 2.18. No less than
twenty different crosses are necessary in order to ascertain fully the fertility
of hybrid heterostyled plants, both inter se and with their two parent-species.
In this instance 256 flowers were crossed in the course of four seasons. I may
mention, as a mere curiosity, that if any one were to raise hybrids between two
trimorphic heterostyled species, he would have to make 90 distinct unions in
order to ascertain their fertility in all ways; and as he would have to try at
least 10 flowers in each case, he would be compelled to fertilise 900 flowers
and count their seeds. This would probably exhaust the patience of the most
patient man.

TABLE 2.14.  Crosses inter se between the two forms of the common Oxlip.

Column 1: Illegitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 20 flowers fertilised, did
not produce one capsule.

Column 2: Legitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of long-styled oxlip: 10 flowers fertilised, did
not produce one capsule.

Column 3: Illegitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by its own pollen: 24 flowers fertilised, produced five
capsules, containing 6, 10, 20, 8, and 14 seeds. Average 11.6.

Column 4: Legitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 10 flowers fertilised, did
not produce one capsule.

TABLE 2.15.  Both forms of the Oxlip crossed with Pollen of both forms of the
Cowslip, P. veris.

Column 1: Illegitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled cowslip: 18 flowers fertilised,
did not produce one capsule.

Column 2: Legitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of long-styled cowslip: 18 flowers fertilised,
produced three capsules, containing 7, 3, and 3 wretched seeds, apparently
incapable of germination.

Column 3: Illegitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by pollen of long-styled cowslip: 11 flowers fertilised,
produced one capsule, containing 13 wretched seeds.

Column 4: Legitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled cowslip: 5 flowers fertilised,
produced two capsules, containing 21 and 28 very fine seeds.

TABLE 2.16.  Both forms of the Oxlip crossed with Pollen of both forms of the
Primrose, P. vulgaris.

Column 1: Illegitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled primrose: 34 flowers fertilised,
produced two capsules, containing 5 and 12 seeds.

Column 2: Legitimate union.
Short-styled oxlip, by pollen of long-styled primrose: 26 flowers fertilised,
produced six capsules, containing 16, 20, 5, 10, 19, and 24 seeds. Average 15.7.
Many of the seeds very poor, some good.

Column 3: Illegitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by pollen of long-styled primrose: 11 flowers fertilised,
produced four capsules, containing 10, 7, 5, and 6 wretched seeds. Average 7.0.

Column 4: Legitimate union.
Long-styled oxlip, by pollen of short-styled primrose: 5 flowers fertilised,
produced five capsules, containing 26, 32, 23, 28, and 34 seeds. Average 28.6.

TABLE 2.17.  Both forms of the Cowslip crossed with Pollen of both forms of the
Oxlip.

Column 1: Illegitimate union.
Short-styled cowslip, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised, did
not produce one capsule.

Column 2: Legitimate union.
Long-styled cowslip, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced one capsule, containing 26 seeds.

Column 3: Illegitimate union.
Long-styled cowslip, by pollen of long-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced three capsules, containing 5, 6 and 14 seeds. Average 8.3.

Column 4: Legitimate union.
Short-styled cowslip, by pollen of long-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced 8 capsules, containing 58, 38, 31, 44, 23, 26, 37, and 66 seeds.
Average 40.4.

TABLE 2.18.  Both forms of the Primrose crossed with Pollen of both forms of the
Oxlip.

Column 1: Illegitimate union.
Short-styled primrose, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
did not produce one capsule.

Column 2: Legitimate union.
Long-styled primrose, by pollen of short-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced two capsules, containing 5 and 2 seeds.

Column 3: Illegitimate union.
Long-styled primrose, by pollen of long-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced 8 capsules, containing 15, 7, 12, 20, 22, 7, 16, and 13 seeds. Average
14.0.

Column 4: Legitimate union.
Short-styled primrose, by pollen of long-styled oxlip: 8 flowers fertilised,
produced 4 capsules, containing 52, 52, 42, and 49 seeds, some good and some
bad. Average 48.7.

We see in Tables 2/14 to 2/18 the number of capsules and of seeds produced, by
crossing both forms of the oxlip in a legitimate and illegitimate manner with
one another, and with the two forms of the primrose and cowslip. I may premise
that the pollen of two of the short-styled oxlips consisted of nothing but
minute aborted whitish cells; but in the third short-styled plant about one-
fifth of the grains appeared in a sound condition. Hence it is not surprising
that neither the short-styled nor the long-styled oxlip produced a single seed
when fertilised with this pollen. Nor did the pure cowslips or primroses when
illegitimately fertilised with it; but when thus legitimately fertilised they
yielded a few good seeds. The female organs of the short-styled oxlips, though
greatly deteriorated in power, were in a rather better condition than the male
organs; for though the short-styled oxlips yielded no seed when fertilised by
the long-styled oxlips, and hardly any when illegitimately fertilised by pure
cowslips or primroses, yet when legitimately fertilised by these latter species,
especially by the long-styled primrose, they yielded a moderate supply of good
seed.

The long-styled oxlip was more fertile than the three short-styled oxlips, and
about half its pollen-grains appeared sound. It bore no seed when legitimately
fertilised by the short-styled oxlips; but this no doubt was due to the badness
of the pollen of the latter; for when illegitimately fertilised (Table 2.14) by
its own pollen it produced some good seeds, though much fewer than self-
fertilised cowslips or primroses would have produced. The long-styled oxlip
likewise yielded a very low average of seed, as may be seen in the third
compartment of Tables 2.15 to 2.18, when illegitimately fertilised by, and when
illegitimately fertilising, pure cowslips and primroses. The four corresponding
legitimate unions, however, were moderately fertile, and one (namely that
between a short-styled cowslip and the long-styled oxlip in Table 2.17) was
nearly as fertile as if both parents had been pure. A short-styled primrose
legitimately fertilised by the long-styled oxlip (Table 2.18) also yielded a
moderately good average, namely 48.7 seeds; but if this short-styled primrose
had been fertilised by a long-styled primrose it would have yielded an average
of 65 seeds. If we take the ten legitimate unions together, and the ten
illegitimate unions together, we shall find that 29 per cent of the flowers
fertilised in a legitimate manner yielded capsules, these containing on an
average 27.4 good and bad seeds; whilst only 15 per cent of the flowers
fertilised in an illegitimate manner yielded capsules, these containing on an
average only 11.0 good and bad seeds.

In a previous part of this chapter it was shown that illegitimate crosses
between the long-styled form of the primrose and the long-styled cowslip, and
between the short-styled primrose and short-styled cowslip, are more sterile
than legitimate crosses between these two species; and we now see that the same
rule holds good almost invariably with their hybrid offspring, whether these are
crossed inter se, or with either parent-species; so that in this particular
case, but not as we shall presently see in other cases, the same rule prevails
with the pure unions between the two forms of the same heterostyled species,
with crosses between two distinct heterostyled species, and with their hybrid
offspring.

Seeds from the long-styled oxlip fertilised by its own pollen were sown, and
three long-styled plants raised. The first of these was identical in every
character with its parent. The second bore rather smaller flowers, of a paler
colour, almost like those of the primrose; the scapes were at first single-
flowered, but later in the season a tall thick scape, bearing many flowers, like
that of the parent oxlip, was thrown up. The third plant likewise produced at
first only single-flowered scapes, with the flowers rather small and of a darker
yellow; but it perished early. The second plant also died in September; and the
first plant, though all three grew under very favourable conditions, looked very
sickly. Hence we may infer that seedlings from self-fertilised oxlips would
hardly be able to exist in a state of nature. I was surprised to find that all
the pollen-grains in the first of these seedling oxlips appeared sound; and in
the second only a moderate number were bad. These two plants, however, had not
the power of producing a proper number of seeds; for though left uncovered and
surrounded by pure primroses and cowslips, the capsules were estimated to
include an average of only from fifteen to twenty seeds.

From having many experiments in hand, I did not sow the seed obtained by
crossing both forms of the primrose and cowslip with both forms of the oxlip,
which I now regret; but I ascertained an interesting point, namely, the
character of the offspring from oxlips growing in a state of nature near both
primroses and cowslips. The oxlips were the same plants which, after their seeds
had been collected, were transplanted and experimented on. From the seeds thus
obtained eight plants were raised, which, when they flowered, might have been
mistaken for pure primroses; but on close comparison the eye in the centre of
the corolla was seen to be of a darker yellow, and the peduncles more elongated.
As the season advanced, one of these plants threw up two naked scapes, 7 inches
in height, which bore umbels of flowers of the same character as before. This
fact led me to examine the other plants after they had flowered and were dug up;
and I found that the flower-peduncles of all sprung from an extremely short
common scape, of which no trace can be found in the pure primrose. Hence these
plants are beautifully intermediate between the oxlip and the primrose,
inclining rather towards the latter; and we may safely conclude that the parent
oxlips had been fertilised by the surrounding primroses.

From the various facts now given, there can be no doubt that the common oxlip is
a hybrid between the cowslip (P. veris, Brit. Fl.) and the primrose (P.
vulgaris, Brit. Fl.), as has been surmised by several botanists. It is probable
that oxlips may be produced either from the cowslip or the primrose as the seed-
bearer, but oftenest from the latter, as I judge from the nature of the stations
in which oxlips are generally found (2/13. See also on this head Hardwicke's
'Science Gossip' 1867 pages 114, 137.), and from the primrose when crossed by
the cowslip being more fertile than, conversely, the cowslip by the primrose.
The hybrids themselves are also rather more fertile when crossed with the
primrose than with the cowslip. Whichever may be the seed-bearing plant, the
cross is probably between different forms of the two species; for we have seen
that legitimate hybrid unions are more fertile than illegitimate hybrid unions.
Moreover a friend in Surrey found that 29 oxlips which grew in the neighbourhood
of his house consisted of 13 long-styled and 16 short-styled plants; now, if the
parent-plants had been illegitimately united, either the long- or short-styled
form would have greatly preponderated, as we shall hereafter see good reason to
believe. The case of the oxlip is interesting; for hardly any other instance is
known of a hybrid spontaneously arising in such large numbers over so wide an
extent of country. The common oxlip (not the P. elatior of Jacq.) is found
almost everywhere throughout England, where both cowslips and primroses grow. In
some districts, as I have seen near Hartfield in Sussex and in parts of Surrey,
specimens may be found on the borders of almost every field and small wood. In
other districts the oxlip is comparatively rare: near my own residence I have
found, during the last twenty-five years, not more than five or six plants or
groups of plants. It is difficult to conjecture what is the cause of this
difference in their number. It is almost necessary that a plant, or several
plants belonging to the same form, of one parent-species, should grow near the
opposite form of the other parent-species; and it is further necessary that both
species should be frequented by the same kind of insect, no doubt a moth. The
cause of the rare appearance of the oxlip in certain districts may be the rarity
of some moth, which in other districts habitually visits both the primrose and
cowslip.

Finally, as the cowslip and primrose differ in the various characters above
specified,--as they are in a high degree sterile when intercrossed,--as there is
no trustworthy evidence that either species, when uncrossed, has ever given
birth to the other species or to any intermediate form,--and as the intermediate
forms which are often found in a state of nature have been shown to be more or
less sterile hybrids of the first or second generation,--we must for the future
look at the cowslip and primrose as good and true species.

Primula elatior, Jacq., or the Bardfield Oxlip, is found in England only in two
or three of the eastern counties. On the Continent it has a somewhat different
range from that of the cowslip and primrose; and it inhabits some districts
where neither of these species live. (2/14. For England, see Hewett C. Watson
'Cybele Britannica' volume 2 1849 page 292. For the Continent, see Lecoq
'Geograph. Botanique de l'Europe' tome 8 1858 page 142. For the Alps see 'Annals
and Magazine of Natural History' volume 9 1842 pages 156 and 515.) In general
appearance it differs so much from the common oxlip, that no one accustomed to
see both forms in the living state could afterwards confound them; but there is
scarcely more than a single character by which they can be distinctly defined,
namely, their linear-oblong capsules equalling the calyx in length. (2/15.
Babington 'Manual of British Botany' 1851 page 258.) The capsules when mature
differ conspicuously, owing to their length, from those of the cowslip and
primrose. With respect to the fertility of the two forms when these are united
in the four possible methods, they behave like the other heterostyled species of
the genus, but differ somewhat (see Tables 1.8 and 1.12.) in the smaller
proportion of the illegitimately fertilised flowers which set capsules. That P.
elatior is not a hybrid is certain, for when the two forms were legitimately
united they yielded the large average of 47.1 seeds, and when illegitimately
united 35.5 per capsule; whereas, of the four possible unions (Table 2.14)
between the two forms of the common oxlip which we know to be a hybrid, one
alone yielded any seed; and in this case the average number was only 11.6 per
capsule. Moreover I could not detect a single bad pollen-grain in the anthers of
the short-styled P. elatior; whilst in two short-styled plants of the common
oxlip all the grains were bad, as were a large majority in a third plant. As the
common oxlip is a hybrid between the primrose and cowslip, it is not surprising
that eight long-styled flowers of the primrose, fertilised by pollen from the
long-styled common oxlip, produced eight capsules (Table 1.18), containing,
however, only a low average of seeds; whilst the same number of flowers of the
primrose, similarly fertilised by the long-styled Bardfield oxlip, produced only
a single capsule; this latter plant being an altogether distinct species from
the primrose. Plants of P. elatior have been propagated by seed in a garden for
twenty-five years, and have kept all this time quite constant, excepting that in
some cases the flowers varied a little in size and tint. (2/16. See Mr. H.
Doubleday in the 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1867 page 435, also Mr. W. Marshall
ibid. page 462.) Nevertheless, according to Mr. H.C. Watson and Dr. Bromfield
(2/17. 'Phytologist' volume 1 page 1001 and volume 3 page 695.), plants may be
occasionally found in a state of nature, in which most of the characters by
which this species can be distinguished from P. veris and vulgaris fail; but
such intermediate forms are probably due to hybridisation; for Kerner states, in
the paper before referred to, that hybrids sometimes, though rarely, arise in
the Alps between P. elatior and veris.

Finally, although we may freely admit that Primula veris, vulgaris, and elatior,
as well as all the other species of the genus, are descended from a common
primordial form, yet from the facts above given, we must conclude that these
three forms are now as fixed in character as are many others which are
universally ranked as true species. Consequently they have as good a right to
receive distinct specific names as have, for instance, the ass, quagga, and
zebra.

Mr. Scott has arrived at some interesting results by crossing other heterostyled
species of Primula. (2/18. 'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8 1864
page 93 to end.) I have already alluded to his statement, that in four instances
(not to mention others) a species when crossed with a distinct one yielded a
larger number of seeds than the same species fertilised illegitimately with its
own-form pollen, though taken from a distinct plant. It has long been known from
the researches of Kolreuter and Gartner, that two species when crossed
reciprocally sometimes differ as widely as is possible in their fertility: thus
A when crossed with the pollen of B will yield a large number of seeds, whilst B
may be crossed repeatedly with pollen of A, and will never yield a single seed.
Now Mr. Scott shows in several cases that the same law holds good when two
heterostyled species of Primula are intercrossed, or when one is crossed with a
homostyled species. But the results are much more complicated than with ordinary
plants, as two heterostyled dimorphic species can be intercrossed in eight
different ways. I will give one instance from Mr. Scott. The long-styled P.
hirsuta fertilised legitimately and illegitimately with pollen from the two
forms of P. auricula, and reciprocally the long-styled P. auricula fertilised
legitimately and illegitimately with pollen from the two forms of P. hirsuta,
did not produce a single seed. Nor did the short-styled P. hirsuta when
fertilised legitimately and illegitimately with the pollen of the two forms of
P. auricula. On the other hand, the short-styled P. auricula fertilised with
pollen from the long-styled P. hirsuta yielded capsules containing on an average
no less than 56 seeds; and the short-styled P. auricula by pollen of the short-
styled P. hirsuta yielded capsules containing on an average 42 seeds per
capsule. So that out of the eight possible unions between the two forms of these
two species, six were utterly barren, and two fairly fertile. We have seen also
the same sort of extraordinary irregularity in the results of my twenty
different crosses (Tables 2.14 to 2.18), between the two forms of the oxlip,
primrose, and cowslip. Mr. Scott remarks, with respect to the results of his
trials, that they are very surprising, as they show us that "the sexual forms of
a species manifest in their respective powers for conjunction with those of
another species, physiological peculiarities which might well entitle them, by
the criterion of fertility, to specific distinction."

Finally, although P. veris and vulgaris, when crossed legitimately, and
especially when their hybrid offspring are crossed in this manner with both
parent-species, were decidedly more fertile, than when crossed in an
illegitimate manner, and although the legitimate cross effected by Mr. Scott
between P. auricula and hirsuta was more fertile, in the ratio of 56 to 42, than
the illegitimate cross, nevertheless it is very doubtful, from the extreme
irregularity of the results in the various other hybrid crosses made by Mr.
Scott, whether it can be predicted that two heterostyled species are generally
more fertile if crossed legitimately (i.e. when opposite forms are united) than
when crossed illegitimately.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON SOME WILD HYBRID VERBASCUMS.

In an early part of this chapter I remarked that few other instances could be
given of a hybrid spontaneously arising in such large numbers, and over so wide
an extent of country, as that of the common oxlip; but perhaps the number of
well-ascertained cases of naturally produced hybrid willows is equally great.
(2/19. Max Wichura 'Die Bastardbefruchtung etc. der Weiden' 1865.) Numerous
spontaneous hybrids between several species of Cistus, found near Narbonne, have
been carefully described by M. Timbal-Lagrave (2/20. 'Mem. de l'Acad. des
Sciences de Toulouse' 5e serie tome 5 page 28.), and many hybrids between an
Aceras and Orchis have been observed by Dr. Weddell. (2/21. 'Annales des Sc.
Nat.' 3e serie Bot. tome 18 page 6.) In the genus Verbascum, hybrids are
supposed to have often originated in a state of nature (2/22. See for instance
the 'English Flora' by Sir J.E. Smith 1824 volume 1 page 307.); some of these
undoubtedly are hybrids, and several hybrids have originated in gardens; but
most of these cases require, as Gartner remarks, verification. (2/23. See
Gartner 'Bastarderzeugung' 1849 page 590.) Hence the following case is worth
recording, more especially as the two species in question, V. thapsus and
lychnitis, are perfectly fertile when insects are excluded, showing that the
stigma of each flower receives its own pollen. Moreover the flowers offer only
pollen to insects, and have not been rendered attractive to them by secreting
nectar.

I transplanted a young wild plant into my garden for experimental purposes, and
when it flowered it plainly differed from the two species just mentioned and
from a third which grows in this neighbourhood. I thought that it was a strange
variety of V. thapsus. It attained the height (by measurement) of 8 feet! It was
covered with a net, and ten flowers were fertilised with pollen from the same
plant; later in the season, when uncovered, the flowers were freely visited by
pollen-collecting bees; nevertheless, although many capsules were produced, not
one contained a single seed. During the following year this same plant was left
uncovered near plants of V. thapsus and lychnitis; but again it did not produce
a single seed. Four flowers, however, which were repeatedly fertilised with
pollen of V. lychnitis, whilst the plant was temporarily kept under a net,
produced four capsules, which contained five, one, two, and two seeds; at the
same time three flowers were fertilised with pollen of V. thapsus, and these
produced two, two, and three seeds. To show how unproductive these seven
capsules were, I may state that a fine capsule from a plant of V. thapsus
growing close by contained above 700 seeds. These facts led me to search the
moderately-sized field whence my plant had been removed, and I found in it many
plants of V. thapsus and lychnitis as well as thirty-three plants intermediate
in character between these two species. These thirty-three plants differed much
from one another. In the branching of the stem they more closely resembled V.
lychnitis than V. thapsus, but in height the latter species. In the shape of
their leaves they often closely approached V. lychnitis, but some had leaves
extremely woolly on the upper surface and decurrent like those of V. thapsus;
yet the degree of woolliness and of decurrency did not always go together. In
the petals being flat and remaining open, and in the manner in which the anthers
of the longer stamens were attached to the filaments, these plants all took more
after V. lychnitis than V. thapsus. In the yellow colour of the corolla they all
resembled the latter species. On the whole, these plants appeared to take rather
more after V. lychnitis than V. thapsus. On the supposition that they were
hybrids, it is not an anomalous circumstance that they should all have produced
yellow flowers; for Gartner crossed white and yellow-flowered varieties of
Verbascum, and the offspring thus produced never bore flowers of an intermediate
tint, but either pure white or pure yellow flowers, generally of the latter
colour. (2/24. 'Bastardzeugung' page 307.)

My observations were made in the autumn; so that I was able to collect some
half-matured capsules from twenty of the thirty-three intermediate plants, and
likewise capsules of the pure V. lychnitis and thapsus growing in the same
field. All the latter were filled with perfect but immature seeds, whilst the
capsules of the twenty intermediate plants did not contain one single perfect
seed. These plants, consequently, were absolutely barren. From this fact,--from
the one plant which was transplanted into my garden yielding when artificially
fertilised with pollen from V. lychnitis and thapsus some seeds, though
extremely few in number,--from the circumstance of the two pure species growing
in the same field,--and from the intermediate character of the sterile plants,
there can be no doubt that they were hybrids. Judging from the position in which
they were chiefly found, I am inclined to believe they were descended from V.
thapsus as the seed-bearer, and V. lychnitis as the pollen-bearer.

It is known that many species of Verbascum, when the stem is jarred or struck by
a stick, cast off their flowers. (2/25. This was first observed by Correa de
Serra: see Sir J.E. Smith's 'English Flora' 1824 volume 1 page 311; also 'Life
of Sir J.E. Smith' volume 2 page 210. I was guided to these references by the
Reverend W.A. Leighton, who observed this same phenomenon with V. virgatum.)
This occurs with V. thapsus, as I have repeatedly observed. The corolla first
separates from its attachment, and then the sepals spontaneously bend inwards so
as to clasp the ovarium, pushing off the corolla by their movement, in the
course of two or three minutes. Nothing of this kind takes place with young
barely expanded flowers. With Verbascum lychnitis and, as I believe, V.
phoeniceum the corolla is not cast off, however often and severely the stem may
be struck. In this curious property the above-described hybrids took after V.
thapsus; for I observed, to my surprise, that when I pulled off the flower-buds
round the flowers which I wished to mark with a thread, the slight jar
invariably caused the corollas to fall off.

These hybrids are interesting under several points of view. First, from the
number found in various parts of the same moderately-sized field. That they owed
their origin to insects flying from flower to flower, whilst collecting pollen,
there can be no doubt. Although insects thus rob the flowers of a most precious
substance, yet they do great good; for, as I have elsewhere shown, the seedlings
of V. thapsus raised from flowers fertilised with pollen from another plant, are
more vigorous than those raised from self-fertilised flowers. (2/26. 'The
Effects of Cross and Self-fertilisation' 1876 page 89.) But in this particular
instance the insects did great harm, as they led to the production of utterly
barren plants. Secondly, these hybrids are remarkable from differing much from
one another in many of their characters; for hybrids of the first generation, if
raised from uncultivated plants, are generally uniform in character. That these
hybrids belonged to the first generation we may safely conclude, from the
absolute sterility of all those observed by me in a state of nature and of the
one plant in my garden, excepting when artificially and repeatedly fertilised
with pure pollen, and then the number of seeds produced was extremely small. As
these hybrids varied so much, an almost perfectly graduated series of forms,
connecting together the two widely distinct parent-species, could easily have
been selected. This case, like that of the common oxlip, shows that botanists
ought to be cautious in inferring the specific identity of two forms from the
presence of intermediate gradations; nor would it be easy in the many cases in
which hybrids are moderately fertile to detect a slight degree of sterility in
such plants growing in a state of nature and liable to be fertilised by either
parent-species. Thirdly and lastly, these hybrids offer an excellent
illustration of a statement made by that admirable observer Gartner, namely,
that although plants which can be crossed with ease generally produce fairly
fertile offspring, yet well-pronounced exceptions to this rule occur; and here
we have two species of Verbascum which evidently cross with the greatest ease,
but produce hybrids which are excessively sterile.


CHAPTER III. HETEROSTYLED DIMORPHIC PLANTS--continued.

Linum grandiflorum, long-styled form utterly sterile with own-form pollen.
Linum perenne, torsion of the pistils in the long-styled form alone.
Homostyled species of Linum.
Pulmonaria officinalis, singular difference in self-fertility between the
English and German long-styled plants.
Pulmonaria angustifolia shown to be a distinct species, long-styled form
completely self-sterile.
Polygonum fagopyrum.
Various other heterostyled genera.
Rubiaceae.
Mitchella repens, fertility of the flowers in pairs.
Houstonia.
Faramea, remarkable difference in the pollen-grains of the two forms; torsion of
the stamens in the short-styled form alone; development not as yet perfect.
The heterostyled structure in the several Rubiaceous genera not due to descent
in common.

(FIGURE 3.4. Linum grandiflorum.
Left: Long-styled form.
Right: Short-styled form.
s, s: stigmas.)

It has long been known that several species of Linum present two forms (3/1.
Treviranus has shown that this is the case in his review of my original paper
'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 189.), and having observed this fact in L. flavum
more than thirty years ago, I was led, after ascertaining the nature of
heterostylism in Primula, to examine the first species of Linum which I met
with, namely, the beautiful L. grandiflorum. This plant exists under two forms,
occurring in about equal numbers, which differ little in structure, but greatly
in function. The foliage, corolla, stamens, and pollen-grains (the latter
examined both distended with water and dry) are alike in the two forms (Figure
3.4). The difference is confined to the pistil; in the short-styled form the
styles and the stigmas are only about half the length of those in the long-
styled. A more important distinction is, that the five stigmas in the short-
styled form diverge greatly from one another, and pass out between the filaments
of the stamens, and thus lie within the tube of the corolla. In the long-styled
form the elongated stigmas stand nearly upright, and alternate with the anthers.
In this latter form the length of the stigmas varies considerably, their upper
extremities projecting even a little above the anthers, or reaching up only to
about their middle. Nevertheless, there is never the slightest difficulty in
distinguishing between the two forms; for, besides the difference in the
divergence of the stigmas, those of the short-styled form never reach even to
the bases of the anthers. In this form the papillae on the stigmatic surfaces
are shorter, darker-coloured, and more crowded together than in the long-styled
form; but these differences seem due merely to the shortening of the stigma, for
in the varieties of the long-styled form with shorter stigmas, the papillae are
more crowded and darker-coloured than in those with the longer stigmas.
Considering the slight and variable differences between the two forms of this
Linum, it is not surprising that hitherto they have been overlooked.

In 1861 I had eleven plants in my garden, eight of which were long-styled, and
three short-styled. Two very fine long-styled plants grew in a bed a hundred
yards off all the others, and separated from them by a screen of evergreens. I
marked twelve flowers, and placed on their stigmas a little pollen from the
short-styled plants. The pollen of the two forms is, as stated, identical in
appearance; the stigmas of the long-styled flowers were already thickly covered
with their own pollen--so thickly that I could not find one bare stigma, and it
was late in the season, namely, September 15th. Altogether, it seemed almost
childish to expect any result. Nevertheless from my experiments on Primula, I
had faith, and did not hesitate to make the trial, but certainly did not
anticipate the full result which was obtained. The germens of these twelve
flowers all swelled, and ultimately six fine capsules (the seed of which
germinated on the following year) and two poor capsules were produced; only four
capsules shanking off. These same two long-styled plants produced, in the course
of the summer, a vast number of flowers, the stigmas of which were covered with
their own pollen; but they all proved absolutely barren, and their germens did
not even swell.

The nine other plants, six long-styled and three short-styled, grew not very far
apart in my flower-garden. Four of these long-styled plants produced no seed-
capsules; the fifth produced two; and the remaining one grew so close to a
short-styled plant that their branches touched, and this produced twelve
capsules, but they were poor ones. The case was different with the short-styled
plants. The one which grew close to the long-styled plant produced ninety-four
imperfectly fertilised capsules containing a multitude of bad seeds, with a
moderate number of good ones. The two other short-styled plants growing together
were small, being partly smothered by other plants; they did not stand very
close to any long-styled plants, yet they yielded together nineteen capsules.
These facts seem to show that the short-styled plants are more fertile with
their own pollen than are the long-styled, and we shall immediately see that
this probably is the case. But I suspect that the difference in fertility
between the two forms was in this instance in part due to a distinct cause. I
repeatedly watched the flowers, and only once saw a humble-bee momentarily
alight on one, and then fly away. If bees had visited the several plants, there
cannot be a doubt that the four long-styled plants, which did not produce a
single capsule, would have borne an abundance. But several times I saw small
diptera sucking the flowers; and these insects, though not visiting the flowers
with anything like the regularity of bees, would carry a little pollen from one
form to the other, especially when growing near together; and the stigmas of the
short-styled plants, diverging within the tube of the corolla, would be more
likely than the upright stigmas of the long-styled plants, to receive a small
quantity of pollen if brought to them by small insects. Moreover from the
greater number of the long-styled than of the short-styled plants in the garden,
the latter would be more likely to receive pollen from the long-styled, than the
long-styled from the short-styled.

In 1862 I raised thirty-four plants of this Linum in a hot-bed; and these
consisted of seventeen long-styled and seventeen short-styled forms. Seed sown
later in the flower-garden yielded seventeen long-styled and twelve short-styled
forms. These facts justify the statement that the two forms are produced in
about equal numbers. The thirty-four plants of the first lot were kept under a
net which excluded all insects, except such minute ones as Thrips. I fertilised
fourteen long-styled flowers legitimately with pollen from the short-styled, and
got eleven fine seed-capsules, which contained on an average 8.6 seeds per
capsule, but only 5.6 appeared to be good. It may be well to state that ten
seeds is the maximum production for a capsule, and that our climate cannot be
very favourable to this North-African plant. On three occasions the stigmas of
nearly a hundred flowers were fertilised illegitimately with their own-form
pollen, taken from separate plants, so as to prevent any possible ill effects
from close inter-breeding. Many other flowers were also produced, which, as
before stated, must have received plenty of their own pollen; yet from all these
flowers, borne by the seventeen long-styled plants, only three capsules were
produced. One of these included no seed, and the other two together gave only
five good seeds. It is probable that this miserable product of two half-fertile
capsules from the seventeen plants, each of which must have produced at least
fifty or sixty flowers, resulted from their fertilisation with pollen from the
short-styled plants by the aid of Thrips; for I made a great mistake in keeping
the two forms under the same net, with their branches often interlocking; and it
is surprising that a greater number of flowers were not accidentally fertilised.

Twelve short-styled flowers were in this instance castrated, and afterwards
fertilised legitimately with pollen from the long-styled form; and they produced
seven fine capsules. These included on an average 7.6 seeds, but of apparently
good seed only 4.3 per capsule. At three separate times nearly a hundred flowers
were fertilised illegitimately with their own-form pollen, taken from separate
plants; and numerous other flowers were produced, many of which must have
received their own pollen. From all these flowers on the seventeen short-styled
plants only fifteen capsules were produced, of which only eleven contained any
good seed, on an average 4.2 per capsule. As remarked in the case of the long-
styled plants, some even of these capsules were perhaps the product of a little
pollen accidentally fallen from the adjoining flowers of the other form on to
the stigmas, or transported by Thrips. Nevertheless the short-styled plants seem
to be slightly more fertile with their own pollen than the long-styled, in the
proportion of fifteen capsules to three; nor can this difference be accounted
for by the short-styled stigmas being more liable to receive their own pollen
than the long-styled, for the reverse is the case. The greater self-fertility of
the short-styled flowers was likewise shown in 1861 by the plants in my flower-
garden, which were left to themselves, and were but sparingly visited by
insects.

On account of the probability of some of the flowers on the plants of both
forms, which were covered under the same net, having been legitimately
fertilised in an accidental manner, the relative fertility of the two legitimate
and two illegitimate unions cannot be compared with certainty; but judging from
the number of good seeds per capsule, the difference was at least in the ratio
of 100 to 7, and probably much greater.

Hildebrand tested my results, but only on a single short-styled plant, by
fertilising many flowers with their own-form pollen; and these did not produce
any seed. This confirms my suspicion that some of the few capsules produced by
the foregoing seventeen short-styled plants were the product of accidental
legitimate fertilisation. Other flowers on the same plant were fertilised by
Hildebrand with pollen from the long-styled form, and all produced fruit. (3/2.
'Botanische Zeitung' January 1, 1864 page 2.)

The absolute sterility (judging from the experiments of 1861) of the long-styled
plants with their own-form pollen led me to examine into its apparent cause; and
the results are so curious that they are worth giving in detail. The experiments
were tried on plants grown in pots and brought successively into the house.

FIRST.

Pollen from a short-styled plant was placed on the five stigmas of a long-styled
flower, and these, after thirty hours, were found deeply penetrated by a
multitude of pollen-tubes, far too numerous to be counted; the stigmas had also
become discoloured and twisted. I repeated this experiment on another flower,
and in eighteen hours the stigmas were penetrated by a multitude of long pollen-
tubes. This is what might have been expected, as the union is a legitimate one.
The converse experiment was likewise tried, and pollen from a long-styled flower
was placed on the stigmas of a short-styled flower, and in twenty-four hours the
stigmas were discoloured, twisted, and penetrated by numerous pollen-tubes; and
this, again, is what might have been expected, as the union was a legitimate
one.

SECONDLY.

Pollen from a long-styled flower was placed on all five stigmas of a long-styled
flower on a separate plant: after nineteen hours the stigmas were dissected, and
only a single pollen-grain had emitted a tube, and this was a very short one. To
make sure that the pollen was good, I took in this case, and in most of the
other cases, pollen either from the same anther or from the same flower, and
proved it to be good by placing it on the stigma of a short-styled plant, and
found numerous pollen-tubes emitted.

THIRDLY.

Repeated last experiment, and placed own-form pollen on all five stigmas of a
long-styled flower; after nineteen hours and a half, not one single grain had
emitted its tube.

FOURTHLY.

Repeated the experiment, with the same result after twenty-four hours.

FIFTHLY.

Repeated last experiment, and, after leaving pollen on for nineteen hours, put
on an additional quantity of own-form pollen on all five stigmas. After an
interval of three days, the stigmas were examined, and, instead of being
discoloured and twisted, they were straight and fresh-coloured. Only one grain
had emitted a quite short tube, which was drawn out of the stigmatic tissue
without being ruptured.

The following experiments are more striking:--

SIXTHLY.

I placed own-form pollen on three of the stigmas of a long-styled flower, and
pollen from a short-styled flower on the other two stigmas. After twenty-two
hours these two stigmas were discoloured, slightly twisted, and penetrated by
the tubes of numerous pollen-grains: the other three stigmas, covered with their
own-form pollen, were fresh, and all the pollen-grains were loose; but I did not
dissect the whole stigma.

SEVENTHLY.

Experiment repeated in the same manner, with the same result.

EIGHTHLY.

Experiment repeated, but the stigmas were carefully examined after an interval
of only five hours and a half. The two stigmas with pollen from a short-styled
flower were penetrated by innumerable tubes, which were as yet short, and the
stigmas themselves were not at all discoloured. The three stigmas covered with
their own-form pollen were not penetrated by a single pollen-tube.

NINTHLY.

Put pollen of a short-styled flower on a single long-styled stigma, and own-form
pollen on the other four stigmas; after twenty-four hours the one stigma was
somewhat discoloured and twisted, and penetrated by many long tubes: the other
four stigmas were quite straight and fresh; but on dissecting them I found that
three pollen-grains had protruded very short tubes into the tissue.

TENTHLY.

Repeated the experiment, with the same result after twenty-four hours, excepting
that only two own-form grains had penetrated the stigmatic tissue with their
tubes to a very short depth. The one stigma, which was deeply penetrated by a
multitude of tubes from the short-styled pollen, presented a conspicuous
difference in being much curled, half-shrivelled, and discoloured, in comparison
with the other four straight and bright pink stigmas.

I could add other experiments; but those now given amply suffice to show that
the pollen-grains of a short-styled flower placed on the stigma of a long-styled
flower emit a multitude of tubes after an interval of from five to six hours,
and penetrate the tissue ultimately to a great depth; and that after twenty-four
hours the stigmas thus penetrated change colour, become twisted, and appear
half-withered. On the other hand, pollen-grains from a long-styled flower placed
on its own stigmas, do not emit their tubes after an interval of a day, or even
three days; or at most only three or four grains out of a multitude emit their
tubes, and these apparently never penetrate the stigmatic tissue deeply, and the
stigmas themselves do not soon become discoloured and twisted.

This seems to me a remarkable physiological fact. The pollen-grains of the two
forms are undistinguishable under the microscope; the stigmas differ only in
length, degree of divergence, and in the size, shade of colour, and
approximation of their papillae, these latter differences being variable and
apparently due merely to the degree of elongation of the stigma. Yet we plainly
see that the two kinds of pollen and the two stigmas are widely dissimilar in
their mutual reaction--the stigmas of each form being almost powerless on their
own pollen, but causing, through some mysterious influence, apparently by simple
contact (for I could detect no viscid secretion), the pollen-grains of the
opposite form to protrude their tubes. It may be said that the two pollens and
the two stigmas mutually recognise each other by some means. Taking fertility as
the criterion of distinctness, it is no exaggeration to say that the pollen of
the long-styled Linum grandiflorum (and conversely that of the other form) has
been brought to a degree of differentiation, with respect to its action on the
stigma of the same form, corresponding with that existing between the pollen and
stigma of species belonging to distinct genera.

Linum perenne.

This species is conspicuously heterostyled, as has been noticed by several
authors. The pistil in the long-styled form is nearly twice as long as that of
the short-styled. In the latter the stigmas are smaller and, diverging to a
greater degree, pass out low down between the filaments. I could detect no
difference in the two forms in the size of the stigmatic papillae. In the long-
styled form alone the stigmatic surfaces of the mature pistils twist round, so
as to face the circumference of the flower; but to this point I shall presently
return. Differently from what occurs in L. grandiflorum, the long-styled flowers
have stamens hardly more than half the length of those in the short-styled. The
size of the pollen-grains is rather variable; after some doubt, I have come to
the conclusion that there is no uniform difference between the grains in the two
forms. The long-stamens in the short-styled form project to some height above
the corolla, and their filaments are coloured blue apparently from exposure to
the light. The anthers of the longer stamens correspond in height with the lower
part of the stigmas of the long-styled flowers; and the anthers of the shorter
stamens of the latter correspond in the same manner in height with the stigmas
of the short-styled flowers.

I raised from seed twenty-six plants, of which twelve proved to be long-styled
and fourteen short-styled. They flowered well, but were not large plants. As I
did not expect them to flower so soon, I did not transplant them, and they
unfortunately grew with their branches closely interlocked. All the plants were
covered under the same net, excepting one of each form. Of the flowers on the
long-styled plants, twelve were illegitimately fertilised with their own-form
pollen, taken in every case from a separate plant; and not one set a seed-
capsule: twelve other flowers were legitimately fertilised with pollen from
short-styled flowers; and they set nine capsules, each including on an average 7
good seeds, ten being the maximum number ever produced. Of the flowers on the
short-styled plants, twelve were illegitimately fertilised with own-form pollen,
and they yielded one capsule, including only 3 good seeds; twelve other flowers
were legitimately fertilised with pollen from long-styled flowers, and these
produced nine capsules, but one was bad; the eight good capsules contained on an
average 8 good seeds each. Judging from the number of seeds per capsule, the
fertility of the two legitimate to that of the two illegitimate unions is as 100
to 20.

The numerous flowers on the eleven long-styled plants under the net, which were
not fertilised, produced only three capsules, including 8, 4, and 1 good seeds.
Whether these three capsules were the product of accidental legitimate
fertilisation, owing to the branches of the plants of the two forms
interlocking, I will not pretend to decide. The single long-styled plant which
was left uncovered, and grew close by the uncovered short-styled plant, produced
five good pods; but it was a poor and small plant.

The flowers borne on the thirteen short-styled plants under the net, which were
not fertilised, produced twelve capsules, containing on an average 5.6 seeds. As
some of these capsules were very fine, and as five were borne on one twig, I
suspect that some minute insect had accidentally got under the net and had
brought pollen from the other form to the flowers which produced this little
group of capsules. The one uncovered short-styled plant which grew close to the
uncovered long-styled plant yielded twelve capsules.

From these facts we have some reason to believe, as in the case of L.
grandiflorum, that the short-styled plants are in a slight degree more fertile
with their own pollen than are the long-styled plants. Anyhow we have the
clearest evidence, that the stigmas of each form require for full fertility that
pollen from the stamens of corresponding height belonging to the opposite form
should be brought to them.

Hildebrand, in the paper lately referred to, confirms my results. He placed a
short-styled plant in his house, and fertilised about 20 flowers with their own
pollen, and about 30 with pollen from another plant belonging to the same form,
and these 50 flowers did not set a single capsule. On the other hand he
fertilised about 30 flowers with pollen from the long-styled form, and these,
with the exception of two, yielded capsules, containing good seeds.

It is a singular fact, in contrast with what occurred in the case of L.
grandiflorum, that the pollen-grains of both forms of L. perenne, when placed on
their own-form stigmas, emitted their tubes, though this action did not lead to
the production of seeds. After an interval of eighteen hours, the tubes
penetrated the stigmatic tissue, but to what depth I did not ascertain. In this
case the impotence of the pollen-grains on their own stigmas must have been due
either to the tubes not reaching the ovules, or to their not acting properly
after reaching them.

The plants both of L. perenne and grandiflorum, grew, as already stated, with
their branches interlocked, and with scores of flowers of the two forms close
together; they were covered by a rather coarse net, through which the wind, when
high, passed; and such minute insects as Thrips could not, of course, be
excluded; yet we have seen that the utmost possible amount of accidental
fertilisation on seventeen long-styled plants in the one case, and on eleven
long-styled plants in the other, resulted in the production, in each case, of
three poor capsules; so that when the proper insects are excluded, the wind does
hardly anything in the way of carrying pollen from plant to plant. I allude to
this fact because botanists in speaking of the fertilisation of various flowers,
often refer to the wind or to insects as if the alternative were indifferent.
This view, according to my experience, is entirely erroneous. When the wind is
the agent in carrying pollen, either from one sex to the other, or from
hermaphrodite to hermaphrodite, we can recognise structure as manifestly adapted
to its action as to that of insects when these are the carriers. We see
adaptation to the wind in the incoherence of the pollen,--in the inordinate
quantity produced (as in the Coniferae, Spinage, etc.),--in the dangling anthers
well fitted to shake out the pollen,--in the absence or small size of the
perianth,--in the protrusion of the stigmas at the period of fertilisation,--in
the flowers being produced before they are hidden by the leaves,--and in the
stigmas being downy or plumose (as in the Gramineae, Docks, etc), so as to
secure the chance-blown grains. In plants which are fertilised by the wind, the
flowers do not secrete nectar, their pollen is too incoherent to be easily
collected by insects, they have not bright-coloured corollas to serve as guides,
and they are not, as far as I have seen, visited by insects. When insects are
the agents of fertilisation (and this is incomparably the more frequent case
with hermaphrodite plants), the wind plays no part, but we see an endless number
of adaptations to ensure the safe transport of the pollen by the living workers.
These adaptations are most easily recognised in irregular flowers; but they are
present in regular flowers, of which those of Linum offer a good instance, as I
will now endeavour to show.

I have already alluded to the rotation of each separate stigma in the long-
styled form of Linum perenne. In both forms of the other heterostyled species
and in the homostyled species of Linum which I have seen, the stigmatic surfaces
face the centre of the flower, with the furrowed backs of the stigmas, to which
the styles are attached, facing outwards. This is the case with the stigmas of
the long-styled flowers of L. perenne whilst in bud. But by the time the flowers
have expanded, the five stigmas twist round so as to face the circumference,
owing to the torsion of that part of the style which lies beneath the stigma. I
should state that the five stigmas do not always turn round completely, two or
three sometimes facing only obliquely outwards. My observations were made during
October; and it is not improbable that earlier in the season the torsion would
have been more complete; for after two or three cold and wet days the movement
was very imperfectly performed. The flowers should be examined shortly after
their expansion, as their duration is brief; as soon as they begin to wither,
the styles become spirally twisted all together, the original position of the
parts being thus lost.

He who will compare the structure of the whole flower in both forms of L.
perenne and grandiflorum, and, as I may add, of L. flavum, will not doubt about
the meaning of this torsion of the styles in the one form alone of L. perenne,
as well as the meaning of the divergence of the stigmas in the short-styled form
of all three species. It is absolutely necessary as we know, that insects should
carry pollen from the flowers of the one form reciprocally to those of the
other. Insects are attracted by five drops of nectar, secreted exteriorly at the
base of the stamens, so that to reach these drops they must insert their
proboscides outside the ring of broad filaments, between them and the petals. In
the short-styled form of the above three species, the stigmas face the axis of
the flower; and had the styles retained their original upright and central
position, not only would the stigmas have presented their backs to the insects
which sucked the flowers, but their front and fertile surfaces would have been
separated from the entering insects by the ring of broad filaments, and would
never have received any pollen. As it is, the styles diverge and pass out
between the filaments. After this movement the short stigmas lie within the tube
of the corolla; and their papillous surfaces being now turned upwards are
necessarily brushed by every entering insect, and thus receive the required
pollen.

In the long-styled form of L. grandiflorum, the almost parallel or slightly
diverging anthers and stigmas project a little above the tube of the somewhat
concave flower; and they stand directly over the open space leading to the drops
of nectar. Consequently when insects visit the flowers of either form (for the
stamens in this species occupy the same position in both forms), they will get
their foreheads or proboscides well dusted with the coherent pollen. As soon as
they visit the flowers of the long-styled form they will necessarily leave
pollen on the proper surface of the elongated stigmas; and when they visit the
short-styled flowers, they will leave pollen on the upturned stigmatic surfaces.
Thus the stigmas of both forms will receive indifferently the pollen of both
forms; but we know that the pollen alone of the opposite form causes
fertilisation.

(Figure 3.5. Long-styled form of L. perenne var. Austriacum in its early
condition before the stigmas have rotated. The petals and calyx have been
removed on the near side. (3/3. I neglected to get drawings made from fresh
flowers of the two forms. But Mr. Fitch has made the above sketch of a long-
styled flower from dried specimens and from published engravings. His well-known
skill ensures accuracy in the proportional size of the parts.)

In the case of L. perenne, affairs are arranged more perfectly; for the stamens
in the two forms stand at different heights, so that pollen from the anthers of
the longer stamens will adhere to one part of an insect's body, and will
afterwards be brushed off by the rough stigmas of the longer pistils; whilst
pollen from the anthers of the shorter stamens will adhere to a different part
of the insect's body, and will afterwards be brushed off by the stigmas of the
shorter pistils; and this is what is required for the legitimate fertilisation
of both forms. The corolla of L. perenne is more expanded than that of L.
grandiflorum, and the stigmas of the long-styled form do not diverge greatly
from one another; nor do the stamens of either form. Hence insects, especially
rather small ones, will not insert their proboscides between the stigmas of the
long-styled form, nor between the anthers of either form (Figure 3.5), but will
strike against them, at nearly right angles, with the backs of their head or
thorax. Now, in the long-styled flowers, if each stigma did not rotate on its
axis, insects in visiting them would strike their heads against the backs of the
stigmas; as it is, they strike against that surface which is covered with
papillae, with their heads already charged with pollen from the stamens of
corresponding height borne by the flowers of the other form, and legitimate
fertilisation is thus ensured.

Thus we can understand the meaning of the torsion of the styles in the long-
styled flowers alone, as well as their divergence in the short-styled flowers.

One other point is worth notice. In botanical works many flowers are said to be
fertilised in the bud. This statement generally rests, as far as I can discover,
on the anthers opening in the bud; no evidence being adduced that the stigma is
at this period mature, or that it is not subsequently acted on by pollen brought
from other flowers. In the case of Cephalanthera grandiflora I have shown that
precocious and partial self-fertilisation, with subsequent full fertilisation,
is the regular course of events. (3/4. 'Fertilisation of Orchids' page 108; 2nd
edition 1877 page 84.) The belief that the flowers of many plants are fertilised
in the bud, that is, are perpetually self-fertilised, is a most effectual bar to
understanding their real structure. I am, however, far from wishing to assert
that some flowers, during certain seasons, are not fertilised in the bud; for I
have reason to believe that this is the case. A good observer, resting his
belief on the usual kind of evidence, states that in Linum Austriacum (which is
heterostyled, and is considered by Planchon as a variety of L. perenne) the
anthers open the evening before the expansion of the flowers, and that the
stigmas are then almost always fertilised. (3/5. H. Lecoq 'Etudes sur la Geogr.
Bot.' 1856 tome 5 page 325.) Now we know positively that, so far from Linum
perenne being fertilised by its own pollen in the bud, its own pollen is as
powerless on the stigma as so much inorganic dust.

Linum flavum.

The pistil of the long-styled form of this species is nearly twice as long as
that of the short-styled; the stigmas are longer and the papillae coarser. In
the short-styled form the stigmas diverge and pass out between the filaments, as
in the previous species. The stamens in the two forms differ in length; and,
what is singular, the anthers of the longer stamens are not so long as those of
the other form; so that in the short-styled form both the stigmas and the
anthers are shorter than in the long-styled form. The pollen-grains of the two
forms do not differ in size. As this species is propagated by cuttings,
generally all the plants in the same garden belong to the same form. I have
inquired, but have never heard of its seeding in this country. Certainly my own
plants never produced a single seed as long as I possessed only one of the two
forms. After considerable search I procured both forms, but from want of time
only a few experiments were made. Two plants of the two forms were planted some
way apart in my garden, and were not covered by nets. Three flowers on the long-
styled plant were legitimately fertilised with pollen from the short-styled
plant, and one of them set a fine capsule. No other capsules were produced by
this plant. Three flowers on the short-styled plant were legitimately fertilised
with pollen from the long-styled, and all three produced capsules, containing
respectively no less than 8, 9, and 10 seeds. Three other flowers on this plant,
which had not been artificially fertilised, produced capsules containing 5, 1,
and 5 seeds; and it is quite possible that pollen may have been brought to them
by insects from the long-styled plant growing in the same garden. Nevertheless,
as they did not yield half the number of seeds compared with the other flowers
on the same plant which had been artificially and legitimately fertilised, and
as the short-styled plants of the two previous species apparently evince some
slight capacity for fertilisation with their own-form pollen, these three
capsules may have been the product of self-fertilisation.

Besides the three species now described, the yellow-flowered L. corymbiferum is
certainly heterostyled, as is, according to Planchon, L. salsoloides. (3/6.
Hooker's 'London Journal of Botany' 1848 volume 7 page 174.) This botanist is
the only one who seems to have inferred that heterostylism might have some
important functional bearing. Dr. Alefeld, who has made a special study of the
genus, says that about half of the sixty-five species known to him are
heterostyled. (3/7. 'Botanische Zeitung' September 18, 1863 page 281.) This is
the case with L. trigynum, which differs so much from the other species that it
has been formed by him into a distinct genus. (3/8. It is not improbable that
the allied genus, Hugonia, is heterostyled, for one species is said by Planchon
(Hooker's 'London Journal of Botany' 1848 volume 7 page 525) to be provided with
"staminibus exsertis;" another with "stylis staminibus longioribus," and another
has "stamina 5, majora, stylos longe superantia.") According to the same author,
none of the species which inhabit America and the Cape of Good Hope are
heterostyled.

I have examined only three homostyled species, namely, L. usitatissimum,
angustifolium, and catharticum. I raised 111 plants of a variety of the first-
named species, and these, when protected under a net, all produced plenty of
seed. The flowers, according to H. Muller, are frequented by bees and moths.
(3/9. 'Die Befruchtung der Blumen' etc. page 168.) With respect to L.
catharticum, the same author shows that the flowers are so constructed that they
can freely fertilise themselves; but if visited by insects they might be cross-
fertilised. He has, however, only once seen the flowers thus visited during the
day; but it may be suspected that they are frequented during the night by small
moths for the sake of the five minute drops of nectar secreted. Lastly, L.
Lewisii is said by Planchon to bear on the same plant flowers with stamens and
pistils of the same height, and others with the pistils either longer or shorter
than the stamens. This case formerly appeared to me an extraordinary one; but I
am now inclined to believe that it is one merely of great variability. (3/10.
Planchon in Hooker's 'London Journal of Botany' 1848 volume 7 page 175. See on
this subject Asa Gray in 'American Journal of Science' volume 36 September 1863
page 284.)

PULMONARIA (BORAGINEAE).

Pulmonaria officinalis.

Hildebrand has published a full account of this heterostyled plant. (3/11.
'Botanische Zeitung' 1865 January 13 page 13.) The pistil of the long-styled
form is twice as long as that of the short-styled; and the stamens differ in a
corresponding, though converse, manner. There is no marked difference in the
shape or state of surface of the stigma in the two forms. The pollen-grains of
the short-styled form are to those of the long-styled as 9 to 7, or as 100 to
78, in length, and as 7 to 6 in breadth. They do not differ in the appearance of
their contents. The corolla of the one form differs in shape from that of the
other in nearly the same manner as in Primula; but besides this difference the
flowers of the short-styled are generally the larger of the two. Hildebrand
collected on the Siebengebirge, ten wild long-styled and ten short-styled
plants. The former bore 289 flowers, of which 186 (i.e. 64 per cent) had set
fruit, yielding 1.88 seed per fruit. The ten short-styled plants bore 373
flowers, of which 262 (i.e. 70 per cent) had set fruit, yielding 1.86 seed per
fruit. So that the short-styled plants produced many more flowers, and these set
a rather larger proportion of fruit, but the fruits themselves yielded a
slightly lower average number of seeds than did the long-styled plants. The
results of Hildebrand's experiments on the fertility of the two forms are given
in Table 3.19.

TABLE 3.19. Pulmonaria officinalis (from Hildebrand).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Fruits produced.
Column 4: Average Number of Seeds per Fruit.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
14 : 10 : 1.30.

Long-styled 14 by own-pollen, and 16 by pollen of other plant of same form.
Illegitimate union :
30 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
16 : 14 : 1.57.

Short-styled 11 by own-pollen, 14 by pollen of other plant of same form.
Illegitimate union :
25 : 0 : 0.

In the summer of 1864, before I had heard of Hildebrand's experiments, I noticed
some long-styled plants of this species (named for me by Dr. Hooker) growing by
themselves in a garden in Surrey; and to my surprise about half the flowers had
set fruit, several of which contained 2, and one contained even 3 seeds. These
seeds were sown in my garden and eleven seedlings thus raised, all of which
proved long-styled, in accordance with the usual rule in such cases. Two years
afterwards the plants were left uncovered, no other plant of the same genus
growing in my garden, and the flowers were visited by many bees. They set an
abundance of seeds: for instance, I gathered from a single plant rather less
than half of the seeds which it had produced, and they numbered 47. Therefore
this illegitimately fertilised plant must have produced about 100 seeds; that
is, thrice as many as one of the wild long-styled plants collected on the
Siebengebirge by Hildebrand, and which, no doubt, had been legitimately
fertilised. In the following year one of my plants was covered by a net, and
even under these unfavourable conditions it produced spontaneously a few seeds.
It should be observed that as the flowers stand either almost horizontally or
hang considerably downwards, pollen from the short stamens would be likely to
fall on the stigma. We thus see that the English long-styled plants when
illegitimately fertilised were highly fertile, whilst the German plants
similarly treated by Hildebrand were completely sterile. How to account for this
wide discordance in our results I know not. Hildebrand cultivated his plants in
pots and kept them for a time in the house, whilst mine were grown out of doors;
and he thinks that this difference of treatment may have caused the difference
in our results. But this does not appear to me nearly a sufficient cause,
although his plants were slightly less productive than the wild ones growing on
the Siebengbirge. My plants exhibited no tendency to become equal-styled, so as
to lose their proper long-styled character, as not rarely happens under
cultivation with several heterostyled species of Primula; but it would appear
that they had been greatly affected in function, either by long-continued
cultivation or by some other cause. We shall see in a future chapter that
heterostyled plants illegitimately fertilised during several successive
generations sometimes become more self-fertile; and this may have been the case
with my stock of the present species of Pulmonaria; but in this case we must
assume that the long-styled plants were at first sufficiently fertile to yield
some seed, instead of being absolutely self-sterile like the German plants.

Pulmonaria angustifolia.

(FIGURE 3.6. Pulmonaria angustifolia.
Left: Long-styled form.
Right: Short-styled form.)

Seedlings of this plant, raised from plants growing wild in the Isle of Wight,
were named for me by Dr. Hooker. It is so closely allied to the last species,
differing chiefly in the shape and spotting of the leaves, that the two have
been considered by several eminent botanists--for instance, Bentham--as mere
varieties. But, as we shall presently see, good evidence can be assigned for
ranking them as distinct. Owing to the doubts on this head, I tried whether the
two would mutually fertilise one another. Twelve short-styled flowers of P.
angustifolia were legitimately fertilised with pollen from long-styled plants of
P. officinalis (which, as we have just seen, are moderately self-fertile), but
they did not produce a single fruit. Thirty-six long-styled flowers of P.
angustifolia were also illegitimately fertilised during two seasons with pollen
from the long-styled P. officinalis, but all these flowers dropped off
unimpregnated. Had the plants been mere varieties of the same species these
illegitimate crosses would probably have yielded some seeds, judging from my
success in illegitimately fertilising the long-styled flowers of P. officinalis;
and the twelve legitimate crosses, instead of yielding no fruit, would almost
certainly have yielded a considerable number, namely, about nine, judging from
the results given in Table 3.20. Therefore P. officinalis and angustifolia
appear to be good and distinct species, in conformity with other important
functional differences between them, immediately to be described.

TABLE 3.20.  Pulmonaria angustifolia.

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Flowers fertilised.
Column 3: Number of Fruits produced.
Column 4: Average Number of Seeds per Fruit.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union :
18 : 9 : 2.11.

Long-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
18 : 0 : 0.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
18 : 15 : 2.60.

Short-styled by own-form pollen. Illegitimate union :
12 : 7 : 1.86.

The long-styled and short-styled flowers of P. angustifolia differ from one
another in structure in nearly the same manner as those of P. officinalis. But
in Figure 3.6 a slight bulging of the corolla in the long-styled form, where the
anthers are seated, has been overlooked. My son William, who examined a large
number of wild plants in the Isle of Wight, observed that the corolla, though
variable in size, was generally larger in the long-styled flowers than in the
short-styled; and certainly the largest corollas of all were found on the long-
styled plants, and the smallest on the short-styled. Exactly the reverse occurs,
according to Hildebrand, with P. officinalis. Both the pistils and stamens of P.
angustifolia vary much in length; so that in the short-styled form the distance
between the stigma and the anthers varied from 119 to 65 divisions of the
micrometer, and in the long-styled from 115 to 112. From an average of seven
measurements of each form the distance between these organs in the long-styled
is to the same distance in the short-styled form as 100 to 69; so that the
stigma in the one form does not stand on a level with the anthers in the other.
The long-styled pistil is sometimes thrice as long as that of the short-styled;
but from an average of ten measurements of both, its length to that of the
short-styled was as 100 to 56. The stigma varies in being more or less, though
slightly, lobed. The anthers also vary much in length in both forms, but in a
greater degree in the long-styled than in the short-styled-form; many in the
former being from 80 to 63, and in the latter from 80 to 70 divisions of the
micrometer in length. From an average of seven measurements, the short-styled
anthers were to those from the long-styled as 100 to 91 in length. Lastly, the
pollen-grains from the long-styled flowers varied between 13 and 11.5 divisions
of the micrometer, and those from the short-styled between 15 and 13. The
average diameter of 25 grains from the latter, or short-styled form, was to that
of 20 grains from the long-styled as 100 to 91. We see, therefore, that the
pollen-grains from the smaller anthers of the shorter stamens in the long-styled
form are, as usual, of smaller size than those in the other form. But what is
remarkable, a larger proportion of the grains were small, shrivelled, and
worthless. This could be seen by merely comparing the contents of the anthers
from several distinct plants of each form. But in one instance my son found, by
counting, that out of 193 grains from a long-styled flower, 53 were bad, or 27
per cent; whilst out of 265 grains from a short-styled flower only 18 were bad,
or 7 per cent. From the condition of the pollen in the long-styled form, and
from the extreme variability of all the organs in both forms, we may perhaps
suspect that the plant is undergoing a change, and tending to become dioecious.

My son collected in the Isle of Wight on two occasions 202 plants, of which 125
were long-styled and 77 short-styled; so that the former were the more numerous.
On the other hand, out of 18 plants raised by me from seed, only 4 were long-
styled and 14 short-styled. The short-styled plants seemed to my son to produce
a greater number of flowers than the long-styled; and he came to this conclusion
before a similar statement had been published by Hildebrand with respect to P.
officinalis. My son gathered ten branches from ten different plants of both
forms, and found the number of flowers of the two forms to be as 100 to 89, 190
being short-styled and 169 long-styled. With P. officinalis the difference,
according to Hildebrand, is even greater, namely, as 100 flowers for the short-
styled to 77 for the long-styled plants. Table 3.20 shows the results of my
experiments.

We see in Table 3.20 that the fertility of the two legitimate unions to that of
the two illegitimate together is as 100 to 35, judged by the proportion of
flowers which produced fruit; and as 100 to 32, judged by the average number of
seeds per fruit. But the small number of fruit yielded by the 18 long-styled
flowers in the first line was probably accidental, and if so, the difference in
the proportion of legitimately and illegitimately fertilised flowers which yield
fruit is really greater than that represented by the ratio of 100 to 35. The 18
long-styled flowers illegitimately fertilised yielded no seeds,--not even a
vestige of one. Two long-styled plants which were placed under a net produced
138 flowers, besides those which were artificially fertilised, and none of these
set any fruit; nor did some plants of the same form which were protected during
the next summer. Two other long-styled plants were left uncovered (all the
short-styled plants having been previously covered up), and humble-bees, which
had their foreheads white with pollen, incessantly visited the flowers, so that
their stigmas must have received an abundance of pollen, yet these flowers did
not produce a single fruit. We may therefore conclude that the long-styled
plants are absolutely barren with their own-form pollen, though brought from a
distinct plant. In this respect they differ greatly from the long-styled English
plants of P. officinalis which were found by me to be moderately self-fertile;
but they agree in their behaviour with the German plants of P. officinalis
experimented on by Hildebrand.

Eighteen short-styled flowers legitimately fertilised yielded, as may be seen in
Table 3.20, 15 fruits, each having on an average 2.6 seeds. Four of these fruits
contained the highest possible number of seeds, namely 4, and four other fruits
contained each 3 seeds. The 12 illegitimately fertilised short-styled flowers
yielded 7 fruits, including on an average 1.86 seed; and one of these fruits
contained the maximum number of 4 seeds. This result is very surprising in
contrast with the absolute barrenness of the long-styled flowers when
illegitimately fertilised; and I was thus led to attend carefully to the degree
of self-fertility of the short-styled plants. A plant belonging to this form and
covered by a net bore 28 flowers besides those which had been artificially
fertilised, and of all these only two produced a fruit each including a single
seed. This high degree of self-sterility no doubt depended merely on the stigmas
not receiving any pollen, or not a sufficient quantity. For after carefully
covering all the long-styled plants in my garden, several short-styled plants
were left exposed to the visits of humble-bees, and their stigmas will thus have
received plenty of short-styled pollen; and now about half the flowers, thus
illegitimately fertilised, set fruit. I judge of this proportion partly from
estimation and partly from having examined three large branches, which had borne
31 flowers, and these produced 16 fruits. Of the fruits produced 233 were
collected (many being left ungathered), and these included on an average 1.82
seed. No less than 16 out of the 233 fruits included the highest possible number
of seeds, namely 4, and 31 included 3 seeds. So we see how highly fertile these
short-styled plants were when illegitimately fertilised with their own-form
pollen by the aid of bees.

The great difference in the fertility of the long and short-styled flowers, when
both are illegitimately fertilised, is a unique case, as far as I have observed
with heterostyled plants. The long-styled flowers when thus fertilised are
utterly barren, whilst about half of the short-styled ones produce capsules, and
these include a little above two-thirds of the number of seeds yielded by them
when legitimately fertilised. The sterility of the illegitimately fertilised
long-styled flowers is probably increased by the deteriorated condition of their
pollen; nevertheless this pollen was highly efficient when applied to the
stigmas of the short-styled flowers. With several species of Primula the short-
styled flowers are much more sterile than the long-styled, when both are
illegitimately fertilised; and it is a tempting view, as formerly remarked, that
this greater sterility of the short-styled flowers is a special adaptation to
check self-fertilisation, as their stigmas are eminently liable to receive their
own pollen. This view is even still more tempting in the case of the long-styled
form of Linum grandiflorum. On the other hand, with Pulmonaria angustifolia, it
is evident, from the corolla projecting obliquely upwards, that pollen is much
more likely to fall on, or to be carried by insects down to the stigma of the
short-styled than of the long-styled flowers; yet the short-styled instead of
being more sterile, as a protection against self-fertilisation, are far more
fertile than the long-styled, when both are illegitimately fertilised.

Pulmonaria azurea, according to Hildebrand, is not heterostyled. (3/12. 'Die
Geschlechter-Vertheilung bei den Pflanzen' 1867 page 37.)

[From an examination of dried flowers of Amsinckia spectabilis, sent me by
Professor Asa Gray, I formerly thought that this plant, a member of the
Boragineae, was heterostyled. The pistil varies to an extraordinary degree in
length, being in some specimens twice as long as in others, and the point of
insertion of the stamens likewise varies. But on raising many plants from seed,
I soon became convinced that the whole case was one of mere variability. The
first-formed flowers are apt to have stamens somewhat arrested in development,
with very little pollen in their anthers; and in such flowers the stigma
projects above the anthers, whilst generally it stands below and sometimes on a
level with them. I could detect no difference in the size of the pollen-grain or
in the structure of the stigma in the plants which differed most in the above
respects; and all of them, when protected from the access of insects, yielded
plenty of seeds. Again, from statements made by Vaucher, and from a hasty
inspection, I thought at first that the allied Anchusa arvensis and Echium
vulgare were heterostyled, but soon saw my error. From information given me, I
examined dried flowers of another member of the Boragineae, Arnebia
hispidissima, collected from several sites, and though the corolla, together
with the included organs, differed much in length, there was no sign of
heterostylism.]

Polygonum fagopyrum (Polygonaceae).

(FIGURE 3.7. Polygonum fagopyrum. (From H. Muller.)
Upper figure, the long-styled form; lower figure, the short-styled.
Some of the anthers have dehisced, others have not.)

Hildebrand has shown that this plant, the common Buck-wheat, is heterostyled.
(3/13. 'Die Geschlechter-Vertheilung' etc. 1867 page 34.) In the long-styled
form (Figure 3.7), the three stigmas project considerably above the eight short
stamens, and stand on a level with the anthers of the eight long stamens in the
short-styled form; and so it is conversely with the stigmas and stamens of this
latter form. I could perceive no difference in the structure of the stigmas in
the two forms. The pollen-grains of the short-styled form are to those of the
long-styled as 100 to 82 in diameter. This plant is therefore without doubt
heterostyled.

I experimented only in an imperfect manner on the relative fertility of the two
forms. Short-styled flowers were dragged several times over two heads of flowers
on long-styled plants, protected under a net, which were thus legitimately,
though not fully, fertilised. They produced 22 seeds, or 11 per flower-head.

Three flower-heads on long-styled plants received pollen in the same manner from
other long-styled plants, and were thus illegitimately fertilised. They produced
14 seeds, or only 4.66 per flower-head.

Two flower-heads on short-styled plants received pollen in like manner from
long-styled flowers, and were thus legitimately fertilised. They produced 8
seeds, or 4 per flower-head.

Four heads on short-styled plants similarly received pollen from other short-
styled plants, and were thus illegitimately fertilised. They produced 9 seeds,
or 2.25 per flower-head.

The results from fertilising the flower-heads in the above imperfect manner
cannot be fully trusted; but I may state that the four legitimately fertilised
flower-heads yielded on an average 7.50 seeds per head; whereas the seven
illegitimately fertilised heads yielded less than half the number, or on an
average only 3.28 seeds. The legitimately crossed seeds from the long-styled
flowers were finer than those from the illegitimately fertilised flowers on the
same plants, in the ratio of 100 to 82, as shown by the weights of an equal
number.

About a dozen plants, including both forms, were protected under nets, and early
in the season they produced spontaneously hardly any seeds, though at this
period the artificially fertilised flowers produced an abundance; but it is a
remarkable fact that later in the season, during September, both forms became
highly self-fertile. They did not, however, produce so many seeds as some
neighbouring uncovered plants which were visited by insects. Therefore the
flowers of neither form when left to fertilise themselves late in the season
without the aid of insects, are nearly so sterile as most other heterostyled
plants. A large number of insects, namely 41 kinds as observed by H. Muller,
visit the flowers for the sake of the eight drops of nectar. (3/14. 'Die
Befruchtung' etc. page 175 and 'Nature' January 1, 1874 page 166.) He infers
from the structure of the flowers that insects would be apt to fertilise them
both illegitimately as well as legitimately; but he is mistaken in supposing
that the long-styled flowers cannot spontaneously fertilise themselves.

Differently to what occurs in the other genera hitherto noticed, Polygonum,
though a very large genus, contains, as far as is at present known, only a
single heterostyled species, namely the present one. H. Muller in his
interesting description of several other species shows that P. bistorta is so
strongly proterandrous (the anthers generally falling off before the stigmas are
mature) that the flowers must be cross-fertilised by the many insects which
visit them. Other species bear much less conspicuous flowers which secrete
little or no nectar, and consequently are rarely visited by insects; these are
adapted for self-fertilisation, though still capable of cross-fertilisation.
According to Delpino, the Polygonaceae are generally fertilised by the wind,
instead of by insects as in the present genus.

[Leucosmia Burnettiana (Thymeliae).

As Professor Asa Gray has expressed his belief that this species and L.
acuminata, as well as some species in the allied genus Drymispermum, are
dimorphic or heterostyled (3/15. 'American Journal of Science' 1865 page 101 and
Seemann's 'Journal of Botany' volume 3 1865 page 305.), I procured from Kew,
through the kindness of Dr. Hooker, two dried flowers of the former species, an
inhabitant of the Friendly Islands in the Pacific. The pistil of the long-styled
form is to that of the short-styled as 100 to 86 in length; the stigma projects
just above the throat of the corolla, and is surrounded by five anthers, the
tips of which reach up almost to its base; and lower down, within the tubular
corolla, five other and rather smaller anthers are seated. In the short-styled
form, the stigma stands some way down the tube of the corolla, nearly on a level
with the lower anthers of the other form: it differs remarkably from the stigma
of the long-styled form, in being more papillose, and in being longer in the
ratio of 100 to 60. The anthers of the upper stamens in the short-styled form
are supported on free filaments, and project above the throat of the corolla,
whilst the anthers of the lower stamens are seated in the throat on a level with
the upper stamens of the other form. The diameters of a considerable number of
grains from both sets of anthers in both forms were measured, but they did not
differ in any trustworthy degree. The mean diameter of twenty-two grains from
the short-styled flower was to that of twenty-four grains from the long-styled,
as 100 to 99. The anthers of the upper stamens in the short-styled form appeared
to be poorly developed, and contained a considerable number of shrivelled grains
which were omitted in striking the above average. Notwithstanding the fact of
the pollen-grains from the two forms not differing in diameter in any
appreciable degree, there can hardly be a doubt from the great difference in the
two forms in the length of the pistil, and especially of the stigma, together
with its more papillose condition in the short-styled form, that the present
species is truly heterostyled. This case resembles that of Linum grandiflorum,
in which the sole difference between the two forms consists in the length of the
pistils and stigmas. From the great length of the tubular corolla of Leucosmia,
it is clear that the flowers are cross-fertilised by large Lepidoptera or by
honey-sucking birds, and the position of the stamens in two whorls one beneath
the other, which is a character that I have not seen in any other heterostyled
dimorphic plant, probably serves to smear the inserted organ thoroughly with
pollen.

Menyanthes trifoliata (Gentianeae).

This plant inhabits marshes: my son William gathered 247 flowers from so many
distinct plants, and of these 110 were long-styled, and 137 short-styled. The
pistil of the long-styled form is in length to that of the short-styled in the
ratio of about 3 to 2. The stigma of the former, as my son observed, is
decidedly larger than that of the short-styled; but in both forms it varies much
in size. The stamens of the short-styled are almost double the length of those
of the long-styled; so that their anthers stand rather above the level of the
stigma of the long-styled form. The anthers also vary much in size, but seem
often to be of larger size in the short-styled flowers. My son made with the
camera many drawings of the pollen-grains, and those from the short-styled
flowers were in diameter in nearly the ratio of 100 to 84 to those from the
long-styled flowers. I know nothing about the capacity for fertilisation in the
two forms; but short-styled plants, living by themselves in the gardens at Kew,
have produced an abundance of capsules, yet the seeds have never germinated; and
this looks as if the short-styled form was sterile with its own pollen.

Limnanthemum Indicum (Gentianeae).

This plant is mentioned by Mr. Thwaites in his Enumeration of the Plants of
Ceylon as presenting two forms; and he was so kind as to send me specimens
preserved in spirits. The pistil of the long-styled form is nearly thrice as
long (i.e. as 14 to 5) as that of the short-styled, and is very much thinner in
the ratio of about 3 to 5. The foliaceous stigma is more expanded, and twice as
large as that of the short-styled form. In the latter the stamens are about
twice as long as those of the long-styled, and their anthers are larger in the
ratio of 100 to 70. The pollen-grains, after having been long kept in spirits,
were of the same shape and size in both forms. The ovules, according to Mr.
Thwaites, are equally numerous (namely from 70 to 80) in the two forms.

Villarsia [sp.?] (Gentianeae).

Fritz Muller sent me from South Brazil dried flowers of this aquatic plant,
which is closely allied to Limnanthemum. In the long-styled form the stigma
stands some way above the anthers, and the whole pistil, together with the
ovary, is in length to that of the short-styled form as about 3 to 2. In the
latter form the anthers stand above the stigma, and the style is very short and
thick; but the pistil varies a good deal in length, the stigma being either on a
level with the tips of the sepals or considerably beneath them. The foliaceous
stigma in the long-styled form is larger, with the expansions running farther
down the style, than in the other form. One of the most remarkable differences
between the two forms is that the anthers of the longer stamens in the short-
styled flowers are conspicuously longer than those of the shorter stamens in the
long-styled flowers. In the former the sub-triangular pollen-grains are larger;
the ratio between their breadth (measured from one angle to the middle of the
opposite side) and that of the grains from the long-styled flowers being about
100 to 75. Fritz Muller also informs me that th