gear, if you endure and
forgive all this cross-questioning from me, who am a perfect
stranger to you.'

'But you are not a perfect stranger to her.'

'That is it, of course. Now, if you will allow me, I will explain
to you exactly what my footing with her is. When the Duchess
returned, and when I found her to be so ill, as she passed through
London, I went down with her into the country,--quite as a matter
of course.'

'So I understand.'

'And there she died,--in my arms. I will not try to harass you by
telling you what those few days were; how absolutely he was struck
to the ground, how terrible was the grief of the daughter, how the
boys were astonished by the feeling of their loss. After a few
days they went away. It was, I think, their father's wish that
they should go. And I too was going away,--and had felt, indeed,
directly her spirit had parted from her, that I was only in the
way in his house. But I stayed at his request, because he did not
wish his daughter to be alone.'

'I can easily understand that, Mrs Finn.'

'I wanted her to go to Lady Cantrip who had invited her, but she
would not. In that way we were thrown together in the closest
intercourse. For two or three weeks. Then she told me the story of
your engagement.'

'That was natural, I suppose.'

'Surely so. Think of her position, left without a mother! It was
incumbent on her to tell someone. There was, however, one other
person in whom it would have been much better that she should have
confided.'

'What person?'

'Her father.'

'I rather fancy that it is I who ought to tell him.'

'As far as I understand things, Mr Tregear,--which, indeed, is very
imperfectly,--I think it is natural that a girl should at once tell
her mother when a gentleman has made her understand that he loves
her.'

'She did so, Mrs Finn.'

'And I suppose that generally the mother would tell the father.'

'She did not.'

'No; and therefore the position of the young lady is now one of
great embarrassment. The Duchess has gone from us, and we must now
make up our minds as to what had better be done. It is out of the
question that Lady Mary should be allowed to consider herself to
be engaged, and that her father should be kept in ignorance of her
position.'  She paused for his reply, but as he said nothing, she
continued: 'Either you must tell the Duke, or she must do so, or I
must do so.'

'I suppose she told you in confidence.'

'No doubt. She told me presuming that I would not betray her; but
I shall,--if that be a betrayal. The Duke must know it. It will be
infinitely better that he should know it through you, or through
her, than through me. But he must be told.'

'I can't quite see why,' said Tregear.

'For her sake,--whom I suppose you love.'

'Certainly I love her.'

'In order that she may not suffer. I wonder you do not see it, Mr
Tregear. Perhaps you have a sister.'

'I have no sister as it happens.'

'But you can imagine what your feelings would be. Should you like
to think of a sister as being engaged to a man without the
knowledge of any of her family?'

'It was not so. The Duchess knew it. The present condition of
things is altogether an accident.'

'It is an accident that must be brought to an end.'

'Of course it must be brought to an end. I am not such a fool as
to suppose that I can make her my wife without telling her
father.'

'I mean at once, Mr Tregear.'

'It seems to me that you are rather dictating to me, Mrs Finn.'

'I owe you an apology of course, for meddling in your affairs at
all. But as it will be more conducive to your success that the
Duke should hear this from you than from me, and as I feel I am
bound by my duty to him and to Lady Mary to see that he be not
left in ignorance, I think that I am doing you a service.'

'I do not like to have a constraint put upon me.'

'That, Mr Tregear, is what a gentleman, I fancy, very often feels
in regard to ladies. But the constraint of which you speak is
necessary for their protection. Are you unwilling to see the
Duke?'

He was very unwilling, but he would not confess so much. He gave
various reasons for delay, urging repeatedly the question of his
marriage was one which he could not press upon the Duke so soon
after the death of the Duchess. And when she assured him that this
was a matter of importance so great, that even the death of the
man's wife should not be held by him to justify delay, he became
angry, and for awhile insisted that must be allowed to follow his
own judgement. But he gave her a promise that he would see the
Duke before a week was over. Nevertheless he left the house in
dudgeon, having told Mrs Finn more than once that she was taking
advantage of Lady Mary's confidence. They hardly parted as
friends, and her feeling was, on the whole, hostile to him and to
his love. It could not, she thought, be for the happiness of such
a one as Lady Mary that she should give herself to one who seemed
to have so little to recommend him.

He, when he had left her, was angry with his own weakness. He had
not only promised that he would make his application to the Duke,
but that he would do so within the period of a week. Who was she
that she should exact terms from him after this fashion, and
prescribe days and hours?  And now, because this strange woman had
spoken to him, he was compelled to make a journey down to the
Duke's country house, and seek an interview in which he would be
surely snubbed?

This occurred on a Wednesday, and he resolved that he would go
down to Matching on the next Monday. He said nothing of his plan
to anyone, and not a word passed between him and Lord Silverbridge
about Lady Mary during the first two or three days. But on
Saturday Silverbridge appeared at breakfast with a letter in his
hand. 'The governor is coming up to town,' he said.

'Immediately?'

'In the course of next week. He says that he thinks he shall be
here on Wednesday.'

It immediately struck Tregear that this sudden journey must have
some reference to Lady Mary and her engagement. 'Do you know why
he is coming?'

'Because of these vacancies in Parliament.'

'Why should that bring him up?'

'I suppose he hopes to be able to talk me into obedience. He wants
me to stand for the county--as a Liberal, of course. I intend to
stand for the borough as a Conservative, and I have told them so
down at Silverbridge. I am very sorry to annoy him, and all that
kind of thing. But what the deuce is a fellow to do? If a man has
got political convictions of his own, of course he must stick to
them.'  This the young Lord said with a good deal of self-
assurance, as though he, by the light of his own reason, had
ascertained on which side the truth lay in the political contests
of the day.

'There is a good deal to be said on both sides of the question, my
boy.'  At this particular moment Tregear felt that the Duke ought
to be propitiated.

'You wouldn't have me give up my convictions!'

'A seat in Parliament is a great thing.'

'I can probably secure that, whichever side I take. I thought you
were so devilish hot against the Radicals.'

'So I am. But then you are, as it were, bound by family
allegiance.'

'I'll be shot if I am. One never knows how to understand you
nowadays. It used to be a great doctrine with you that nothing
should induce a man to vote against his political opinion.'

'So it is,--if he has really got any. However, as your father is
coming to London, I need not go down to Matching.'

'You don't mean that you were going to Matching?'

'I had intended to beard the lion in his country den; but now the
lion will find me in his own town den, and I must beard him here.'

Then Tregear wrote a most chilling note to Mrs Finn, informing her
with great precision, that, as the Duke of Omnium intended to be
in town one day next week, he would postpone the performance of
his promise for a day or two beyond the allotted time.



CHAPTER 5

It is Impossible

Down at Matching Lady Mary's life was very dull after Mrs Finn had
left her. She had a horse to ride, but had no one to ride with
her; she had a carriage in which to be driven, but no one to be
driven with her, and no special places whither to go. Her father
would walk daily for two hours, and she would accompany him when
he encouraged her to do so; but she had an idea that he preferred
taking his walks alone, and when they were together there was no
feeling of confidence between them. There could be none on her
part, as she knew that she was keeping back information which he
was entitled to possess. On this matter she received two letters
from Mrs Finn, in the first of which she was told that Mr Tregear
intended to present himself at Matching within a few days, and was
advised in the same letter not to endeavour to see her lover on
that occasion; and then, in the second she was informed that this
interview with her father was to be sought not at Matching but in
London. From this letter there was of course some disappointment,
though some feeling of relief. Had he come there she might
possibly have seen him after the interview. But she would have
been subjected to the immediate sternness of her father's anger.
That she would now escape. She would not be called on to meet him
just when the first blow had fallen upon him. She was quite sure
that he would disapprove of the thing. She was quite sure that he
would be very angry. She knew that he was a peculiarly just man,
and yet she thought that in this he would be unjust. Had she been
called upon to sing the praises of her father she would have
insisted above all things on the absolute integrity of his mind,
and yet, knowing as she did that he would be opposed to her
marriage with Mr Tregear, she assured herself every day and every
hour that he had no right to make any such objection. The man she
loved was a gentleman, and an honest man, by no means a fool, and
subject to no vices. Her father had no right to demand that she
should give her heart to a rich man, or to one of high rank. Rank!
 As for rank, she told herself that she had the most supreme
contempt for it. She thought that she had seen it near enough
already to be sure that it ought to have no special allurements.
What was it doing for her? Simply restraining her choice among
comparatively a few who seemed to her by no means best endowed of
God's creatures.

Of one thing she was very sure, that under no pressure whatsoever
would she abandon her engagement to Mr Tregear. That to her had
become a bond almost as holy as matrimony itself could be. She had
told the man that she loved him, and after that there could be no
retreat. He had kissed her, and she had returned his caress. He
had told her that she was his, as his arm was round her; and she
had acknowledged that it was so, that she belonged to him, and
could not be taken away from him. All this was to her a compact so
sacred that nothing could break it but a desire on his part to
have it annulled. No other man had an idea entered into her mind
that it could be pleasant to join her lot in life with his. With
her it had been all new and all sacred. Love with her had that
religion which nothing but freshness can give it. That freshness,
that bloom, may last through a long life. But every change impairs
it, and after many changes it has perished forever. There was no
question with her but that she must bear her father's anger,
should he be angry; put up with his continued opposition, should
he resolutely oppose her; bear all that the countesses of the
world might say to her;--for it was thus that she thought of Lady
Cantrip now. And retrogression was beyond her power.

She was walking with her father when she first heard of the
intended trip to London. At that time she had received Mrs Finn's
first letter, but not the second. 'I suppose you will see
Silverbridge,' she said. She knew that Frank Tregear was living
with her brother.

'I am going up on purpose to see him. He is causing me much
annoyance.'

'Is he extravagant?'

'It is not that--at present.'  He winced even as he said this, for
he had in truth suffered somewhat from demands made upon him for
money; which had hurt him not so much by their amount as by their
nature. Lord Silverbridge had taken upon himself to 'own a horse
or two', very much to his father's chagrin, and was at that moment
part proprietor of an animal supposed to stand well for the Derby.
The fact was not announced in the papers with his lordship's name,
but his father was aware of it, and did not like it the better
because his son held the horse in partnership with a certain Major
Tifto, who was well known in the sporting world.

'What is it, papa?'

'Of course he ought to go into Parliament.'

'I think he wishes it himself.'

'Yes, but how? By a piece of extreme good fortune. West
Barsetshire is open to him. The two seats are vacant together.
There is hardly another agricultural county in England that will
return a Liberal, and I fear I am not asserting too much in saying
that no other Liberal could carry the seat but one of our family.'

'You used to sit for Silverbridge, papa.'

'Yes, I did. In those days the county returned four Conservatives.
I cannot explain it all to you, but it is his duty to contest the
county on the Liberal side.'

'But if he is a Conservative himself, papa?' asked Lady Mary, who
had some political ideas suggested to her own mind by her lover.

'It is all rubbish. It has come from that young man Tregear, with
whom he has been associating.'

'But, papa,' said Lady Mary, who felt that even in this matter she
was bound to be firm on what was now her side of the question. 'I
suppose it is as--as--as respectable to be a Conservative as a
Liberal.'

'I don't know that at all,' said the Duke angrily.

'I thought that--the two sides were--'

She was going to express an opinion that the two parties might be
supposed to stand as equal in the respect of the country, when he
interrupted her. 'The Pallisers have always been Liberal. It will
be a blow to me, indeed, if Silverbridge deserts his colours. I
know that as yet he himself has had no deep thoughts on the
subject, that unfortunately he does not give himself much to
thinking, and that in this matter he is being taken over by a
young man whose position in life hardly justified the great
intimacy which has existed.'

This was very far from being comfortable to her, but of course she
said nothing in defence of Tregear's politics. Nor at present was
she disposed to say anything to his position in life, though at
some future time she might not be so silent. A few days later they
were again walking together, when he spoke to her about himself.
'I cannot bear that you should be left her alone while I am away,'
he said.

'You will not be long gone, I suppose?'

'Only for three of four days now.'

'I shall not mind, papa.'

'But very probably I may have to go to Barsetshire. Would you not
be happier if you would let me write to Lady Cantrip, and tell her
that you will go to her?'

'No, papa, I think not. There are times when one feels that one
ought to be almost alone. Don't you feel that?'

'I do not wish you to feel it, nor would you do so long if you had
other people round you. With me it is different. I am an old man,
and cannot look for new pleasures in society. It has been the
fault of my life to be too much alone. I do not want to see my
children follow me in that.'

'It is so very short time as yet,' said she, thinking of her
mother's death.

'But I think that you should be with somebody,--with some woman who
would be kind to you. I like to see you with books, but books
alone should not be sufficient at your age.'  How little, she
thought, did he know of the state either of her heart or mind!
'Do you dislike Lady Cantrip?'

'I do not know her. I can't say that I dislike a person whom I
don't think I ever spoke to, and never saw above once or twice.
But how can I say that I like her?'  She did, however, know that
Lady Cantrip was a countess all over, and would be shocked at the
idea of a daughter of a Duke of Omnium marrying the younger son of
a country squire. Nothing further was then said on the matter, and
when the Duke went to town, Lady Mary was left quite alone, with
an understanding that if he went into Barsetshire he should come
back and take her with him.

He arrived at his own house in Carlton Terrace about five o'clock
in the afternoon, and immediately went to his study, intending to
dine and spend the evening there alone. His son had already
pleaded an engagement for that afternoon, but had consented to
devote the following morning to his father's wishes. Of the other
sojourner in his house the Duke had thought nothing; but the other
sojourner had thought very much of the Duke. Frank Tregear was
fully possessed of that courage which induces a man who knows that
he must be thrown over a precipice, to choose the first possible
moment for his fall. He had sounded Silverbridge about the change
in his politics, and had found his friend quite determined not to
go back to the family doctrine. Such being the case, the Duke's
ill-will and hardness and general severity would probably be
enhanced by his interview with his son. Tregear, therefore,
thinking that nothing could be got by delay, sent his name in to
the Duke before he had been an hour in the house, and asked for an
interview. The servant brought back word that his Grace was
fatigued, but would see Mr Tregear if the matter in question was
one of importance. Frank's heart quailed for a moment, but only
for a moment. He took up a pen and wrote a note.

'MY DEAR DUKE OF OMNIUM,
'If your Grace can spare a moment, I think you
will  find that what I have to say will justify the
intrusion.
'Your very faithful servant,
F.O.TREGEAR'

Of course the Duke admitted him. There was but one idea on his
head as to what was coming. His son had taken this way of making
some communication to him respecting his political creed. Some
overture or some demand was to be preferred through Tregear. If
so, it was proof of a certain anxiety on the matter on his son's
part which was not displeasing to him. But he was not left long in
the mistake after Tregear had entered the room. 'Sir,' he said,
speaking quite at once, as soon as the door was closed behind him,
but still speaking very slowly, looking beautiful as Apollo as he
stood upright before his wished-for father-in-law--'Sir, I have
come to ask you to give me the hand of your daughter.'  The few
words had been all arranged beforehand, and were now spoken
without any appearance of fear or shame. No one hearing them would
have imagined that an almost penniless young gentleman was asking
in marriage the daughter of the richest and greatest nobleman in
England.

'The hand of my daughter!' said the Duke, rising from his chair.

'I know how very great is the prize,' said Frank, 'and how
unworthy I am of it. But--as she thinks me worthy--'

'She! What she?'

'Lady Mary.'

'She think you worthy!'

'Yes, your Grace.'

'I do not believe it.'  On hearing this, Frank simply bowed his
head. 'I beg your pardon, Mr Tregear. I do not mean to say that I
do not believe you. I never gave the lie to any gentleman, and I
hope I never may be driven to do so. But there must be some
mistake in this.'

'I am complying with Lady Mary's wishes in asking your permission
to enter your house as a suitor.'  The Duke stood for a moment
biting his lips in silence. 'I cannot believe it,' he said at
last. 'I cannot bring myself to believe it. There must be some
mistake. My daughter! Lady Mary Palliser!'  Again the young man
bowed his head. 'What are your pretensions?'

'Simply her regard.'

'Of course it is impossible. You are not so ignorant but that you
must have known as much when you came to me.'

There was so much scorn in his words, and in the tone in which
they were uttered, that Tregear in his turn was becoming angry. He
had prepared himself to bow humbly before the great man, before
the Duke, before the Croesus, before the late Prime Minister,
before the man who was to be regarded as certainly the most
exalted of the earth; but he had not prepared himself to be looked
at as the Duke looked at him. 'The truth, my Lord Duke, is this,'
he said, 'that your daughter loves me, and that we are engaged to
each other,--as far as that engagement can be made without your
sanction as her father.'

'It cannot have been made at all,' said the Duke.

'I can only hope,--we can both of us only hope that a little time
may soften-'

'It is out of the question. There must be an end of this
altogether. You must neither see her, nor hear from her, no in any
way communicate with her. It is altogether impossible. I believe,
sir, that you have no means?'

'Very little at present, Duke.'

'How did you think you were to live? But it is altogether
unnecessary to speak of such a matter as that. There are so many
reasons to make this impossible, that it would be useless to
discuss one as being more important than the others. Has any other
one of my family known of this?'  This he added, wishing to
ascertain whether Lord Silverbridge had disgraced himself by
lending his hand to such a disposition of his sister.

'Oh, yes,' said Tregear.

'Who has known it?'

'The Duchess, sir. We had all her sympathy and approval.'

'I do not believe a word of it,' said the Duke, becoming extremely
red in the face. He was forced to do now that which he had just
declared that he had never done in his life,--driven by the desire
of his heart to acquit the wife he had lost of the terrible
imprudence, worse than imprudence, of which she was now accused.

'That is the second time, my Lord, that you have found it
necessary to tell me that you have not believed direct assertions
which I made to you. But, luckily for me, the two assertions are
capable of the earliest and most direct proof. You will believe
Lady Mary, and she will confirm me in the one and the other.'

The Duke was almost beside himself with emotion and grief. He did
know,--though now at this moment he was most loath to own to
himself that it was so,--that his dear wife had been the most
imprudent of women. And he recognized in her encouragement of this
most pernicious courtship,---if she had encouraged it,---a repetition
of that romantic folly by which she had so nearly brought herself
to shipwreck her own early life. If it had been so,---even whether
it had been so or not,--he had been wrong to tell the man that he
did not believe him. And the man had rebuked him with dignity. 'At
any rate it is impossible,' he repeated.

'I cannot allow that it is impossible.'

'That is for me to judge, sir.'

'I trust that you will excuse me when I say that I also must hold
myself to be in some degree a judge in the matter. If you were in
my place, you would feel--'

'I could not possibly be in your place.'

'If your Grace were in my place you would feel that as long as you
were assured by the young lady that your affection was valued by
her you would not be deterred by the opposition of her father.
That you should yield to me, of course, I do not expect; that Lady
Mary should be persistent in her present feelings when she knows
your mind, perhaps I have no right to hope. But should she be so
persistent as to make you feel that her happiness depends, as mine
does, on our marriage, then I shall believe that you will yield at
last.'

'Never!' said the Duke. 'Never! I shall never believe that my
daughter's happiness can be assured by a step which I should regard
as disgraceful to her.'

'Disgraceful is a violent word, my Lord.'

'It is the only word that will express my meaning.'

'And one which I must be bold enough to say you are not justified
in using. Should she become my wife tomorrow, no one in England
would think that she had disgraced herself. The Queen would
receive her on her marriage. All your friends would hold their
hands out to us,--presuming that we had your good-will.'

'But you would not have it.'

'Her disgrace would not depend upon that, my Lord. Should your
daughter so dispose herself, as to disgrace herself,--which I think
to be impossible,--your countenance could not set her right. Nor
can the withdrawal of your countenance condemn her before the
world if she does that with herself which any other lady might do
and remain a lady.'

The Duke, when he heard this, even in the midst of his wrath,
which was very violent, and the in the midst of his anger, which
was very acute, felt that he had to deal with a man,--with one whom
he could not put off from him into the gutter, and there leave as
buried in the mud. And there came, too, a feeling upon him, which
he had no time to analyse, but of which he was part aware, that
this terrible indiscretion on the part of his daughter and of his
late wife was less wonderful than it had at first appeared to be.
But not on that account was he the less determined to make the
young man feel that his parental opposition would be invincible.
'It is quite impossible, sir. I do not think that I need say
anything more.'  Then, while Tregear was meditating whether to
make any reply; the Duke asked a question which had better have
been left unasked. The asking of it diminished somewhat from that
ducal, grand-ducal, quasi-archducal, almost Godlike superiority
which he had assumed, and showed the curiosity of a mere man. 'Has
anybody else been aware of this?' he said, still wishing to know
whether he had cause for anger against Silverbridge in the matter.

'Mrs Finn is aware of it,' said Tregear.

'Mrs Finn!' exclaimed the Duke, as though he had been stung by an
adder. This was the woman whom he had prayed to remain awhile with
his daughter after his wife had been laid in her grave, in order
that there might be someone near whom he could trust!  And this
very woman whom he had so trusted,--whom, in his early associations
with her, he had disliked and distrusted, but had taught himself
both to like and to trust because his wife had loved her,--this
woman was the she-Pandarus who had managed matters between Tregear
and his daughter!  His wife had been too much subject to her
influence. That he had always known.  And now, in this last act of
her life, she had allowed herself to be persuaded to give up her
daughter by the baneful wiles of this most pernicious woman. Such
were the workings of the Duke's mind when the young man told him
that Mrs Finn was acquainted with the whole affair. As the reader
is aware, nothing could have been more unjust.

'I mentioned her name,' said Tregear, 'because I thought she had
been a friend of the family.'

'That will do, sir. I have been greatly pained as well as
surprised by what I have heard. Of the real state of the case I
can form no opinion till I see my daughter. You, of course, will
hold no further intercourse with her.'  He paused as though for a
promise, but Tregear did not feel himself called upon to say a
word in one direction or the other. 'It will be my care that you
shall not do so. Good-morning, sir.'

Tregear, who during the interview had been standing, then bowed,
turned upon his heel and left the room.

The Duke seated himself, and, crossing his arms upon his chest,
sat for an hour looking up at the ceiling. Why was it that, for
him, such a world of misery had been prepared?  What wrong had he
done, of what imprudence had been guilty, that, at every turn of
life, something should occur so grievous as to make him think of
himself the most wretched of men?  No man had ever loved his wife
more dearly than he had done; and yet now, in that very excess of
tenderness which her death had occasioned, he was driven to accuse
her of a great sin against himself, in that she had kept from him
her knowledge of this affair;--for, when he came to turn the matter
over in his mind, he did believe Tregear's statement as to her
encouragement. Then, too, he had been proud of his daughter. He
was a man so reticent and undemonstrative in his manner that he
had never known how to make confidential friends of his children.
In his sons hitherto he had not taken pride. They were gallant,
well-grown, handsome boys with a certain dash of cleverness,--more
like their mother than their father; but they had not as yet done
anything as he would have made them do it. But the girl, in the
perfection of her beauty, in the quiescence of her manner, in the
nature of her studies, and in the general dignity of her bearing,
had seemed to be all that he had desired. And now she had engaged
herself, behind his back, to the younger son of a county squire!

But his anger against Mrs Finn was hotter than the anger against
anyone in his own family.



CHAPTER 6

Major Tifto

Major Tifto had lately become a member of the Beargarden Club,
under the auspices of his friend Lord Silverbridge. It was
believed, by those who had made some inquiry into the matter, that
the Major had really served a campaign as a volunteer in the
Carlist army in the north of Spain. When, therefore, it was
declared by someone else that he was not a major at all, his
friends were able to contradict the assertion, and to impute it to
slander. Instances were brought up,--declared by these friends to be
innumerable, but which did, in truth, amount to three of four,--of
English gentlemen who had come up from a former Carlist war,
bearing the title of colonel, without any contradiction or
invidious remark. Had this gallant officer appeared as Colonel
Tifto, perhaps less might have been said about it. There was a
little lack of courage in the title which he did choose. But it
was accepted at last, and, as Major Tifto, he was proposed,
seconded, and elected at the Beargarden.

But he had other points in his favour besides the friendship of
Lord Silverbridge,--points which had probably led to that
friendship. He was, without doubt, one of the best horsemen in
England. There were some who said that, across country, he was the
very best, and that, as a judge of hunters few excelled him. Of
late years he had crept into credit as a betting-man. No one
supposed that he had much capital to work with, but still, when he
lost a bet he paid it.

Soon after his return from Spain, he was chosen as Master of the
Runnymede Fox Hounds, and was thus enabled to write the letters
M.F.H. after his name. The gentlemen who rode in the Runnymede
were not very liberal in their terms, and had lately been
compelled to change their Master rather more frequently than was
good for that quasi-suburban hunt; but now they had fitted
themselves well. How he was to hunt the county five days a
fortnight, finding servants and horses, and feeding the hounds,
for eight hundred pounds a year, no one could understand. But
Major Tifto not only undertook to do it, but did it. And he
actually succeeded in obtaining for the Runnymede a degree of
popularity which for many years previous it had not possessed.
Such a man,--even though no one did know anything of his father or
mother, though no one had ever heard him speak of a brother or a
sister, though it was believed that he had no real income,--was
felt by many to be the very man for the Beargarden; and when his
name was brought up at the committee, Lord Silverbridge was able
to say so much in his favour that only two blackballs were given
against him. Under the mild rule of the club, three would have
been necessary to exclude him; and therefore Major Tifto was now
as good a member as anyone else.

He was a well-made little man, good-looking for those who like
such good looks. He was light-haired and blue-eyed, with regular
and yet not inexpressive features. But his eyes were small and
never tranquil, and rarely capable of looking at the person who
was speaking to him. He had small, well-trimmed, glossy whiskers,
with the best-kept mustache, and the best-kept tuft on his chin
which were to be seen anywhere. His face still bore the freshness
of youth, which was a marvel to many, who declared that, from
facts within their knowledge, Tifto must be far on the wrong side
of forty. At a first glance you would hardly have called him
thirty. No doubt, when, on close inspection, you came to look into
his eyes, you could see the hand of time. Even if you believed the
common assertion that he painted,--which it was very hard to
believe of a man who passed the most of his time in the hunting-
field or on a race-course,--yet the paint on his cheeks would not
enable him to move with the elasticity which seemed to belong to
all his limbs. He rode flat races and steeple chases,--if jump
races may still be so called; and with his own hounds and with the
Queen's did incredible things on horseback. He could jump over
chairs too,--the backs of four chairs in a dining-room after
dinner,--a feat which no gentleman of forty-five could perform,
even though he painted himself ever so.

So much in praise of Major Tifto honesty has compelled the present
chronicler to say. But there were traits of character in which he
fell off a little, even in the estimation of those whose pursuits
endeared him to them. He could not refrain from boasting,--and
especially from boasting about women. His desire for glory in that
direction knew no bounds, and he would sometimes mention names,
and bring himself into trouble. It was told of him that at one
period of his life, when misfortune had almost overcome him, when
sorrow had produced prostration, and prostration some expression
of truth, he had owned to a friend his own conviction that could
he have kept his tongue from talking of women, he might have risen
to prosperity in his profession. From these misfortunes he had
emerged, and, no doubt, had often reflected on what he himself had
then said. But we know that the drunkard, though he hates
drunkenness, cannot but drink,--that the gambler cannot keep from
the dice. Major Tifto still lied about women, and could not keep
his tongue from the subject. He would boast, too, about other
matters,--much to his own disadvantage. He was, too, very 'deep',
and some men, who could put up with his other failings, could not
endure that. Whatever he wanted to do he would attempt round three
corners. Though he could ride straight, he could do nothing else
straight. He was full of mysteries. If he wanted to draw Charter
Wood he would take his hounds out of the street at Egham directly
in the other direction. If he had made up his mind to ride Lord
Pottlepot's horse for the great Leamington handicap, he would be
sure to tell even his intimate friends that he was almost
determined to take the 'baronet's' offer of a mount. This he would
do even when there was no possible turn in the betting to be
affected by such falsehood. So that his companions were apt to
complain that there was no knowing where to have Tifto. And then,
they who were old enough in the world to have had some experience
in men, perceived that peculiar quality of his eyes, which never
allowed him to look anyone in the face.

That Major Tifto should make money by selling horses was, perhaps,
a necessity to his position. No one grumbled at him because he did
so, or thought that such a pursuit was incompatible with his
character as a sporting gentleman. But there were some who
considered that they had suffered unduly under his hands, and in
their bargains with him had been made to pay more than a proper
amount of tax for the advantages of his general assistance. When a
man has perhaps made fifty pounds by using a 'straight tip' as to
a horse at Newmarket, in doing which he had of course encountered
some risks, he feels he ought not be made to pay the amount back
into the pockets of the 'tipper', and at the same time to find
himself saddled with the possession of a perfectly useless animal.
In this way there were rocks in the course through which Tifto was
called on to steer his bark. Of course he was anxious, when
preying upon his acquaintances, to spare those who were useful
friends to him. Now and again he would sell a serviceable animal
at a fair price, and would endeavour to make such a sale in favour
of someone whose countenance would be a rock to him. He knew his
business well, but yet there would be mistakes.

Now, at this very moment, was the culmination of the Major's life.
He was Master of Runnymede Hounds, he was partner with the eldest
son of a Duke in the possession of that magnificent colt, the
Prime Minister, and he was a member of the Beargarden. He was a
man who had often been despondent about himself, but was now
disposed to be little triumphant. He had finished his season well
with the Runnymede, and were it not that, let him work as he
would, his expenses always exceeded his means, he would have been
fairly comfortable.

At eight o'clock Lord Silverbridge and his friend met in the
dining-room of the Beargarden. 'Have you been here before?' asked
the Lord.

'Not in here, my Lord. I just looked in at the smoking-room last
night. Glasslough and Nidderdale were there. I thought we should
have got up a rubber, but they didn't seem to see it.'

'There is whist there generally. You'll find out all about it
before long. Perhaps they are a little afraid of you.'

'I'm the worst hand at cards, I suppose, In England. A dash at loo
for about an hour, and half-a-dozen cuts at blind hookey,--that's
about my form. I know I drop more than I pick up. If I knew what I
was about I should never touch a card.'

'Horses; eh, Tifto?'

'Horses, yes. They've pretty good claret, here, eh, Silverbridge?'
He could never hit off his familiarity quite right. He had my-
Lorded his young friend at first, and now brought out the name
with a hesitating twang, which the young nobleman appreciated. But
then the young nobleman was quite aware that the Major was a
friend for club purposes, and sporting purposes, and not for home
use.

'Everything of that kind is pretty good here,' said the Lord.

'You were saying--horses.'

'I dare say you deal better with them than cards.'

'If I didn't I don't know where I should be, seeing what a lot
pass through my hands in the year. Anyone of our fellows who has a
horse to sell thinks that I am bound to buy him. And I do buy 'em.
Last May I had forty-two hunters on my hands.'

'How many of them have you got now?'

'Three. Three of that lot,--though a goodish many have come up
since. But what does it amount to?  When I have anything that is
very good, some fellow that I like gets it from me.'

'After paying for him?'

'After paying for him!  Yes, I don't mean that I make a fellow a
present. But the man who buys has a deal the best of it. Did you
ever get anything better than that spotted chestnut in your life?'

'What, old Sarcinet?'

'You had her for one hundred and sixty pounds. Now, if you were on
your oath, what is she worth?'

'She suits me, Major, and of course I shouldn't sell her.'

'I rather think not. I knew what that mare was well enough. A
dealer would have had three hundred and fifty pounds for her. I
could have got the money easily if I had taken her down into the
shires, and ridden her a day or two myself.'

'I gave you what you asked.'

'Yes, you did. It isn't often that I take less than I ask. But the
fact is, about horses. I don't know whether I shouldn't do better
if I never owned an animal at all but those I want for my own use.
When I am dealing with a man I call a friend, I can't bear to make
money of him. I don't think fellows give me all the credit they
should do for sticking to them.'  The Major, as he said this,
leaned back in his chair, put his hand up to his mustache, and
looked sadly away into the vacancy of the room, as though he were
meditating sorrowfully on the ingratitude of the world.

'I suppose it's all right about Cream Cheese?' asked the Lord.

'Well; it ought to be.'  And now the Major spoke like an oracle,
leaning forward on the table, uttering his words in a low voice,
but very plainly, so that not a syllable might be lost. 'When you
remember how he ran at the Craven with 9st 12lb on him, that it
took Archbishop all he knew to beat him with only 9st 2lb, and
what the lot at Chester are likely to be, I don't think that there
can be seven to one against him. I should be very glad to take it
off your hands, only the figures are a little too heavy for me.'

'I suppose Sunflower'll be the best animal there?'

'Not a doubt of it, if he's all right, and if his temper will
stand. Think what a course Chester is for an ill-conditioned brute
like that!  And then he's the most uncertain horse in training.
There are times he won't feed. From what I hear, I shouldn't
wonder if he don't turn up at all.'

'Solomon says he's all right.'

'You won't get Solomon to take four to one against him, nor yet
four and a half. I suppose you'll go down my Lord?'

'Well, yes; if there's nothing else doing just then. I don't know
how it may be about this electioneering business. I shall go and
smoke upstairs.'

At the Beargarden there were,--I was going to say, two smoking-
rooms; but in truth the house was a smoking-room all over. It was,
however, the custom of those who habitually played cards, to have
their cigars and coffee upstairs. Into this sanctum Major Tifto
had not yet been introduced, but now he was taken there under Lord
Silverbridge's wing. There were already four or five assembled,
among whom was Mr Adolphus Longstaff, a young man of about thirty-
five years of age, who spent very much of his time at the
Beargarden. 'Do you know my friend Tifto?' said the Lord. 'Tifto,
this is Mr Longstaff, whom men within the walls of this asylum
sometimes call Dolly.'  Whereupon the Major bowed and smiled
graciously.

'I have heard of Major Tifto,' said Dolly.

'Who has not?' said Lord Nidderdale, another middle-aged young
man, who made one of the company. Again the Major bowed.

'Last season I was always intending to get down to your country
and have a day with the Tiftoes,' said Dolly. 'Don't they call
your hounds the Tiftoes?'

'They shall be called so if you like,' said the Major. 'And why
didn't you come?'

'It always was such a grind.'

'Train down from Paddington every day at 10.30.'

'That's all very well if you happen to be up. Well, Silverbridge,
how's the Prime Minister?'

'How is he, Tifto?' asked the noble partner.

'I don't think there's a man in England just at present enjoying a
very much better state of health,' said the Major pleasantly.

'Safe to run?' asked Dolly.

'Safe to run! Why shouldn't he be safe to run?'

'I means sure to start.'

'I think we mean him to start, don't we, Silverbridge?' said the
Major.

There was something perhaps in the tone in which the last remark
was made which jarred a little against the young lord's dignity.
At any rate he got up and declared his purpose of going to the
opera. He should look in, he said, and hear a song from
Mademoiselle Stuffa. Mademoiselle Stuffa was the nightingale of
the season, and Lord Silverbridge, when he had nothing else to do,
would sometimes think that he was fond of music. Soon after he was
gone Major Tifto had some whisky-and-water, lit his third cigar,
and began to feel the glory of belonging to the Beargarden. With
Lord Silverbridge, to whom it was essentially necessary that he
should make himself agreeable at all times, he was somewhat
overweighted as it were. Though he attempted an easy familiarity,
he was a little afraid of Lord Silverbridge. With Dolly Longstaff
he felt that he might be comfortable,--not, perhaps, understanding
that gentleman's character. With Lord Nidderdale he had previously
been acquainted, and had found him to be good-natured. So he
sipped his whisky, he became confidential and comfortable.

'I never thought so much about her good looks,' he said. They were
talking of the singer, the charm of whose voice had carried Lord
Silverbridge away.

'Did you ever see her off the stage?' asked Nidderdale.

'Oh dear yes.'

'She does not go about very much, I fancy,' said someone.

'I dare say not,' said Tifto. 'But she and I have had a day or two
together, for all that.'

'You must have been very much favoured,' said Dolly.

'We've been pals ever since she has been over here,' said Tifto,
with an enormous lie.

'How do you get on with her husband?' asked Dolly,--in the simplest
voice, as though not in the least surprised at his companion's
statement.

'Husband!' exclaimed the Major; who was not possessed of
sufficient presence of mind to suppress all signs of ignorance.

'Ah,' said Dolly; 'you are not probably aware that your pal has
been married to Mr Thomas Jones for the last year and a half.'
Soon after that Major Tifto left the club,--with considerable
enhanced respect for Mr Longstaff.



CHAPTER 7

Conservative Convictions

Lord Silverbridge had engaged himself to be with his father the
next morning at half-past nine, and he entered the breakfast-room
a very few minutes after that hour. He had made up his mind as to
what he would say to his father. He meant to call himself a
Conservative, and to go into the House of Commons under that
denomination. All the men among whom he lived were Conservatives.
It was a matter on which, as he thought, his father could have no
right to command him.  Down in Barsetshire, as well as up in
London, there was some little difference of opinion in this
matter. The people of Silverbridge declared that they would prefer
to have a conservative member, as indeed they had had one for the
last session. They had loyally returned the Duke himself while he
was a commoner, but they had returned him as being part and parcel
of the Omnium appendages. That was all over now. As a constituency
they were not endowed with advanced views, and thought that a
Conservative would suit them best. That being so, and as they had
been told that the Duke's son was a Conservative, they fancied
that by electing him they would be pleasing everybody. But, in
truth, by so doing they would by no means please the Duke. He had
told them on previous occasions that they might elect whom they
pleased, and felt no anger because they had elected a
Conservative. They might send up to Parliament the most
antediluvian old Tory they could find in England if they wished,
on not his son, not a Palliser as a Tory or Conservative. And
then, though the little town had gone back in the ways of the
world, the county, or the Duke's division of the county, had made
so much progress, that a Liberal candidate recommended by him
would almost certainly be returned. It was just the occasion on
which a Palliser should show himself ready to serve his country.
There would be an expense, but he would think nothing of expense
in such a matter. Ten thousand pounds spent on such an object
would not vex him. The very contest would have given him new life.
All this Lord Silverbridge understood, but had said to himself and
to all his friends that it was a matter in which he did not intend
to be controlled.

The Duke had passed a very unhappy night. He had told himself that
any such marriage as that spoken of was out of the question. He
believed that the matter might be so represented to his girl as to
make her feel that it was out of the question. He hardly doubted
but that he could stamp it out. Though he should have to take her
away to some further corner of the world, he would stamp it out.
But she, when this foolish passion of hers should have been thus
stamped out, could never be the pure, the bright, the unsullied,
unsoiled thing, of the possession of which he had thought so much.
He had never spoken of his hopes about her even to his wife, but
in the silence of his very silent life he had thought much of the
day when he would give her to some noble youth,--noble with all the
gifts of nobility, including rank and wealth,--who might be fit to
receive her. Now, even though no one else should know it,--and all
would know it,--she would be the girl who had condescended to love
young Tregear.

His own Duchess, she whose loss to him now was as though he had
lost half of his limbs,--had not she in the same way loved a
Tregear, or worse than a Tregear, in her early days?  Ah, yes!
And though his Cora had been so much to him, had he not often
felt, had he not been feeling all his days, that Fate had robbed
him of the sweetest joy that is given to man, in that she had not
come to him loving him with her early spring of love, as she had
loved that poor ne'er-do-well? How infinite had been his regrets.
How often had he told himself that, with all that Fortune had
given him, still Fortune had been unjust to him because he had
been robbed of that. Not to save his life could he have whispered
a word of this to anyone, but he had felt it. He had felt it for
years. Dear as she had been, she had not been quite what she
should have been but for that. And now this girl of his, who was
so much dearer to him than anything else left to him, was doing
exactly as her mother had done. The young man might be stamped
out. He might be made to vanish as that other young man had
vanished. But the fact that he had been there, cherished in the
girl's heart,--that could not be stamped out.

He struggled gallantly to acquit the memory of his wife. He could
best do that by leaning with the full weight of his mind on the
presumed iniquity of Mrs Finn. Had he not known from the first
that the woman was an adventuress? And had he not declared to
himself over and over again that between such a one and himself
there should be no intercourse, no common feeling? He had allowed
himself to be talked into an intimacy, to be talked into an
affection. And this was the result!

And how should he treat this matter in his coming interview with
his son,--or should he make allusion to it? At first it seemed as
though it would be impossible for him to give his mind to that
other subject. How could he enforce the merits of political
liberalism, and the duty of adhering to the old family party,
while his mind was entirely preoccupied with his daughter?  It had
suddenly become almost indifferent to him whether Silverbridge
should be a Conservative or a Liberal. But as he dressed he told
himself, that, as a man, he ought to be able to do a plain duty,
marked out for him as this had been by his own judgement, without
regard to personal suffering. The hedger and ditcher must make his
hedge clean and clean his ditch even though he be tormented by
rheumatism. His duty by his son he must do, even though his heart
were torn to pieces.

During breakfast he tried to be gracious, and condescended to ask
a question about Prime Minister. Racing was an amusement to which
English noblemen had been addicted for many ages, and had been
held to be serviceable rather than disgraceful, if conducted in a
noble fashion. He did not credit Tifto with much nobility. He knew
but little about the Major. He would much have preferred that his
son should have owned a horse alone, if he must have anything to
do with ownership. 'Would it not be better to buy the other
share?' asked the Duke.

'It would take a deal of money, sir. The Major would ask a couple
of thousand, I should think.'

'That is a great deal.'

'And then the Major is a very useful man. He thoroughly
understands the turf.'

'I hope he doesn't live by it?'

'Oh no, he doesn't live by it. That is, he has a great many irons
in the fire.'

'I do not mind a young man owning a horse, if he can afford the
expense,--as you perhaps can do; but I hope you don't bet.'

'Nothing to speak of.'

'Nothing to speak of is so apt to grow into that which has to be
spoken of.'  So much that father said at breakfast, hardly giving
his mind to the matter discussed,--his mind being on other things.
But when their breakfast was eaten, then it was necessary that he
should begin. 'Silverbridge,' he said, 'I hope you have thought
better of what we were talking about as to these coming
elections.'

'Well, sir,--of course I have thought about it.'

'And can you do as I would have you?'

'You see, sir, a man's political opinion is a kind of thing he
can't get rid of.'

'You can hardly as yet have any confirmed political opinion. You
are still young, and I do not suppose that you have thought much
about politics.'

'Well, sir; I think I have. I've got my own ideas. We've got to
protect our position as well as we can against the Radicals and
Communists.'

'I cannot admit that at all, Silverbridge. There is no great
political party in this county anxious either for communism or for
revolution. But, putting all that aside for the present, do you
think that a man's political opinions should be held in regard to
his own individual interests, or to the much wider interests of
others, whom we call the public?'

'To his own interest,' said the young man with decision.

'It is simply self-protection then?'

'His own and his class. The people will look after themselves, and
we must look after ourselves. We are so few and they are so many,
that we shall have quite enough to do.'

Then the Duke gave his son a somewhat lengthy political lecture,
which was intended to teach him that the greatest benefit of the
greatest number was the object to which all political studies
should tend. The son listened with attention, and when it was
over, expressed his opinion that there was a great deal in what
his father had said. 'I trust, if you will consider it,' said the
Duke, 'that you will not find yourself obliged to desert the
school of politics in which your father has not been an inactive
supporter, and to which your family has belonged for many years.'

'I could not call myself a Liberal,' said the young politician.

'Why not?'

'Because I am a Conservative.'

'And you won't stand for the county on the Liberal interest?'

'I should be obliged to tell them that I should always give a
Conservative vote.'

'Then you refuse to do as I ask?'

'I do not know how I can help refusing it. If you wanted me to
grow a couple of inches taller, I couldn't do it, even though I
should be ever so anxious to oblige you.'

'But a very young man, as you are, may have so much deference for
his elders as to be induced to believe that he has been in error.'

'Oh yes; of course.'

'You cannot but be aware that the political condition of the
country is the one subject to which I have devoted the labour of
my life.'

'I know that very well; and of course, I know how much they all
think of you.'

'Then my opinion might go for something with you?'

'So it does, sir; I shouldn't have doubted at all only for that.
Still, you see, as the thing is,--how am I to help myself?'

'You believe that you must be right,--you who have never given an
hour's study to the subject.'

'No, sir. In comparison with a great many men, I know that I am a
fool. Perhaps it is because I know that, that I am a Conservative.
The Radicals are always saying that a Conservative must be a fool.
Then a fool ought to be a Conservative.'

Hereupon the father got up from his chair and turned round, facing
the fire, with his back to his son. He was becoming very angry,
but endeavoured to restrain his anger. The matter in dispute
between them was of so great importance, that he could hardly be
justified in abandoning it in consequence of arguments so trifling
in themselves as these which his son adduced. As he stood there
for some minutes thinking of it all, he was tempted again and
again to burst out in wrath and threaten the lad,--to threaten him
as to money, as to his amusements, as to the general tenure of his
life. The pity was so great that the lad should be so stubborn and
so foolish!  He would never ask his son to be a slave to the
Liberal party, as he had been. But that a Palliser should not be a
Liberal,--and his son, as the first recreant Palliser,--was
wormwood to him!  As he stood there he more than once clenched his
fist in eager desire to turn upon the young man; but he restrained
himself, telling himself that in justice he should not be angry
for such offence as this. To become a Conservative, when the path
to liberalism was so fairly open, might be the part of a fool, but
could not fairly be imputed as a crime. To endeavour to be just
was the study of his life, and in no condition of life can justice
be more imperatively due than from a father to his son.

'You mean to stand for Silverbridge?' he said at last.

'Not if you object, sir.'

This made it worse. It became now still more difficult for him to
scold the young man. 'You are aware that I should not meddle in
any way.'

'That is what I supposed. They will return a Conservative at any
rate.'

'It is not that I care about,' said the Duke sadly.

'Upon my word, sir, I am very sorry to vex you; but what would you
have me do? I will give up Parliament altogether, if you say that
you wish it.'

'No; I do not wish that.'

'You wouldn't have me tell a lie?'

'No.'

'What can I do then?'

'Learn what there is to learn from some master fit to teach you.'

'There are so many masters.'

'I believe it to be that most arrogant ill-behaved young man who
was with me yesterday who has done this evil.'

'You mean Frank Tregear?'

'I do mean Mr Tregear.'

'He's a Conservative, of course; and of course he and I have been
much together. Was he with you yesterday, sir?'

'Yes, he was.'

'What was that about?' asked Lord Silverbridge, in a voice that
almost betrayed fear, for he knew very well what cause had
produced the interview.

'He has been speaking to me-' When the Duke had got so far as this
he paused, finding himself hardly able to declare the disgrace
which had fallen upon himself and his family. As he did tell the
story, both his face and his voice was altered, so that the son,
in truth, was scared. 'He has been speaking to me about your
sister. Did you know of this?'

'I knew there was something between them.'

'And you encouraged it?'

'No, sir; just the contrary. I have told him that I was quite sure
it would never do.'

'And why did you not tell me?'

'Well, sir; it was hardly my business, was it?'

'Not to guard the honour of your sister?'

'You see, sir; so many things have happened all at once.'

'What things?'

'My dear mother, sir, thought well of him.'  The Duke uttered a
deep sigh, and turned round to the fire. 'I always told him you
would never consent.'

'I should think not.'

'It has come so suddenly. I should have spoken to you about it as
soon as--as soon-' He had meant to say as soon as the husband's
grief for the loss of his wife had been in some degree appeased,
but could not speak the words.  The Duke, however, perfectly
understood him. 'In the meantime, they were not seeing each
other.'

'Nor writing?'

'I think not.'

'Mrs Finn has known it all.'

'Mrs Finn!'

'Certainly. She has known all through.'

'I do not see how it can have been so.'

'He told me so himself,' said the Duke, unwittingly putting words
into Tregear's mouth which Tregear had never uttered. 'There must
be an end of this. I will speak to your sister. In the meantime,
the less, I think, you see of Mr Tregear the better. Of course it
is out of the question he should be allowed to remain in this
house. You will make him understand that at once, if you please.'

'Oh, certainly,' said Silverbridge.



CHAPTER 8

He is a Gentleman

The Duke returned to Matching an almost broken-hearted man. He had
intended to go down into Barsetshire, in reference to the coming
elections;--not with the view of interfering in any unlordly, or
rather, unpeerlike fashion, but thinking that if his eldest son
were to stand for the county in a proper constitutional spirit, as
the eldest son of so great a county magnate ought to do, his
presence at Gatherum Castle, among his own people, might properly
be serviceable, and would certainly be gracious. There would be no
question of entertainment. His bereavement would make that
impossible. But there would come from his presence a certain
savour of proprietorship, and a sense of power, which would be
beneficial to his son, and would not, as the Duke thought, be
contrary to the spirit of the constitution. But all this was now
at an end. He told himself that he did not care how the elections
might go;--that he did not care much how anything might go.
Silverbridge might stand for Silverbridge if he so pleased. He
would give neither assistance nor obstruction, either in the
county or in the borough. He wrote to this effect to his agent, Mr
Morton;--but at the same time desired that gentleman to pay Lord
Silverbridge's electioneering expenses, feeling it to be his duty
as a father to do so much for his son.

But though he endeavoured to engage his thoughts in these
parliamentary matters, though he tried to make himself believe
that this political apostasy was the trouble which vexed him, in
truth that other misery was so crushing, as to make the affairs of
his son insignificant. How should he express himself to her? That
was the thought present to his mind as he went down to Matching.
Should he content himself with simply telling her that such a wish
on her part was disgraceful, and that it could never be fulfilled;
or should he argue the matter with her, endeavouring as he did so
to persuade her gently that she was wrong to place her affections
so low, and so to obtain from her an assurance that the idea
should be abandoned?

The latter course would be infinitely the better,--if only he could
accomplish it. But he was conscious of his own hardness of manner,
and was aware that he had never succeeded in establishing
confidence between himself and his daughter. It was a thing for
which he had longed,--as a plain girl might long to possess the
charms of an acknowledged beauty;--as a poor little fellow, five
feet in height, might long to a cubit added to his stature.

Though he was angry with her, how willingly would he take her into
his arms and assure her of his forgiveness!  How anxious he would
be to make her understand that nothing should be spared by him to
add beauty and grace to her life! Only, as a matter of course, Mr
Tregear must be abandoned. But he knew of himself that he would
not know how to begin to be tender and forgiving. He knew that he
would not know not to be stern and hard.

But he must find out the history of it all. No doubt the man had
been his son's friend, and had joined the party in Italy at his
son's instance. But yet he had come to entertain the idea that Mrs
Finn had been the great promoter of this sin, and he thought that
Tregear had told him that that lady had been concerned with the
matter from the beginning. In all this there was a craving in his
heart to lessen the amount of culpable responsibility which might
seem to attach itself to the wife he had lost.

He reached Matching about eight, and ordered his dinner to be
brought to him in his own study. When Lady Mary came to welcome
him, he kissed her forehead, and bade her to come to him after his
dinner. 'Shall I not sit with you, papa, whilst you are eating
it?' she asked; but he merely told her that he would not trouble
her to do that. Even in saying this, he was so unusually tender to
her that she assured herself that her lover had not as yet told
his tale.

The Duke's meals were generally not feasts for a Lucullus. No man
living, perhaps, cared less what he ate, or knew less what he
drank. In such matters he took what was provided for him, making
his dinner off the first bit of meat that was brought, and simply
ignoring anything offered to him afterwards. And he would drink
what wine the servant gave him, mixing it, whatever it might be,
with seltzer water. He had never been given much the pleasures of
the table; but this habit of simplicity had grown on him of late,
till the Duchess used to tell him that his wants were so few that
it was a pity he was not a hermit, vowed to poverty.

Very shortly a message was brought to Lady Mary, saying that her
father wished to see her. She went at once, and found him seated
on a sofa, which stood close along the bookshelves on one side of
the room. The table had already been cleared, and he was alone. He
not only was alone, but had not even a pamphlet or newspaper in
his hand.

Then she knew that Tregear must have told the story. As this
occurred to her, her legs almost gave way under her. 'Come and sit
down, Mary,' he said, pointing to the seat on the sofa beside
himself.

She sat down and took one of his hands within her own. Then, as he
did not begin at once, she asked a question. 'Will Silverbridge
stand for the county, papa?'

'No, my dear.'

'But for the town.'

'Yes, my dear.'

'And he won't be a Liberal?'

'I am afraid not. It is a cause of great unhappiness to me; but I
do not know that I should be justified in any absolute opposition.
A man is entitled to his own opinion, even though he be a very
young man.'

'I am so sorry that it should be so, papa, because it vexes you.'

'I have many things to vex me;--things to break my heart.'

'Poor mamma!' she exclaimed.

'Yes; that above all others. But life and death are in God's
hands, and even though we may complain we can alter nothing. But
whatever our sorrows are, while we are here we must do our duty.'

'I suppose he may be a good Member of Parliament, though he has
turned Conservative.'

'I am not thinking about your brother. I am thinking about you.'
The poor girl gave a little start on the sofa. 'Do you know-Mr
Tregear?' he added.

'Yes, papa; of course I know him. You used to see him in Italy.'

'I believe I did; I understood that he was there as a friend of
Silverbridge.'

'His most intimate friend, papa.'

'I dare say. He came to me in London yesterday, and told me,--! Oh
Mary, can it be true?'

'Yes, papa,' she said, covered up to her forehead with blushes,
and with her eyes turned down. In the ordinary affairs of life she
was a girl of great courage, who was not given to be shaken from
her constancy by the pressures of any present difficulty; but now
the terror inspired by her father's voice almost overpowered her.

'Do you mean to tell me that you have engaged yourself to that
young man without my approval?'

'Of course you were to have been asked, papa.'

'Is that in accordance with your idea of what should be the
conduct of a young lady in your position?'

'Nobody meant to conceal anything from you, papa.'

'It has been so far concealed. And yet this young man has the
self-confidence to come to me and to demand your hand as though it
were a matter of course that I should accede to so trivial a
request. It is, as a matter of course, quite impossible. You
understand that; do you not?'  When she did not answer him at
once, he repeated the question. 'I ask you whether you do not feel
that it is altogether impossible?'

'No, papa,' she said, in the lowest possible whisper, but still in
such a whisper that he could hear the word, and with so much
clearness that he could judge from her face the obstinacy of her
mind.

'Then, Mary, it becomes my duty to tell you that it is quite
impossible. I will not have it thought of. There must be an end of
it.'

'Why, papa?'

'Why! I am astonished that you should ask me why.'

'I should not have allowed him, papa, to go to you unless I had,--
unless I had loved him.'

'Then you must conquer your love. It is disgraceful and must be
conquered.'

'Disgraceful!'

'Yes. I am sorry to use such word to my own child, but it is so.
If you will promise to be guided by me in this matter, if you will
undertake not to see him any more, I will,--if not forget it,--at
any rate pardon it, and be silent. I will excuse it because you
were young, and were thrown imprudently in his way. There has, I
believe, been someone at work in the matter with whom I ought to
be more angry than with you. Say that you will obey me, and there
is nothing within a father's power that I will not do for you, to
make your life happy.'  It was thus that he strove to be stern.
His heart, indeed, was tender enough, but there was nothing tender
in the tone of his voice or in the glance of his eye. Though he
was very positive in what he said, yet he was shy and shamefaced
even with his own daughter. He, too, had blushed when he told her
that she must conquer her love.

That she should be told that she had disgraced herself was
terrible to her. That her father should speak of her marriage with
this man as an event that was impossible made her very unhappy.
That he should talk of pardoning her, as for some great fault, was
in itself a misery. But she had not on that account the least idea
of giving up her lover. Young as she was, she had her own peculiar
theory on that matter, her own code of conduct and honour, from
which she did not mean to be driven. Of course she had not
expected that her father would yield at the first word. He, no
doubt, would wish that she should make a more exalted marriage.
She had known that she would have to encounter opposition, though
she had not expected to be told that she had disgraced herself. As
she sat there she resolved that under no pretence would she give
up her lover;--but she was so far abashed that she could not find
words to express herself. He, too, had been silent for a few
moments before he again asked her for her promise.

'Will you tell me, Mary, that you will not see him again?'

'I don't think I can say that, papa.'

'Why not?'

'Oh, papa, how can I, when of all people in the world I love him
the best.'

It is not without a pang that anyone can be told that she who is
of all the dearest has some other one who is to her the dearest.
Such pain fathers and mothers have to bear; and though, I think,
the arrow is never so blunted but that it leaves something of a
wound behind, there is in most cases, if not a perfect salve,
still an ample consolation. The mother knows that it is good that
her child should love some man better than all the world beside,
and that she should be taken away to become a wife and a mother.
And the father, when that delight of his eye ceases to assure him
that he is her nearest and dearest, though he abandon the treasure
of the nearestness and dearestness with a soft melancholy, still
knows that it should be. Of course that other 'him' is the person
she loves the best in the world. Were it not so how evil a thing
it would be that she should marry him? Were it not so with
reference to some 'him', how void would her life be!  But now, to
the poor Duke the wound had no salve, no consolation. When he was
told that this young Tregear was the owner of the girl's sweet
love, was the treasure of her heart, he shrank as though arrows
with sharp points were pricking him all over. 'I will not hear of
such love,' he said.

'What am I to say, papa?'

'Say that you will obey me.'

Then she sat silent. 'Do you not know that he is not fit to be
your husband?'

'No, papa.'

'Then you cannot have thought much either of your position or of
mine.'

'He is a gentleman, papa.'

'So is my private secretary. There is not a clerk in one of our
public offices who does not consider himself to be a gentleman.
The curate of the parish is a gentleman, and the medical man who
comes here from Bradstock. The word is too vague to carry with it
any meaning that ought to be serviceable to you in thinking of
such a matter.'

'I do not know of any other way of dividing people,' said she,
showing thereby that she had altogether made up her mind as to
what ought to be serviceable to her.

'You are not called upon to divide people. That division requires
so much experience that you are bound in this matter to rely upon
those to whom your obedience is due. I cannot but think you must
have known that you were not entitled to give your love to any man
without being assured that the man would be approved of by--by--by
me.' He was going to say 'your parents', but was stopped by the
remembrance of his wife's imprudence.

She saw it all, and was too noble to plead her mother's authority.
But she was not too dutiful to cast a reproach upon him, when he
was so stern to her. 'You have been so little with me, papa.'

'That is true,' he said, after a pause. 'That is true. It has been
a fault and I will need to mend it. It is a reason for
forgiveness, and I will forgive you. But you must tell me that
there shall be an end to this.'

'No, papa.'

'What do you mean?'

'That I love Mr Tregear, and as I have told him so, and as I have
promised him, I will be true to him. I cannot let there be an end
to it.'

'You do not suppose that you will be allowed to see him again?'

'I hope so.'

'Most assuredly not. Do you write to him?'

'No, papa.'

'Never?'

'Never since we have been back in England.'

'You must promise me that you will not write.'

She paused for a moment before she answered him, and now she was
looking him full in the face. 'I shall not write to him. I do not
think I shall write to him; but I will not promise.'

'Not promise me,--your father!'

'No, papa. It might be that--that I should do it.'

'You would not wish me so to guard you that you should have no
power of sending a letter but by permission?'

'I should not like that.'

'But it will have to be so.'

'If I do write I will tell you.'

'And show me what you write?'

'No, papa; not that, but I will tell you what I have written.'

Then it occurred to him that this bargaining was altogether
derogatory to his parental authority, and by no means likely to
impress upon her mind the conviction that Tregear must be
completely banished from her thoughts. He began already to find
how difficult it would be for him to have the charge of such a
daughter,--how impossible that he should conduct such a charge with
sufficient firmness, and yet with sufficient tenderness!  At
present he had done no good. He had only been made more wretched
than ever by her obstinacy. Surely he must pass her over to the
charge of some lady,--but of some lady who would be as determined
as he was himself that she should not throw herself away by
marrying Mr Tregear. 'There shall be no writing,' he said, 'no
visiting, no communication of any kind. As you refuse to obey me
now, you had better go to your room.'



CHAPTER 9

'In Media Res'

Perhaps the method of rushing at once 'in media res' is, of all
the ways of beginning a story, or a separate branch of a story,
the least objectionable. The reader is made to think that the gold
lies so near the surface that he will be required to take very
little trouble in digging for it. And the writer is enabled,--at
any rate for a time, and till his neck has become, as it were,
warm to the collar,--to throw off from him the difficulties and
dangers, the tedium and prolixity, of description. This rushing
'in media res' has doubtless the charm of ease. 'Certainly when I
threw her from the garret window to the stony pavement below, I
did not anticipate that she would fall so far without injury to
life or limb.'  When a story has been begun after this fashion,
without any prelude, without description of the garret or of the
pavement, or of the lady thrown, or of the speaker, a great amount
of trouble seems to have been saved. The mind of the reader fills
up the blanks,--if erroneously, still satisfactorily. He knows, at
least, that the heroine has encountered a terrible danger, and has
escaped from it with almost incredible good fortune, that the
demon of the piece is a bold demon, not ashamed to speak of his
own iniquity, and that the heroine and the demon are so far united
that they have been in a garret together. But there is the
drawback on the system,--that it is almost impossible to avoid the
necessity of doing, sooner or later, that which would naturally be
done at first. It answers, perhaps, for a half-a-dozen chapters;--
and to carry the reader pleasantly for half-a-dozen chapters is a
great matter!-but after that a certain nebulous darkness gradually
seems to envelope the characters and the incidents. 'Is all this
going on in the country, or is it in town,--or perhaps in the
Colonies? How old was she? Was she tall? Is she fair? Is she
heroine-like in her form and gait? And, after all, how high was
the garret window? I have always found that the details would
insist on being told at last, and that by rushing 'in media res' I
was simply presenting the cart before the horse. But as readers
like the cart the best, I will do it once again,--trying it only
for a branch of my story,--and will endeavour to let as little as
possible of the horse be seen afterwards.

'And so poor Frank has been turned out of heaven?' said Lady Mabel
Grex to young Lord Silverbridge.

'Who told you that?  I have said nothing to anybody.'

'Of course he told me himself,' said the young beauty. I am aware
that, in the word beauty, and perhaps, also, the word young, a
little bit of the horse appearing; and I am already sure that I
shall have to show his head and neck, even if not his very tail.
'Poor Frank! Did you hear it all?'

'I heard nothing, Lady Mab, and know nothing.'

'You know that your awful governor won't let him stay any longer
in Carlton Terrace?'

'Yes, I know that.'

'And why not?'

'Would Lord Grex allow Percival to have his friends living here?'
 Lord Grex was Lady Mabel's father, Lord Percival was the Earl's
son;--and the Earl lived in Belgrave Square. All these little bits
of the horse.

'Certainly not. In the first place, I am here.'

'That makes a difference, certainly.'

'Of course it makes a difference. They would be wanting to make
love to me.'

'No doubt. I should, I know.'

'And therefore it wouldn't do for you to live here, and then papa
is living here himself. And then the permission never has been
given. I suppose Frank did not go there without the Duke knowing
it.'

'I daresay that I mentioned it.'

'You might as well tell me about it. We are cousins, you know.'
Frank Tregear, through his mother's family, was second cousin to
Lady Mabel; as was also Lord Silverbridge, one of the Grexes
having, at some remote period, married a Palliser. This is another
bit of the horse.

'The governor merely seemed to think that he would like to have
his own house to himself,--like other people. What an ass Tregear
was to say anything to you about it.'

'I don't think he was an ass at all. Of course he had to tell us
that he was changing his residence. He says that he is going to
take a back bedroom somewhere near the Seven Dials.'

'He has got very nice rooms in Duke Street.'

'Have you seen him, then?'

'Of course I have.'

'Poor fellow! I wish he had a little money; he is so nice. And
now, Lord Silverbridge, do you mean to say that there is something
in the wind about Lady Mary?'

'If there were I should not talk about it,' said Lord
Silverbridge.

'You are a very innocent young gentleman.'

'And you are a very interesting young lady.'

'You ought to think me so, for I interest myself very much about
you. Was the Duke very angry about your not standing for the
county?'

'He was vexed.'

'I do think it is so odd that a man should be expected to be this
or that in politics because his father happened to be so before
him! I don't understand how he should expect that you should
remain with a party so utterly snobbish and down in the world as
the Radicals. Everybody that is worth anything is leaving them.'

'He has not left them.'

'No, I don't suppose he could; but you have.'

'I never belonged to them, Lady Mab.'

'And never will, I hope. I always told papa that you would
certainly be one of us.'  All this took place in the drawing-room
of Lord Grex's house. There was no Lady Grex alive, but there
lived with the Earl, a certain elderly lady, reported in some
distant way a cousin of the family, named Miss Cassewary, who in
the matter of looking after Lady Mab, did what was supposed to be
absolutely necessary. She now entered the room with her bonnet on,
having just returned from church. 'What was the text?' asked Lady
Mab at once.

'If you had gone to church, as you ought to have done, my dear,
you would have heard it.'

'But as I didn't?'

'I don't think the text alone will do you any good.'

'And probably you forget it.'

'No, I don't, my dear. How do you do, Lord Silverbridge?'

'He is a Conservative, Miss Cass.'

'Of course he is. I am quite sure that a young nobleman of so much
taste and intellect would take the better side.'

'You forget that all you are saying is against my father and my
family, Miss Cassewary.'

'I dare say it was different when your father was a young man. And
your father, too, was not very long since, at the head of a
government which contained many Conservatives.  I don't look upon
your father as a Radical, though perhaps I should not be justified
in calling him a Conservative.'

'Well; certainly not, I think.'

'But now it is necessary that all noblemen in England should rally
to the defence of their order.'  Miss Cassewary was a great
politician, and was one of those who are always foreseeing the
ruin of their country. 'My dear, I will go up and take my bonnet
off. Perhaps you will have tea when I come down.'

'Don't you go,' said Lady Mabel, when Silverbridge got up to take
his departure.

'I always do when tea comes.'

'But you are going to dine here?'

'Not that I know of. In the first place, nobody has asked me. In
the second place, I am engaged. Thirdly, I don't care about having
to talk politics to Miss Cass; and fourthly, I hate family dinners
on Sunday.'

'In the first place, I ask you. Secondly, I know you are going to
dine with Frank Tregear, at the club. Thirdly, I want you to talk
to me, and not to Miss Cass. And, fourthly, you are an uncivil
young,--young,--young,--I should say cub, if I dared, to tell me that
you don't like dining with me any day of the week.'

'Of course you know what I mean is, that I don't like troubling
your father.'

'Leave that to me. I shall tell him you are coming, and Frank too.
Of course you can bring him. Then he can talk to me when papa goes
down to his club, and you can arrange your politics with Miss
Cass.'  So it was settled, and at eight o'clock Lord Silverbridge
reappeared in Belgrave Square with Frank Tregear.

Earl Grex was a nobleman of a very ancient family, the Grexes
having held the parish of Grex, in Yorkshire, from some time long
prior to the Conquest. In saying all this, I am, I know, allowing
the horse to appear wholesale;--but I find that he cannot be kept
out. I may as well go on to say that the present Earl was better
known at Newmarket and the Beaufort,--where he spent a large part
of his life in playing whist,--than in the House of Lords. He was a
grey-haired, handsome, worn-out old man, who through a long life
of pleasure had greatly impaired a fortune, which, for an earl,
had never been magnificent, and who now strove hard, but not
always successfully, to remedy that evil by gambling. As he could
no longer eat and drink as he used to do, and as he cared no
longer for the light that lies in a lady's eye, there was not much
left to him but cards and racing. Nevertheless he was a handsome
old man, of polished manners, when he chose to use them; a staunch
Conservative and much regarded by his party, for whom in his early
life he had done some work in the House of Commons.

'Silverbridge is all very well,' he had said; 'but I don't see why
that young Tregear is to dine here every night of his life.'

'This is the second time since he has been up in town. Papa.'

'He was here last week, I know.'

'Silverbridge wouldn't come without him.'

'That's d-d nonsense,' said the Earl. Miss Cassewary gave a
start,--not, we may presume, because she was shocked, for she could
not be much shocked, having heard the same word from the same lips
very often; but she thought it right always to enter a protest.
Then the two young men were announced.

Frank Tregear, having been known by the family as a boy, was Frank
to all of them,--as was Lady Mabel, Mabel to him, somewhat to the
disgust of the father and not altogether with the approbation of
Miss Cass. But Lady Mabel had declared that she would not be
guilty of the folly of changing old habits. Silverbridge, being
Silverbridge to all his own people, hardly seemed to have a
Christian name;--his godfathers and godmothers had indeed called
him Plantagenet;--but having only become acquainted with the family
since his Oxford days he was Lord Silverbridge to Lady Mabel. Lady
Mabel had not as yet become Mabel to him, but, as by her very
intimate friends she was called Mab, had allowed herself to be
addressed by him as Lady Mab. There was thus between them all
considerable intimacy.

'I'm deuced glad to hear it,' said the Earl when dinner was
announced. For although he could not eat much, Lord Grex was
always impatient when the time of eating was at hand. Then he
walked down alone. Lord Silverbridge followed with his daughter,
and Frank Tregear gave his arm to Miss Cassewary. 'If that woman
can't clear her soup better than that, she might as well go to the
d-,' said the Earl;--upon which remark no one in the company made
any observation. As there were two men-servants in the room when
it was made the cook probably had the advantage of it. It may be
almost unnecessary to add that though the Earl had polished
manners for certain occasions he would sometimes throw them off in
the bosom of his own family.

'My Lord,' said Miss Cassewary--she always called him 'My Lord'--
'Lord Silverbridge is going to stand for the Duke's borough in the
conservative interest.'

'I didn't know the Duke had a borough.'

'He had one till he thought it proper to give it up,' said the son,
taking his father's part.

'And you are going to pay him off for what he has done by standing
against him. It's just the sort of thing a son to do in these
days. If I had a borough Percival would go down and make radical
speeches there.'

'There isn't a better Conservative in England than Percival,' said
Lady Mabel, bridling up.

'Nor a worse son,' said the father. 'I believe he would do
anything he could lay his hand on to oppose me.'  During the past
week there had been some little difference of opinion between the
father and the son as to the signing of a deed.

'My father does not take it in bad part at all,' said
Silverbridge.

'Perhaps he is ratting himself,' said the Earl. 'When a man lends
himself to a coalition he is as good as half gone.'

'I do not think that in all England there is so thorough a Liberal
as my father,' said Lord Silverbridge. 'And when I say that he
doesn't take this badly, I don't mean that it doesn't vex him. I
know it vexes him. But he doesn't quarrel with me, he even wrote
to Barsetshire to say that all my expenses at Silverbridge were to
be paid.'

'I call that bad politics,' said the Earl.

'It seems to me to be very grand,' said Frank.

'Perhaps, sir, you don't know what is good or what is bad in
politics,' said the Earl, trying to snub his guest.

But it was difficult to snub Frank. 'I know a gentleman when I see
him, I think,' he said. 'Of course Silverbridge is right to be a
Conservative. Nobody has a stronger opinion about that than I
have. But the Duke is behaving so well that if I were he I should
almost regret it.'

'And so I do,' said Silverbridge.

When the ladies were gone the old Earl turned himself round the
fire, having filled his glass and pushed the bottles away from
him, as though he meant to leave the two young men to themselves.
He sat leaning with his head on his hand, looking the picture of
woe. It was now only nine o'clock, and there would be no more
whist at the Beaufort till eleven. There was still more than a
hour to be endured before the brougham would come to fetch him. 'I
suppose we shall have a majority,' said Frank, trying to rouse
him.

'Who does "We" mean?' asked the Earl.

'The Conservatives, of whom I take the liberty to call myself
one.'

'It sounded as though you were a very influential member of the
party.'

'I consider myself to be one of the party, and so I say "We".'

Upstairs in the drawing-room Miss Cassewary did her duty loyally.
It was quite right that young ladies and young gentlemen should be
allowed to talk together, and very right indeed that such a young
gentleman as Lord Silverbridge should be allowed to talk so such a
young lady as Lady Mabel. What could be so nice as a marriage
between the heir of the house of Omnium and Lady Mabel Grex?  Lady
Mabel looked indeed to be the elder,--but they were in truth the
same age. All the world acknowledged that Lady Mabel was very
clever and very beautiful and fit to be a Duchess. Even the Earl,
when Miss Cassewary hinted at the matter to him, grunted an
assent. Lady Mabel had already refused one or two not ineligible
offers, and it was necessary that something should be done. There
had been at one time a fear in Miss Cassewary's bosom lest her
charge should fall too deeply in love with Frank Tregear,--but Miss
Cassewary knew that whatever danger there might have been in that
respect had passed away. Frank was willing to talk to her, while
Mabel and Lord Silverbridge were in a corner together.

'I shall be on tenterhooks now till I know how it is to be at
Silverbridge,' said the young lady.

'It is very good of you to feel so much interest.'

'Of course I feel an interest. Are you not one of us? When is to
be?'

'They say that the elections will be over before the Derby.'

'And which do you care for the most?'

'I should like to pull off the Derby, I own.'

'From what papa says, I should think the other event is more
probable.'

'Doesn't the Earl stand to win on Prime Minister?'

'I never know anything about his betting. But,--you know his way,--
he said you were going to drop a lot of money like a-I can't quite
tell you what he likened you to.'

'The Earl may be mistaken.'

'You are not betting much, I hope.'

'Not plunging. But I have a little money on.'

'Don't get into the way of betting.'

'Why:--what difference does it make,--to you?'

'Is that kind, Lord Silverbridge?'

'I meant to say that if I did make a mess of it you wouldn't care
about it.'

'Yes, I should. I should care very much. I dare say you could lose
a great deal of money and care nothing about it.'

'Indeed I could not.'

'What would be a great deal of money to me. But you would want to
get it back again. And in that way you would be regularly on the
turf.'

'And why not?'

'I want to see better things from you.'

'You ought not to preach against the turf, Lady Mab.'

'Because of papa? But I am not preaching against the turf. If I
were such as you are I would have a horse or two myself. A man in
your position should do a little of everything. You should hunt
and have a yacht, and stalk deer and keep your own trainer at
Newmarket.'

'I wish you would say all that to my father.'

'Of course I mean if you can afford it. I like a man to like
pleasure. But I despise a man who makes a business of his
pleasures. When I hear that this man is the best whist-player in
London, and that man the best billiard-player, I always know that
they can do nothing else, and then I despise them.'

'You needn't despise me, because I do nothing well,' said he, as
he got up to take his leave.

'I do so hope you'll get the seat,--and win the Derby.'

These were her last words to him as she wished him good-night.



CHAPTER 10

Why if not Romeo if I Feel like Romeo?

'That's nonsense, Miss Cass, and I shall,' said Lady Mabel. They
were together on the morning after the little dinner-party
described in the last chapter, in a small back sitting-room which
was supposed to be Lady Mabel's own, and the servant had just
announced that Mr Tregear was below.

'Then I shall go down too,' said Miss Cassewary.

'You'll do nothing of the kind. Will you please to tell me what it
is you are afraid of? Do you think that Frank is going to make
love to me again?'

'No.'

'Or that if I chose that he should I would let you stop me? He is
in love with somebody else,--and perhaps I am too. And we are two
paupers.'

'My lord would not approve of it.'

'If you know what my lord approves of and he disapproves you
understand a great deal better than I do. And if you mind what he
approves or disapproves, you care for his opinion a great deal
more than I do. My cousin is here now to talk to me,--about his
own affairs, and I mean to see him,--alone.'  Then she left the
room, and went down to that in which Frank was waiting for her,
without the company of Miss Cassewary.

'Do you really mean,' she said, after they had been together for
some minutes, 'that you had the courage to ask the Duke for his
daughter's hand?'

'Why not?'

'I believe you would dare to do anything.'

'I couldn't very well take it without asking him.'

'As I am not acquainted with the young lady I don't know how that
might be.'

'And if I took her so, I should have to take her empty-handed.'

'Which wouldn't suit;--would it?'

'It wouldn't suit for her,--whose comforts and happiness are much
more to me than my own.'

'No doubt!  Of course you are terribly in love.'

'Very thoroughly in love, I think I am.'

'For the tenth time, I should say.'

'For the second only. I don't regard myself as a monument of
constancy, but I think I am less fickle than some other people.'

'Meaning me?'

'Not especially.'

'Frank, that is ill-natured, and almost unmanly,--and false also.
When have been I fickle? You say that there was one before with you.
I say that thee has never really been one with me at all. No one
knows that better than yourself. I cannot afford to be in love
till I am quite sure that the man is fit to be, and will be, my
husband.

'I doubt sometimes whether you are capable of being in love with
anyone.'

'I think I am,' she said, very gently. 'But I am at any rate
capable of not being in love till I wish it. Come, Frank, do not
quarrel with me. You know,--you ought to know,--that I should have
loved you had not been that such love would have been bad for both
of us.'

'It is a kind of self-restraint I do not understand.'

'Because you are not a woman.'

'Why did you twit me with changing my love?'

'Because I am a woman. Can't you forgive as much as that to me?'

'Certainly. Only you must not think that I have been false because
I now love so dearly.'

'I do not think you are false. I would do anything to help you if
there were anything I could do. But when you spoke so like a Romeo
of your love,--'

'Why not like a Romeo, if I feel like a Romeo?'

'But I doubt whether Romeo talked much to Rosaline of his love for
Juliet. But you shall talk to me of yours for Lady Mary, and I
will listen to you patiently and encourage you, and will not even
think of those former vows.'

'The former vows were foolish.'

'Oh--of course.'

'You at least used to say so.'

'I say so now, and they shall be as though they had never been
spoken. So you bearded the Duke in his den, and asked him for Lady
Mary's hand,--just as though you had been a young Duke yourself and
owned half a county?'

'Just the same.'

'And what did he say?'

'He swore that it was impossible.-Of course I knew all that
before.'

'How will it be now? You will not give it up?'

'Certainly not.'

'And Lady Mary?'

'One human being can perhaps never answer for another with perfect
security.'

'But you feel sure of her.'

'I do.'

'He, I should think, be very imperious.'

'And so can she. The Pallisers are all obstinate.'

'Is Silverbridge obstinate?' she asked.

'Stiff-necked as a bull if he takes it into his head to be so.'

'I shouldn't have thought it.'

'No;--because he is so soft in his manner, and often finds it
easier to be led by others than to direct himself.'

Then she remained silent for a few seconds. They were both
thinking of the same thing, and both wishing to speak of it. But
the words came to her first. 'I wonder what he thinks of me.'
Whereupon Tregear only smiled. 'I suppose he has spoken to you
about me?'

'Why do you ask?'

'Why?'

'And why should I tell you? Suppose he should have said to me in
the confidence of friendship that he thinks you ugly and stupid.'

'I am sure he has not said that. He has eyes to see and ears to
hear. But, though I am neither ugly nor stupid, he needn't like
me.'

'Do you want him to like you?'

'Yes, I do. Oh yes; you may laugh; but if I did not think that I
could be a good wife to him I would not take his hand even to
become the Duchess of Omnium.'

'Do you mean that you love him, Mabel?'

'No; I do not mean that. But I would learn to love him. You do not
believe that?'  Here he again smiled and shook his head. 'It is as
I said before, because you are not a woman, and do not understand
how woman are trammelled. Do you think ill of me because I say
this?'

'No, indeed.'

'Do not think ill of me if you can help it, because you are almost
the only friend that I trust. I almost trust dear old Cass, but
not quite. She is old-fashioned and I shock her. As for other
women, there isn't one anywhere to whom I would say a word. Only
think how a girl such as I am is placed; or indeed any girl. You,
if you see a woman that you fancy, can pursue her, can win her and
triumph, or lose her and gnaw your heart;--at any rate you can do
something. You can tell her that you love her; can tell her so
again and again even though she should scorn you. You can set
yourself about the business you have taken in hand and can work
hard at it. What can a girl do?'

'Girls work hard sometimes.'

'Of course they do;--but everybody feels that they are sinning
against their sex. Of love, such as a man's is, a woman ought to
know nothing. How can she love with passion when she should never
give her love till it has been asked, and not then unless her
friends tell her that the thing is suitable? Love such as that to
me is out of the question. But, as it is fit that I should be
married, I wish to be married well.'

'And you will love him after a fashion?'

'Yes;--after a very sterling fashion. I will make his wishes my
wishes, his ways my ways, his party my party, his home my home,
his ambition my ambition,--his honour my honour.'  As she said this
she stood up with her hands clenched and head erect, and her eyes
flashing. 'Do you not know me well enough to be sure that I should
be loyal to him?'

'Yes;--I think that you would be loyal.'

'Whether I loved him or not, he should love me.'

'And you think that Silverbridge would do?'

'Yes. I think that Silverbridge would do. You, no doubt, will say
that I am flying high.'

'Not too high. Why should you not fly high? If I can justify
myself, surely I cannot accuse you.'

'It is hardly the same thing, Frank. Of course there is not a girl
in London to whom Lord Silverbridge would not be the best match
that she could make. He has the choice of us all.'

'Most girls would think twice before refusing him.'

'Very few would think twice before accepting him. Perhaps he
wishes to add to his wealth by marrying richly,--as his father
did.'

'No thought on that subject would ever trouble him. That will be
all as it happens. As soon as he takes sufficient fancy to a girl
he will ask her straight off. I do not say that he might not
change afterwards, but he would mean it at the time.'

'If he had once said the word to me, he should not change. But
then what right have I to expect it? What has he ever said about
me?'

'Very little. But had he said much I should not tell you.'

'You are my friend,--but you are his too; and he, perhaps, is more
to you than I am. As his friend it may be your duty to tell him
all that I am saying.  If so, I have been wrong.'

'Do you think that I shall do that, Mabel?'

'I do not know. Men are so strong in their friendships.'

'Mine with you is the older, and the sweeter. Though we may not be
more than friends, I will say that it is the more tender. In my
heart of hearts, I do not think that Silverbridge could do
better.'

'Thanks for that, Frank.'

'I shall tell him nothing of you that can set him against you.'

'And you would be glad to see me his wife?' she said.

'As you must be somebody's wife, and not mine.'

'I cannot be yours, Frank.'

'And not mine,' he repeated. 'I will endeavour to be glad. Who can
explain his feelings in such a matter? Though I most truly love
the girl I hope to marry, yet my heart goes back to former things
and opens itself to past regrets.'

'I know it all,' she whispered.

'But you and I must be too wise to permit ourselves to be
tormented by such foolish melancholy.'  As he said this he took
her hand, half with the purpose of bidding her good-bye, but
partly with the idea of giving some expression of tenderness of
his feelings. But as he did so, the door was opened, and the old
Earl shambled into the room.

'What the deuce are you doing here?' he said.

'I have been talking to Lady Mabel.'

'For about an hour.'

'Indeed I do not know for how long.'

'Papa, he is going to be married.'  When she said this Frank
Tregear turned round and looked at her almost in anger.

'Going to be married, is he?  And who is the fortunate woman?

'I don't think he will let me tell you.'

'Not yet, I think,' said Frank, gloomily. 'There is nothing
settled.'

The old Earl looked puzzled, but Lady Mabel's craft had been
successful. If this objectionable young second-cousin had come
there to talk about his marriage with another young woman, the
conversation must have been innocent. 'Where is Miss Cassewary?'
asked the Earl.

'I asked her not to come down with me because Frank wished to
speak to me about his own affairs. You have no objection to his
coming, papa?'

There had been objections raised to any intimacy with Frank
Tregear, but all that was now nearly two years since. He had been
assured over and over again by Miss Cassewary that he need not be
afraid of Frank Tregear, and had in a sort of way assented to the
young man's visits. 'I think he might find something better to do
with his time than hanging about here all day.' Frank, shrugging
his shoulders, and having shaken hands with both the daughter and
father, took his hat and departed.  'Who is the girl?' asked the
Earl.

'You heard him say that I was not to tell.'

'Has she got money?'

'I believe she will have a great deal.'

'Then she is a great fool for her pains,' said the Earl, shambling
off again.

Lady Mabel spent the greater part of the afternoon alone,
endeavouring to recall to her mind all that she had said to Frank
Tregear, and questioning herself as to the wisdom and truth of her
own words. She had intended to tell the truth,--but hardly perhaps
the whole truth. The life which was before her,--which it was
necessary that she should lead,--seemed to her to be so difficult!
 She could not clearly see her way to be pure and good and
feminine, and at the same time wise. She had been false now,--so
far false that she had told her friend that she had never been in
love. But she was in love;--in love with him, Frank Tregear. She
knew it as thoroughly as it was possible for her to know
anything;--and had acknowledged it to herself a score of times.

But, she could not marry him. And it was expected, nay, almost
necessary that she should marry someone. To that someone, how good
she would be!  How she would strive by duty and attention, and if
possible by affection, to make up for the misfortune of her early
love.

And so I hope that I have brought my cart to its appointed place
in the front, without showing too much of the horse.



CHAPTER 11

Cruel

For two or three days after the first scene between the Duke and
his daughter,--that scene in which she was forbidden either to see
or to write to her lover,--not a word was said at Matching about Mr
Tregear, nor were any steps taken towards curtailing her liberty
of action. She had said she would not write to him without telling
her father, and the Duke was too proud of the honour of his family
to believe it to be possible that she should deceive him. Nor was
it possible. Not only would her own idea of duty prevent her from
writing to her lover, although she had stipulated for the right to
do so in some possible emergency,--but, carried far beyond that in
her sense of what was right and wrong, she felt it now incumbent
on her to have no secret from her father at all. The secret, as
long as it had been a secret, had been a legacy from her mother,--
and had been kept, at her lover's instance, during that period of
mourning for her mother in which it would, she thought, have been
indecorous that there should be any question of love or of giving
in marriage. It had been a burden to her, though a necessary
burden. She had been very clear that the revelation should be made
to her father, when it was made, by her lover. That had been
done,--and now it was open to her to live without any secrecy,--as
was her nature. She meant to cling to her lover. She was quite
sure of that. Nothing could divide her from him but his death or
hers,--or falseness on his part. But as to marriage, that would not
be possible till her father had assented. And as to seeing the
man,--ah, yes if she could do so with her father's assent!  She
would not be ashamed to own her great desire to see him. She would
tell her father that all her happiness depended on seeing him, she
would not be coy in speaking of her love. But she would obey her
father.

She had a strong idea that she would ultimately prevail,--and idea
also that that 'ultimately' should not be postponed to some
undefined middle-aged period in her life. As she intended to
belong to Frank Tregear, she thought it expedient that he should
have the best of her days as well as what might be supposed to be
the worst; and she therefore resolved that it would be her duty to
make her father understand that though she would certainly obey
him, she would look to be treated humanely by him, and not to be
made miserable for an indefinite term of years.

The first word spoken between them on the subject,--the first word
after that discussion, began with him and was caused by his
feeling that her present life at Matching must be sad and lonely.
Lady Cantrip had again written that she would be delighted to take
her;--but Lady Cantrip was in London and must be in London, at any
rate when Parliament would again be sitting. A London life would
perhaps, at present, hardly suit Lady Mary. Then a plan had been
prepared which might be convenient. The Duke had a house at
Richmond, on the river, called The Horns. That should be lent to
Lady Cantrip, and Mary should there be her guest. So it was
settled between the Duke and Lady Cantrip. But as yet Lady Mary
knew nothing of the arrangement.

'I think I shall go up to town tomorrow,' said the Duke to his
daughter.

'For long?'

'I shall be gone only one night. It is on your behalf that I am
going.'

'On my behalf, papa?'

'I have been writing to Lady Cantrip.'

'Not about Mr Tregear?'

'No;--not about Mr Tregear,' said the father with a mixture of
anger and solemnity in his tone. 'It is my desire to regard Mr
Tregear as though he did not exist.'

'That is not possible, papa.'

'I have alluded to the inconvenience of your position here.'

'Why is it inconvenience?'

'You are too young to be without a companion. It is not fit that
you should be much alone.'

'I do not feel it.'

'It is very melancholy for you, and cannot be good for you. They
will go down to The Horns so that you will not be absolutely in
London, and you will find Lady Cantrip a very nice person.'

'I don't care for new people just now, papa,' she said. But to
this he paid but little heed; nor was she prepared to say that she
would not do as he directed. When therefore he left Matching, she
understood that he was going to prepare a temporary home for her.
Nothing further was said about Tregear. She was too proud to ask
that no mention of his name should be made to Lady Cantrip. And he
when he left the house did not think that he would find himself
called upon to allude to the subject.

But when Lady Cantrip made some inquiry about the girl and her
habits,--asking what were her ordinary occupations, how she was
accustomed to pass her hours, to what she chiefly devoted
herself,--then at last with much difficulty the Duke did bring
himself to tell the story. 'Perhaps it is better that you should
know it all,' he said as he told it.

'Poor girl!  Yes, Duke, upon the whole it is better that I should
know it all,' said Lady Cantrip. 'Of course he will not come
here.'

'Oh dear; I hope not.'

'Nor to The Horns.'

'I hope he will never see her again anywhere,' said the Duke.

'Poor girl!'

'Have I not been right? Is it not best to put an end to such a
thing at once?'

'Certainly at once, if it has to be put an end to,--and can be put
an end to.'

'It must be put an end to,' said the Duke, very decidedly. 'Do you
not see that it must be so?  Who is Mr Tregear?'

'I suppose they were allowed to be together?'

'He was unfortunately intimate with Silverbridge, who took him
over to Italy. He has nothing; not even a profession.'  Lady
Cantrip could not but smile when she remembered the immense wealth
of the man who was speaking to her;--and the Duke saw the smile and
understood it. 'You will understand what I mean, Lady Cantrip. If
this young man were in other respects suitable, of course I could
find an income for them. But he is nothing; just an idle seeker
for pleasure without the means of obtaining it.'

'That is very bad.'

'As for rank,' continued the Duke energetically, 'I do not think
that I am specially wedded to it. I have found myself as willing
to associate with those who are without it as with those who have
it. But for my child, I would wish her to mate with one of her own
class.'

'It would be best.'

'When a young man comes to me, though I believe him to be what is
called a gentleman, has neither rank, nor means, nor profession,
nor name, and asks for my daughter, surely I am right to say that
such a marriage shall not be thought of. Was I not right?'
demanded the Duke persistently.

'But it is a pity that it should be so. It is a pity that they
should ever have come together.'

'It is indeed, indeed to be lamented,--and I will own at once that
the fault was not hers. Though I must be firm in this, you are not
to suppose that I am angry with her. I have myself been to blame.'
 This he said with a resolution that,--as he and his wife had been
one flesh,--all faults committed by her should, now that she was
dead, be accepted by him as his faults. 'It had not occurred to me
that as yet she would love any man.'

'Has it gone deep with her, Duke?'

'I fear that all things go deep with her.'

'Poor girl!'

'But they shall be kept apart! As long as your great kindness is
continued for her they shall be kept apart!'

'I do not think that I should be found good at watching a young
lady.'

'She will require no watching.'

'Then of course they will not meet. She had better know that you
have told me.'

'She shall know it.'

'And let her know also that anything I can do to make her happy
shall be done. But, Duke, there is but one cure.'

'Time you mean.'

'Yes; time; but I did not mean time.'  Then she smiled as she went
on. 'You must not suppose that I am speaking against my own sex if
I say that she will not forget Mr Tregear till someone else has
made himself agreeable to her. We must wait till she can go out a
little more into society. Then she will find out that there are
others in the world besides Mr Tregear. It so often is the case
that a girl's love means her sympathy for him who has chanced to
be nearest her.'

The Duke as he went away thought very much of what Lady Cantrip
had said to him;--particularly of those last words. 'Till some one
else has made himself agreeable to her.'  Was he to send his girl
into the world in order that she might find a lover?  There was
something in the idea which was thoroughly distasteful to him. He
had not given his mind much to the matter, but had felt that a
woman should be sought for,--sought for and extracted, cunningly,
as it were, from some hiding-place, and not sent out into a market
to be exposed as for sale. In his own personal history there had
been a misfortune,--a misfortune, the sense of which he could
never, at any moment, have expressed to any ears, the memory of
which had been always buried deep in his own bosom,--but a
misfortune in that no such cunning extraction on his part had won
for him the woman to whose hands had been confided the strings of
his heart. His wife had undergone that process of extraction
before he had seen her, and his marriage with her had been a
matter of sagacious bargaining. He was now told that his daughter
must be sent out among young men in order that she might become
sufficiently fond of some special one to be regardless of Tregear.
There was a feeling that in doing so she must lose something of
the freshness of the bloom of her innocence. How was this transfer
of her love to be effected?  Let her go here because she will meet
the heir of this wealthy house who may probably be smitten by her
charms; or there because that other young lordling would make a
fit husband for her. Let us contrive to throw her into the arms of
this man, or put her into the way of that man. Was his girl to be
exposed to this?  Surely that method of bargaining to which he had
owed his own wife would be better than that. Let it be said,--only
he himself most certainly could not be the person to say it,--let
it be said to some man of rank and means and fairly good
character, 'Here is a wife for you with so many thousand pounds,
with beauty, as you can see for yourself, with rank and belongings
of the highest; very good in every respect;--only that as regards
her heart she thinks she has given it to a young man named
Tregear. No marriage there is possible; but perhaps the young lady
might suit you?'  It was thus he had been married. There was an
absence in it of that romance which, though he had never
experienced it in his own life, was always present to his
imagination. His wife had often ridiculed him because he could
only live among figures and official details; but to her had not
been given the power of looking into a man's heart and feeling all
that was there. Yes;--in such bargaining for a wife, in such
bargaining for a husband, there could be nothing of the tremulous
delicacy of feminine romance; but it would be better than standing
at a stall in the market till the sufficient purchaser should
come. It never occurred to him that the delicacy, the innocence,
the romance, the bloom might all be preserved if he would give his
girl to the man whom she said she loved. Could he have modeled her
future course according to his own wishes, he would have had her
live a gentle life for the next three years, with a pencil perhaps
in her hand or a music-book before her;--and then come forth,
cleaned as it were by such quarantine from the impurity to which
she had been subjected.

When he was back at Matching he at once told his daughter what he
had arranged for her, and then there took place a prolonged
discussion both as to his view of her future life and as to her
own. 'You did tell her then about Mr Tregear?' she asked.

'As she is to have charge of you for a time I thought it best.'

'Perhaps it is. Perhaps--you were afraid.'

'No; I was not afraid, he said angrily.

'You need not be afraid. I shall do nothing elsewhere that I would
not do here, and nothing anywhere without telling you.'

'I know that I can trust you.'

'But, papa, I shall always intend to marry Mr Tregear.'

'No!' he exclaimed.

'Yes;--always. I want you to understand exactly how it is. Nothing
you can do can separate me from him.'

'Mary, that is very wicked.'

'It cannot be wicked to tell the truth, papa. I mean to try to do
all you tell me. I shall not see him, or write to him,--unless
there should be some very particular reason. And if I did see him,
or write to him I would tell you. And of course I should not think
of--of marrying without your leave. But I shall expect you to let
me marry him.'

'Never!'

'Then I shall think you are--cruel; and you will break my heart.'

'You should not call your father cruel.'

'I hope you will not be cruel.'

'I can never permit you to marry this man. It would be altogether
improper. I cannot allow you to say that I am cruel because I do
what I feel to be my duty. You will see other people.'

'A great many perhaps.'

'And will learn to,--to,--to forget him.'

'Never! I will not forget him. I should hate myself if I thought
it possible. What would love be worth if it could be forgotten in
that way?'  As he heard this he reflected whether his own wife,
this girl's mother, had ever forgotten her early love for that
Burgo Fitzgerald whom in her girlhood she had wished to marry.

When he was leaving her she called him back again. 'There is one
other thing I think I ought to say, papa. If Lady Cantrip speaks
to me about Mr Tregear, I can only tell her what I have told you.
I shall never give him up.'  When he heard this he turned angrily
from her, almost stamping his foot upon the ground, when she
quietly left the room.

Cruel! She had told him that he would be cruel, if he opposed her
love. He thought he knew of himself that he could not be cruel,--
even to a fly, even to a political opponent. There could be no
cruelty without dishonesty, and did he not always struggle to be
honest? Cruel to his own daughter!



CHAPTER 12

At Richmond

The pity of it!  The pity of it!  It was thus that Lady Cantrip
looked at it. From what the girl's father had said to her she was
disposed to believe that the malady had gone deep with her. 'All
things go deep with her,' he had said. And she too from other
sources had heard something of this girl. She was afraid that it
would go deep. It was a thousand pities!  Then she asked herself
whether the marriage ought to be regarded as impossible. The Duke
had been very positive,--had declared again and again that it was
quite impossible, had so expressed himself as to make her aware
that he intended her to understand that he would not yield
whatever the sufferings of the girl might be. But Lady Cantrip
knew the world well and was aware that in such matters daughters
are apt to be stronger than their fathers. He had declared Tregear
to be a young man with very small means, and intent on such
pleasures as require great means for their enjoyment. No worse
character could be given to a gentleman who had proposed himself
as a son-in-law. But Lady Cantrip thought it possible that the
Duke might be mistaken in this. She had never seen Mr Tregear, but
she fancied that she had heard his name, and that the name was
connected with a character different from that which the Duke had
given him.

Lady Cantrip, who at this time was a young-looking woman, not much
above forty, had two daughters, both of whom were married. The
younger about a year since had become the wife of Lord Nidderdale,
a middle-aged young man who had been long about town, a cousin of
the late Duchess, the heir to a marquisate, and a Member of
Parliament. The marriage had not been considered very brilliant;
but the husband was himself good-natured and pleasant, and Lady
Cantrip was fond of him. In the first place she went to him for
information.

'Oh yes, I know him. He's one of our set at the Beargarden.'

'Not your set now, I hope,' she said laughing.

'Well;--I don't see so much of them as I used to. Tregear is not a
bad fellow at all. He's always with Silverbridge. When
Silverbridge does what Tregear tells him, he goes along pretty
straight. But unfortunately there's another man called Tifto, and
when Tifto is in the ascendant then Silverbridge is apt to go a
little astray.'

'He's not in debt, then?'

'Who?-Tregear? I should think he's the last man in the world to owe
a penny to anyone.'

'Is he a betting man?'

'Oh dear no; quite the other way up. He's a severe, sarcastic,
bookish sort of fellow,--a chap who knows everything and turns up
his nose at people who know nothing.'

'Has he got anything of his own?'

'Not much I should say. If he had had any money he would have
married Lady Mab Grex last year.'

Lady Cantrip was inclined from what she now learned to think that
the Duke must be wrong about the young man. But before Lady Mary
joined her she made further inquiry. She too knew Lady Mabel, and
knowing Lady Mabel, she knew Miss Cassewary. She contrived to find
herself alone with Miss Cassewary, and asked some further
questions about Mr Tregear. 'He's a cousin of my Lord's,' said
Miss Cass.

'So I thought. I wonder what sort of young man he is. He is a good
deal with Lord Silverbridge.'

Then Miss Cassewary spoke her opinion very plainly. 'If Lord
Silverbridge has nobody worse about him than Mr Tregear he would
not come to much harm.'

'I suppose he's not very well off?'

'No;--certainly not. He will have a property of some kind, I
believe, when his mother dies. I think very well of Mr Tregear;--
only I wish that he had a profession. But why are you asking about
him, Lady Cantrip?'

'Nidderdale was talking to me about him and saying that he was so
much with Lord Silverbridge. Lord Silverbridge is going into
Parliament now, and, as it were, beginning the world, and it would
be a thousand pities that he should get into bad hands.'  It may,
however, be doubted whether Miss Cassewary was hoodwinked by this
little story.

Early in the second week of May the Duke brought his daughter up
to The Horns, and at the same time expressed his intention of
remaining in London. When he did so Lady Mary at once asked
whether she might not be with him, but he would not permit it. The
house in London would, he said, be more gloomy even than Matching.

'I am quite ashamed of giving so much trouble,' Lady Mary said to
her new friend.

'We are delighted to have you, my dear.'

'But I know you have been obliged to leave London because I am
with you.'

'There is nothing I like so much as this place, which your father
has been kind enough to lend us. As for London, there is nothing
now to make me like being there. Both my girls are married, and
therefore I regard myself as an old woman who has done her work.
Don't you think this place very much nicer than London at this
time of the year?'

'I don't know London at all. I had only just been brought out when
poor mamma want abroad.'

The life they led was very quiet, and most probably have been felt
to be dull by Lady Cantrip, in spite of her old age and desire for
retirement. But the place itself was very lovely. May of all the
months of the year is in England the most insidious, the most
dangerous, and the most inclement. A greatcoat can not be endured,
and without a greatcoat who can endure a May wind and live?  But
of all months it is the prettiest. The grasses are then the
greenest, and the young foliage of the trees, while it has all the
glory and all the colour of spring vegetation, does not hide the
form of the branches as do the heavy masses of the larger leaves
which come in the advancing summer.  And of all the villas near
London The Horns was the sweetest. The broad green lawn swept down
to the very margins of the Thames, which absolutely washed the
fringe of grass when the tide was high. And here, along the bank,
was a row of flowering ashes the drooping boughs of which in
places touched the water. It was one of those spots which when
they are first seen make the beholder feel that to be able to live
there and look at it always would be happiness for life.

At the end of the week there came a visitor to see Lady Mary. A
very pretty carriage was driven up to the door of The Horns, and
the servant asked for Lady Mary Palliser. The owner of the
carriage was Mrs Finn. Now it must be explained to the reader that
there had never been any friendship between Mrs Finn and Lady
Cantrip, though the ladies had met each other. The great political
intimacy which had existed between the Duke and Lord Cantrip had
created some intimacy between their wives. The Duchess and Lady
Cantrip had been friends,--after a fashion. But Mrs Finn had never
been cordially accepted by those among whom Lady Cantrip chiefly
lived. When therefore the name was announced, the servant
expressly stating that the visitor had asked for Lady Mary, Lady
Cantrip, who was with her guest, had to bethink herself what she
would do. The Duke, who was at this time very full of wrath
against Mrs Finn, had not mentioned this lady's name when
delivering up the charge of his daughter to Lady Cantrip. At this
moment it occurred to her that not improbably Mrs Finn would cease
to be included in the intimacies of the Palliser family from the
time of the death of the Duchess,---that the Duke would not care to
maintain the old relations, and that he would be as little anxious
to do it for his daughter as for himself. If so, could it be right
that Mrs Finn should come down her, to a house which was now in
the occupation of a lady with whom she was not on inviting terms,
in order that she might thus force herself on the Duke's daughter?
Mrs Finn had not left her carriage, but had sent to ask of Lady
Mary could see her. In all this there was considerable
embarrassment. She looked round at her guest, who had at once
risen from her chair. 'Would you wish to see her?' asked Lady
Cantrip.

'Oh yes, certainly.'

'Have you seen her since,--since you came home from Italy?'

'Oh dear, yes! She was down at Matching when poor mamma died. And
papa persuaded her to remain afterwards. Of course I will see
her.'  Then the servant was desired to ask Mrs Finn to come in;--
and while this was being done Lady Cantrip retired.

Mrs Finn embraced her young friend, and asked after her welfare,
and after the welfare of the house in which she was staying,--a
house with which Mrs Finn had been well acquainted,--and said half-
a-dozen pretty little things in her own quiet pretty way, before
she spoke of the matter which had really brought her to The Horns
on that day.

'I have had a correspondence with your father, Mary,'

'Indeed.'

'And unfortunately one that has been far from agreeable to me.'

'I am sorry for that, Mrs Finn.'

So am I, very sorry. I may say with perfect truth that there is no
man in the world, except my own husband, for whom I feel so
perfect an esteem as I do for your father. If it were not that I
do not like to be carried away by strong language, I would speak
of more than esteem. Through your dear mother I have watched his
conduct closely, and have come to think that perhaps no other man
at the same time so just and patriotic. Now he is very angry with
me,--and most unjustly angry.'

'Is it about me?'

'Yes;--it is about you. Had it not been altogether about you I
would not have troubled you.'

'And about-?'

'Yes;--about Mr Tregear also. When I tell you that there has been a
correspondence I must explain that I have written one long letter
to the Duke, and that in answer I have received a very short one.
That his been the whole correspondence. Here is your father's
letter to me.'  Then she brought out of her pocket a note, which
Lady Mary read,--covered with blushes as she did so. The note was
as follows:

'The Duke of Omnium understands from Mrs Finn's
letter that Mrs Finn, while she was the Duke's guest at
Matching, was aware of a certain circumstance affecting
the Duke's honour and happiness,--which circumstance she
certainly did not communicate to the Duke. The Duke
thinks that the trust which had been placed in Mrs Finn
should have made such a communication imperative. The
Duke feels that no further correspondence between
himself and Mrs Finn on the matter could lead to any
good result.'

'Do you understand it?' asked Mrs Finn.

'I think so.'

'It simply means this,--that when at Matching he had thought me
worthy of having for a time the charge of you and your welfare,
that he had trusted me, who was the friend of your dear mother, to
take for time in regard to you the place which had been so
unhappily left vacant by her death; and it means also that I
deceived and betrayed that trust by being privy to an engagement
on your part, of which he disapproves, and of which he was not
then aware.'

'I suppose he does mean that.'

'Yes, Lady Mary; that is what he means. And he means further to
let me know that as I did so foully betray the trust which he had
placed in me,--that as I had consented to play the part of
assistant to you in that secret engagement,--therefore he casts me
off as altogether unworthy of his esteem and acquaintance. It is
as though he had told me in so many words that among women he had
known none more vile or more false than I.'

'Not that, Mrs Finn.'

'Yes, that;--all of that. He tells me that, and then says that
there shall be no more words spoken or written about it. I can
hardly submit to so stern a judgement. You know the truth, Lady
Mary.'

'Do not call me Lady Mary. Do not quarrel with me.'

'If your father has quarrelled with me, it would not be fit that
you and I should be friends. Your duty to him would forbid it. I
should not have come to you now did I not feel that I am bound to
justify myself. The thing of which I am accused is so repugnant to
me, that I am obliged to do something and to say something, even
though the subject itself be one on which I would willing be
silent.'

'What can I do, Mrs Finn?'

'It was Mr Tregear who first told me that your father was very
angry with me. He knew what I had done and why, and he was bound
to tell me in order that I might have an opportunity of setting
myself right with the Duke.  Then I wrote and explained
everything,--how you had told me of the engagement, and how I then
urged Mr Tregear that he should not keep such a matter secret from
your father. In answer to my letter I have received--that.'

'Shall I write and tell papa?'

'He should be made to understand that from the moment in which I
heard of the engagement I was urgent with you and with Mr Tregear
that he should be informed of it. You will remember what passed.'

'I remember it all.'

'I did not conceive it to my duty to tell the Duke myself, but I
did conceive it to be my duty to see that he should be told. Now
he writes to as though I had known the secret from the first, and
as though I had been concealing it from him at the very moment in
which he was asking me to remain at Matching on your behalf. That
I consider to be hard,--and unjust. I cannot deny what he says I
did know of it while I was at Matching, for it was at Matching
that you told me. But he implies that I knew it before. When you
told me your story I did feel that it was my duty to see that the
matter was not kept longer from him;--and I did my duty. Now your
father takes it upon himself to rebuke me,--and takes upon himself
at the same time to forbid me to write to him again!'

'I will tell him, Mrs Finn.'

'Let him understand this. I do not wish to write to him again.
After what has passed I cannot say I wish to see him again. But I
think he should acknowledge to me that he has been mistaken. He
need not then fear that I shall trouble him with any reply. But I
shall know that he has acquitted me of a fault of which I cannot
bear to think I should be accused.'  Then she took a somewhat
formal though still an affectionate farewell to the girl.

'I want to see papa as soon as possible,' said Lady Mary when she
was again with Lady Cantrip. The reason for her wish was soon
given, and then the whole story told. 'You do not think that she
should have gone to papa at once?' Lady Mary asked. It was a point
of moral law on which the elder woman, who had girls of her own,
found it hard to give an immediate answer. It certainly is
expedient that parents should know at once of any engagement by
which their daughters may seek to contract themselves. It is
expedient that they should be able to prevent any secret
contracts. Lady Cantrip felt strongly that Mrs Finn having
accepted the confidential charge of the daughter, could not,
without gross betrayal of trust, allow herself to be the
depositary of such a secret. 'But she did not allow herself,' said
Lady Mary, pleading for her friend.

'But she left the house without telling him, my dear.'

'But it was because of what she did that he was told.'

'That is true; but I doubt whether she should have left him an
hour in ignorance.'

'But it was I who told her. She would have betrayed me.'

'She was not a fit recipient for your confidence, Mary. But I do
not wish to accuse her. She seems a high-minded woman, and I think
that your papa has been hard upon her.'

'And mamma knew it always,' said Mary. To this Lady Cantrip could
give no answer. Whatever the cause for anger the Duke might have
against Mrs Finn, there had been cause for much more against his
wife. But she had freed herself from all accusation by death.

Lady Mary wrote to her father, declaring that she was most
particularly anxious to see him and talk to him about Mrs Finn.



CHAPTER 13

The Duke's Injustice

No advantage whatever was obtained by Lady Mary's interview with
her father. He persisted that Mrs Finn had been untrue to him when
she left Matching without telling him all that she knew of his
daughter's engagement with Mr Tregear. No doubt by degrees that
idea which he at first entertained was expelled from his heat,--the
idea that she had been cognizant of the whole thing before she
came to Matching; but even this was done so slowly that there was
no moment at which he became aware of any lessened feeling of
indignation. To his thinking she had betrayed her trust, and he
could not be got by his daughter to say that he would forgive her.
He certainly could not be got to say that he would apologise for
the accusation he had made. It was nothing less that his daughter
asked; and he could hardly refrain himself from anger when she
asked it. 'There should not have been a moment,' he said, 'before
she came and told me and told me all.'  Poor Lady Mary's position
was certainly uncomfortable enough. The great sin,--the sin which
was so great that to have known it for a day without revealing it
was in itself a damning sin on the part of Mrs Finn,--was Lady
Mary's sin. And she differed so entirely from her father as to
think that the sin of her own was a virtue, and that to have
spoken of it to him would have been, on the part of Mrs Finn, a
treachery so deep that no woman ought to have forgive it! When he
spoke of a matter which deeply affected his honour,--she could
hardly refrain from asserting that his honour was quite safe in
his daughter's hands. And when in his heart he declared that it
should have been Mrs Finn's first care to save him from disgrace,
Lady Mary did break out, 'Papa there could be no disgrace.' 'That
for a moment shall be laid aside,' he said, with that manner by
which even his peers in council had never been able not to be
awed, 'but if you communicate with Mrs Finn at all you must be
made to understand that I regard her conduct as inexcusable.'

Nothing had been gained, and poor Lady Mary was compelled to write
a few lines which were to her most painful in writing.

'MY DEAR MRS FINN,
'I have seen papa, and he thinks that you
ought to have told him when I told you. It occurs to me
that it would have been a cruel thing to do, and most
unfair to Mr Tregear, who was quite willing to go to
papa, and had only put off doing so because of poor
mamma's death. As I had told mamma, of course it was
right that he should tell papa. Then I told you,
because you were so kind to me! I am so sorry that I
have got you into this trouble; but what can I do?

'I told him I must write to you. I suppose it is
better that I should, although what I have to say is so
unpleasant. I hope it will all blow over in time,
because I love you dearly. You may be quite sure of one
thing,--that I shall never change.' (In this assurance
the writer was alluding not to her friendship for her
friend but her love for her lover,--and so the friend
understood her) I hope things will be settled some day,
and then we may be able to meet.

  'Your very affectionate
Friend,
      'MARY PALLISER'

Mrs Finn, when she received this, was alone in her house in Park
Lane. Her husband was down in the North of England. On this
subject she had not spoken to him, fearing that he would feel
himself bound to take some steps to support his wife under the
treatment she had received. Even though she must quarrel with the
Duke, she was most anxious that her husband should not be
compelled to do so. Their connection had been political rather
than personal. There were many reasons why there should be no open
cause of disruption between them. But her husband was hot-headed,
and, were al this to be told to him and that letter shown to him
which the Duke had written, there would be words between him and
the Duke which would probably make impossible any further
connection between them.

It troubled her very much. She was by no means not alive to the
honour of the Duke's friendship. Throughout her intimacy with the
Duchess she had abstained from pressing herself on him, not
because she had been indifferent about him, but that she had
perceived that she might make her way with him better by standing
aloof than by thrusting herself forward. And she had known that
she had been successful. She could tell herself with pride that her
conduct towards him had been always such as would become a lady of
high spirit and fine feeling. She knew that she had deserved well
of him, that in all her intercourse with him, with his uncle, and
with his wife, she had given much and had taken little. She was
the last woman in the world to let a word on such a matter pass
her lips; but not the less was she conscious of her merit towards
him. And she had been led to act as she had done by sincere
admiration for the man. In all their political troubles, she had
understood him better than the Duchess had done. Looking on from a
distance she had understood the man's character as it had come to
her both from his wife and from her own husband.

That he was unjust to her,--cruelly unjust, she was quite sure. He
accused her of intentional privity as to a secret which it
behooved him to know, and of being a party to that secrecy.
Whereas from the moment in which she had heard the secret she had
determined that it must be made known to him. She felt that she
had deserved his good opinion in all things, but in nothing more
than in the way in which she had acted in this matter. And yet he
had treated her with an imperious harshness which amounted to
insolence. What a letter it was that he had written to her!  The
very tips of her ears tingled with heat as she read again to
herself. None of the ordinary courtesies of epistle-craft had been
preserved either in the beginning or in the end. It was worse even
than if he had called her, Madam without an epithet. 'The Duke
understands--' 'The Duke thinks--' 'The Duke feels--' feels that he
should not be troubled with either letters or conversation; the
upshot of it all being that the Duke declared her to have shown
herself unworthy of being treated like a lady!  And this is after
all she had done!

She would not bear it. That at present was all that she could say
to herself. She was not angry with Lady Mary. She did not doubt
but that the girl had done the best in her power to bring her
father to reason. But because Lady Mary had failed, she, Mrs Finn,
was not going to put up with so grievous an injury. And she was
forced to bear all this alone!  There was none with whom she could
communicate;--no one from whom she could ask advice. She would not
bring her husband into a quarrel which might be prejudicial to his
position as a member of his political party. There was no one else
to whom she would tell the secret of Lady Mary's love. And yet she
could not bear this injustice done to her.

Then she wrote as follows to the Duke:

'Mrs Finn presents her compliments to the Duke of
Omnium. Mrs Finn finds it to be essential to her that
she should see the Duke in reference to his letter to
her. If his Grace will let her know on what day and at
what hour he will be kind enough to call on her, Mrs
Finn will be at home to receive him.
'Park Lane. Thursday 12th May, 18-'



CHAPTER 14

The New Member for Silverbridge

Lord Silverbridge was informed that it would be right that he
should go down to Silverbridge a few days before the election, to
make himself known to the electors. As the day for the election
drew near it was understood that there would be no other
candidate. The Conservative side was the popular side among the
tradesmen of Silverbridge. Silverbridge had been proud to be
honoured by the services of the heir of the House of Omnium, even
while that heir had been a Liberal,--had regarded it as so much a
matter of course that the borough should be at his disposal that
no question as to politics had ever arisen while he retained the
seat. And had the Duke chosen to continue to send them Liberals,
one after another, when he went into the House of Lords, there
would have been no question as to the fitness of the man, or men
so sent. Silverbridge had been supposed to be a Liberal as a
matter of course;--because the Pallisers were Liberals. But when
the matter was remitted to themselves;--when the Duke declared that
he would not interfere any more, for it was thus that the borough
had obtained its freedom;--then the borough began to feel
conservative predilections. 'If his Grace really does mean us to
do just what we please ourselves which is a thing we never thought
of asking from his Grace, then we find, having turned the matter
over among ourselves, that we are upon the whole Conservative.'
In this spirit the borough had elected a certain Mr Fletcher; but
in doing so the borough had still a shade of fear that it would
offend the Duke. The House of Palliser, Gatherum Castle, the Duke
of Omnium, and this special Duke himself, were all so great in the
eyes of the borough, that the first and only strong feeling in the
borough was the one of duty. The borough did not altogether enjoy
being enfranchised. But when the Duke had spoken once, twice, and
thrice, then with a hesitating heart the borough returned Mr
Fletcher. Now Mr Fletcher was wanted elsewhere, having been
persuaded to stand for the county, and it was a comfort to the
borough that it could resettle itself beneath the warmth of the
wings of the Pallisers.

So the matter stood when Lord Silverbridge was told that his
presence in the borough for a few hours would be taken as a
compliment. Hitherto no one knew him at Silverbridge. During his
boyhood he had not been much at Gatherum Castle, and had done his
best to eschew the place since he had ceased to be a boy. All the
Pallisers took a pride in Gatherum Castle, but they all disliked
it. 'Oh yes, I'll go down,' he said to Mr Morton, who was up in
town. 'I needn't go to the great barrack I suppose.'  The great
barrack was the Castle. 'I'll put up at the Inn.' Mr Morton begged
the heir to come to his own house; but Silverbridge declared that
he would prefer the Inn, and so the matter was settled. He was to
meet sundry politicians,--Mr Spurgeon and Mr Sprout and Mr Du
Boung,--who would like to be thanked for what they had been done.
But who was to go with him? He would naturally have asked Tregear,
but from Tregear he had for the last week or two been, not perhaps
estranged, but separated. He had been much taken up with racing.
He had gone down to Chester with Major Tifto, and under the
Major's auspicious influences had won a little money;--and now he
was very anxiously preparing himself for the Newmarket Second
Spring Meeting. He had therefore passed much of his time with
Major Tifto. And when this visit to Silverbridge was pressed on
him he thoughtlessly asked Tifto to go with him. Tifto was
delighted. Lord Silverbridge was to be met at Silverbridge by
various well-known politicians from the neighbourhood, and Major
Tifto was greatly elated by the prospect of such an introduction
into the political world.

But no sooner had the offer been made by Lord Silverbridge than he
saw his own indiscretion. Tifto was very well for Chester or
Newmarket, very well perhaps for the Beargarden, but not very well
for an electioneering expedition. An idea came to the young
nobleman that if it should be his fate to represent Silverbridge
in Parliament for the next twenty years, it would be well that
Silverbridge should entertain respecting him some exalted
estimation,--that Silverbridge should be taught to regard him as a
fit son of his father and a worthy specimen of the British
political nobility. Struck by serious reflection of this nature he
did open his mind to Tregear. 'I am very fond of Tifto,' he said,
'but I don't know whether he's just the sort of fellow to take
down to an election.'

'I should think not,' said Tregear very decidedly.

'He's a very good fellow, you know,' said Silverbridge. 'I don't
know an honester man than Tifto anywhere.'

'I dare say. Or rather, I don't dare say. I know nothing about the
Major's honesty, and I doubt whether you do. He rides very well.'

'What has that to do with it?'

'Nothing on earth. Therefore I advise you not to take him to
Silverbridge.'

'You needn't preach.'

'You may call it what you like. Tifto would not hold his tongue,
and there is nothing he could say there which would not be to your
prejudice.'

'Will you go?'

'If you wish it,' said Tregear.

'What will the governor say?'

'That must be your look out. In a political point of view I shall
not disgrace you. I shall hold my tongue and look like a
gentleman,--neither of which is in Tifto's power.'

And so it was settled, that on the day but one after this
conversation Lord Silverbridge and Tregear should go together to
Silverbridge. But the Major, when on that same night his noble
friend's altered plans were explained to him, did not bear the
disappointment with equanimity. 'Isn't that a little strange?' he
said, becoming very red in the face.

'What do you call strange?' said the Lord.

'Well;--I'd made all my arrangements. When a man has been asked to
do a thing like that, he doesn't like to be put off.'

'The truth is, Tifto, when I came to think of it, I saw that,
going down to these fellows about Parliament and all that sort of
thing, I ought to have a political atmosphere, and not a racing or
a betting or a hunting atmosphere.'

'There isn't a man in London who cares more about politics than I
do,--and not many perhaps who understand them better. To tell you
the truth, my Lord, I think you are throwing me over.'

'I'll make it up to you,' said Silverbridge, meaning to be kind.
'I'll go down to Newmarket with you and stick to you like wax.'

'No doubt you'll do that,' said Tifto, who, like a fool, failed to
see where his advantage lay. 'I can be useful at Newmarket, and so
you'll stick to me.'

'Look here, Major Tifto,' said Silverbridge; 'if you are
dissatisfied, you and I can easily separate ourselves.'

'I am not dissatisfied,' said the little man, almost crying.

'Then don't talk as though you were. As to Silverbridge, I shall
not want you there. When I asked you I was only thinking what
would be pleasant to both of us; but since that I have remembered
that business must be business.'  Even this did not reconcile the
angry little man, who as he turned away declared himself within
his own little bosom that he would 'take it out of Silverbridge
for that.'

Lord Silverbridge and Tregear went down to the borough together,
and on the journey something was said about Lady Mary,--and
something also about Lady Mabel. 'From the first, you know,' said
Lady Mary's brother, 'I never thought it would answer.'

'Why not answer?'

'Because I knew the governor would not have it. Money and rank and
those sort of things are not particular charming to me. But still
things should go together. It is all very silly for you and me to
be pals, but of course it will be expected that Mary should marry
some--'

'Some swell?'

'Some swell if you would have it.'

'You mean to call yourself a swell.'

'Yes I do,' said Silverbridge, with considerable resolution. 'You
ought not to make yourself disagreeable, because you understand
all about it as well as anybody. Chance has me the eldest son of a
Duke and heir to an enormous fortune. Chance has made my sister
the daughter of a Duke, and an heiress also. My intimacy ought to
be proof at any rate to you that I don't on that account set
myself up above other fellows. But when you come to talk of
marriage of course it is a serious thing.'

'But you have told me more than once that you have no objection on
your own score.'

'Nor have I.'

'You are only saying what the Duke will think.'

'I am telling you that it is impossible, and I told you so before.
You and she will be kept apart, and so--'

'And so she'll forget me.'

'Something of that kind.'

'Of course I have to trust her for that. If she forgets me, well
and good.'

'She needn't forget you. Lord bless me! you talk as though the
thing were not done every day. You'll hear some morning that she
is going to marry some fellow who has a lot of money and a good
position; and what difference will it make then whether she has
forgotten you or no? It might almost have been supposed that the
young man had been acquainted with his mother's history.'

After this there was a pause, and there arose some conversation
about other things, and a cigar was smoked. Then Tregear returned
once more to the subject. 'There is one thing I wish to say about
it all.'

'What is that?'

'I want you to understand that nothing else will turn me away from
my intention but such a marriage on her part as that of which you
speak. Nothing that your father can do will turn me.'

'She can't marry without his leave.'

'Perhaps not.'

'That he'll never give,--and I don't suppose you look forward to
waiting till his death.'

'If he sees her happiness really depends on it he will give his
leave. It all depends on that. If I judge your father rightly,
he's just as soft-hearted as other people. The man who holds out
is not the man of the firmest opinion, but the man of the hardest
heart.'

'Somebody will talk Mary over.'

'If so, the thing is over. It all depends on her.'  Then he went
on to tell his friend that he had spoken of his engagement with
Lady Mabel. 'I have mentioned it to no soul but to your father and
her.'

'Why to her?'

'Because we were friends together as children. I never had a
sister, but she has been more like a sister to me than anyone
else. Do you object to her knowing it?'

'Not particularly. It seems to me now that everybody knows
everything. There are no longer any secrets.'

'She is a special friend.'

'Of yours,' said Silverbridge.

'And of yours,' said Tregear.

'Well, yes;--in a sort of way. She is the jolliest girl I know.'

'Take her all round, for beauty, intellect, good sense, and fun at
the same time. I don't know anyone equal to her.'

'It's a pity you didn't fall in love with her.'

'We knew each other too early for that.  And then she has not a
shilling. I should think myself dishonest if I did not tell you
that I could not afford any girl who hadn't money. A man must
live,--and a woman too.'

At the station they were met by Mr Spurgeon and Mr Sprout, who,
with many apologies for the meanness of such entertainment, took
them up to the George and Vulture, which was supposed for the
nonce to be the Conservative hotel in the town. Here they were met
by other men of importance in the borough, and among them by Mr Du
Boung. Now Mr Sprout and Mr Spurgeon were Conservatives but Mr Du
Boung was a strong Liberal.

'We are, all of us, particularly glad to see your Lordship among
us,' said Mr Du Boung.

'I have told his Lordship how perfectly satisfied you are to see
the borough in his Lordship's hands,' said Mr Spurgeon.

'I am sure it could not be in better,' said Mr Du Boung. 'For
myself I an quite willing to postpone any particular shade of
politics to the advantage of having your father's son as our
representative.'  This Mr Du Boung said with much intention of
imparting both grace and dignity to the occasion. He thought that
he was doing a great thing for the House of Omnium, and that the
House of Omnium ought to know it.

'That's very kind of you,' said Lord Silverbridge, who had not
read as carefully as he should have done the letters which had
been sent to him, and did not therefore quite understand the
position.

'Mr Du Boung had intended to stand himself,' said Mr Sprout.

'But retired in your lordship's favour,' said Mr Spurgeon.

'I thought you gave it up because there was hardly a footing for
a Liberal,' said his Lordship, very imprudently.

'The borough was always liberal till the last election,' said Mr
Du Boung, drawing himself up.

'The borough wishes on this occasion to be magnanimous,' said Mr
Sprout, probably having on his mind some confusion between
magnanimity and unanimity.

'As your Lordship is coming among us, the borough is anxious to
sink politics altogether for the moment,' said Mr Spurgeon. There
had no doubt been a compact between the Spurgeon and the Sprout
party and the Du Boung party in accordance with which it had been
arranged that Mr Du Boung should be entitled to a certain amount
of glorification in the presence of Lord Silverbridge.

'And it was in compliance with that wish on the part of the
borough, my Lord,' said Mr Du Boung,--'as to which my own feelings
were quite as strong as that of any other gentleman in the
borough,--that I conceived it to be my duty to give way.'

'His Lordship is quite aware how much he owes to Mr Du Boung,'
said Tregear. Whereupon Lord Silverbridge bowed.

'And now what are we to do?' said Lord Silverbridge.

Then there was a little whispering between Mr Sprout and Mr
Spurgeon. 'Perhaps, Mr Du Boung,' said Spurgeon, 'his lordship had
better call first on Dr Tempest.'

'Perhaps,' said the injured brewer, 'as it is to be a party affair
after all I had better retire from the scene.'

'I thought all that was to be given up,' said Tregear.

'Oh, certainly,' said Sprout. 'Suppose we go to Mr Walker first?'

'I'm up to anything,' said Lord Silverbridge; 'but of course
everybody understands that I am a Conservative.'

'Oh dear, yes,' said Spurgeon.

'We are all aware of that,' said Sprout.

'And very glad we've all of us been to hear of it,' said the
landlord.

'Though there are some in the borough who could have wished, my
Lord, that you had stuck to the old Palliser politics,' said Mr Du
Boung.

'But I haven't stuck to the Palliser politics. Just at present I
think that order and all that sort of thing should be maintained.'

'Hear, hear!' said the landlord.

'And now, as I have expressed my views generally, I am willing to
go anywhere.'

'Then we'll go to Mr Walker first,' said Spurgeon. Now it was
understood that in the borough, among those who really had
opinions of their own, Mr Walker the old attorney stood first as a
Liberal, and Dr Tempest the old rector as a Conservative.

'I am glad to see your Lordship in the town which gives you its
name,' said Mr Walker, who was a hale old gentleman with silvery-
white hair, over seventy years of age. 'I proposed your father for
this borough on, I think, six or seven different occasions. They
used to go in and out then whenever they changed their offices.'

'We hope you'll propose Lord Silverbridge now,' said Mr Spurgeon.

'Oh; well;--yes. He's his father's son, and I never knew anything
but good of the family. I wish you were going to sit on the same
side, my Lord.'

'Times are changed a little, perhaps,' said his Lordship.

'The matter is not to be discussed now,' said the old attorney.
'I understand that. Only I hope you'll excuse me if I say that
a man  ought to get up very early in the morning if he means to
see further into politics than your father.'

'Very early indeed,' said Mr Du Boung, shaking his head.

'That's all right,' said Lord Silverbridge.

'I'll propose you, my Lord. I need not wish you success, because
there is no one to stand against you.'

Then they went to Dr Tempest, who was also an old man. 'Yes, my
Lord, I shall be proud to second you,' said the rector. 'I didn't
think that I should ever do that to one of your name of
Silverbridge.'

'I hope you think I've made a change for the better,' said the
candidate.

'You've come over to my school of course, and I suppose I am bound
to think that a change for the better. Nevertheless I have a kind
of idea that certain people ought to be Tories and that other
certain people ought to be Whigs. What does your father say about
it?'

'My father wishes me to be in the House, and that he has not
quarrelled with me you may know by the fact that had there been a
contest he would have paid my expenses.'

'A father generally has to do that whether he approves of what his
son is about or not,' said the caustic old gentleman.

There was nothing else to be done. They all went back to the
hotel, and Mr Spurgeon with Mr Sprout and the landlord clerk drank
a glass of sherry at the candidate's expense, wishing him
political long life and prosperity. There was no one else whom it
was thought necessary that the candidate should visit, and the
next day he returned to town with the understanding that on the
day appointed in the next week he should come back again to be
elected.

And on the appointed day the two young men again went to
Silverbridge, and after he had been declared duly elected, the new
Member of Parliament made his first speech. There was a meeting in
the town-hall and many were assembled anxious to hear,--not the
lad's opinions, for which the probably nobody cared much,--but the
tone of his voice and to see his manner. Of what sort was the
eldest son of the man of whom the neighbourhood had been so proud?
 For the county was in truth proud of their Duke. Of this son whom
they had now made a Member of Parliament they at present only knew
that he had been sent away from Oxford,--not so very long ago,--for
painting the Dean's house scarlet. The speech was not very
brilliant. He told them that he was very much obliged to them for
the honour they had done him. Though he could not follow exactly
his father's political opinions,--he would always have before his
eyes his father's honesty and independence. He broke down two or
three times and blushed, and repeated himself, and knocked his
words a great deal too quickly one on top of another. But it was
taken very well, and was better than expected. When it was over he
wrote a line to the Duke.

'MY DEAR FATHER,

'I am Member of Parliament for Silverbridge,--as you
used to be in the days which I can first remember. I
hope you won't think that it does not make me unhappy
to have differed from you. Indeed it does. I don't
think that anybody has ever done so well in politics as
you have. But when a man does take up an opinion, I
don't see how he can help himself. Of course I could
have kept myself quiet;--but then you wished me to be in
the House. They were all very civil to me at
Silverbridge, but there was very little said.

'Your affectionate Son,
'SILVERBRIDGE.'



CHAPTER 15

The Duke Receives a Letter,--and Writes One.

The Duke, when he received Mrs Finn's note, demanding an
interview, thought much upon the matter before he replied. She had
made her demand as though the Duke had been no more than any other
gentleman, almost as though she had a right to call upon him to
wait upon her. He understood and admitted the courage of this;--but
nevertheless he would not go to her. He had trusted her with that
which of all things was the most sacred to him, and she had
deceived him!  He wrote her as follows:

'The Duke of Omnium presents his compliments to
Mrs Finn. As the Duke thinks that no good could result
either to Mrs Finn or to himself from an interview, he
is obliged to say that he would rather not do as Mrs
Finn has requested.

'But for the strength of this conviction the Duke
would have waited upon Mrs Finn most willingly.'

Mrs Finn when she received this was not surprised. She had felt
sure that such would be the nature of the Duke's answer; but she
was also sure that is such an answer did come, she would not let
the matter rest. The accusation was so bitter to her that she
would spare nothing in defending herself,--nothing in labour and
nothing in time. She would make him know that she was in earnest.
As she could not succeed in getting into his presence she must do
so by letter,--and she wrote her letter, taking two days to think
of her words.

'May 18, 18-

'MY DEAR DUKE OF OMNIUM,

'As you will not come to me, I must trouble your
Grace to read what I fear will be a long letter. For it
is absolutely necessary that I should explain my
conduct to you. That you have condemned me I am sure
you will not deny;--nor that you have punished me as far
as the power of punishment was in your hands. If I can
succeed in making you see that you have judged me
wrongly, I think you will admit you error and beg my
pardon. You are not one who from your nature can be
brought easily to do this; but you are the one who will
certainly do it if you can be made to feel that by not
doing so you would be unjust. I am myself so clear as
to my own rectitude of purpose and conduct, and I am so
well aware of your perspicuity, that I venture to
believe that if you will read this letter I shall
convince you.

'Before I go any further I will confess that the
matter is one,--I was going to say almost of life and
death to me. Circumstances, not of my own seeking, have
for some years past thrown me so closely into
intercourse with your family that now to be cast off,
and to be put on one side as a disgraced person,--and
that so quickly after the death of her who loved me so
dearly, and who was dear to me,--is such an affront as I
cannot bear and hold up my head afterwards. I have come
to be known as her whom your uncle trusted and loved,
as her whom your wife trusted and loved,--obscure as I
was before;--and as her whom, may I not say, you
yourself trusted?  As there was much of honour and very
much of pleasure in this, so also was their something
of misfortune. Friendships are safest when the friends
are of the same standing. I have always felt there was
a danger, and now the thing I have feared has come home
to me.

'Now I will plead my case. I fancy, that when you
first heard that I had been cognizant of your
daughter's engagement, you imagined that I was aware of
it before I went to Matching. Had I been so, I should
have been guilty of that treachery of which you accuse
me. I did know nothing of it till Lady Mary told me on
the day before I left Matching. That she should tell me
was natural enough. Her mother had known of it, and for
the moment,--if I am not assuming too much in saying
so,--I was filling her mother's place. But, in reference
to you, I could not exercise the discretion which a
mother might have used, and I told her at once, most
decidedly, that you must be made acquainted with the
fact.

'Then Lady Mary expressed to me her wish,--not
that this matter should be kept any longer from you,
for that it should be told to you by Mr Tregear. It was
not for me to raise any question as to Mr Tregear's
fitness or unfitness,--as to which indeed I could know
nothing. All I could do was to say that if Mr Tregear
would make communications at once, I should feel that I
had done my duty. The upshot was that Mr Tregear came
to me immediately on my return to London, and agreeing
with me that it was imperative for you to be informed,
went to you and did inform you. In all of that, if I
have told the story truly, where has been my offence?
I suppose you will believe me, but your daughter can
give evidence as to every word that I have written.

'I think that you have got into your mind that I
have befriended Mr Tregear' suit, and that, having
received this impression, you hold it with the tenacity
which is usual to you. There never was a greater
mistake. I went to Matching as the friend of my dear
friend;---but I stayed there at your request, as your
friend. Had I been, when you asked me to do so, a
participator in that secret I could not have honestly
remained in the position you assigned to me. Had I done
so, I should have deserved your ill opinion. As it is I
have not deserved it, and your condemnation of me has
been altogether unjust. Should I not now receive from
you a full withdrawal of all charges against me, I
shall be driven to think that after all the insight
which circumstances have given me into your character,
I have nevertheless been mistaken in the reading of it.
'I remain,
'Dear Duke of Omnium,
'Yours truly,
M. FINN'

'I find on looking over my letter that I must add
one word further. It might seem that I am asking for a
return of your friendship. Such is not my purpose.
Neither can you forget that you have accused me,--nor
can I. What I expect is that you should tell me that
you in your conduct to me have been wrong and that I in
mine to you have been right. I must be enabled to feel
that the separation between us has come from injury
done to me, and not by me.'

He did read the letter more than once, and read it with tingling
ears, and hot cheeks, and a knitted brow. As the letter went on,
and as the woman's sense of wrong grew hot from her own telling of
her own story, her words became stronger and still stronger, till
at last they were almost insolent in their strength. Were it not
that they came from one who did think herself to have been
wronged, then certainly they would be insolent. A sense of injury,
a burning conviction of wrong sustained, will justify language
which otherwise would be unbearable.  The Duke felt that, though
his ears were tingling and his brow knitted, he could have
forgiven the language, if only he could have admitted the
argument. He understood every word of it. When she spoke of
tenacity she intended to charge him with obstinacy. Though she had
dwelt but lightly on her own services she had made her thoughts on
the matter clear enough. 'I, Mrs Finn, who am nobody, have done
much to succour and assist you, the Duke of Omnium; and this is
the return which I have received!'  And then she told him to his
face that unless he did something which it would be impossible
that he should do, she would revoke her opinion of his honesty!
He tried to persuade himself that her opinion about his honesty
was nothing to him;--but he failed. Her opinion was very much to
him. Though in his anger he had determined to throw her off from
him, he knew her to be one whose good opinion was worth having.

Not a word of overt accusation had been made against his wife.
Every allusion to her was full of love. But yet how heavy a charge
was really made!  That such a secret should be kept from him, the
father, was acknowledged to be a heinous fault;--but the wife had
known the secret and had kept it from him the father!  And then
how wretched a thing it was for him that anyone should dare to
write to him about the wife that had been taken away from him! In
spite of all her faults her name was so holy to him that it had
never once passed his lips since her death, except in low whispers
to himself,--low whispers made in the perfect, double-guarded
seclusion of his own chamber. 'Cora, Cora,' he had murmured, so
that the sense of the sound and not the sound itself had come to
him from his own lips. And now this woman wrote to him about her
freely, as though there were nothing sacred, no religion in the
memory of her.

'It was not for me to raise any question as to Mr Tregear's
fitness'. Was it not palpable to all the world that he was unfit?
Unfit! How could a man be more unfit?  He was asking for the hand
of one who was second only to royalty--who possessed of everything,
who was beautiful, well-born, rich, who was the daughter of the
Duke of Omnium, and he had absolutely nothing of his own to offer.

But it was necessary that he should at last come to the
consideration of the actual point as to which she had written to
him so forcibly. He tried to set himself to the task of perfect
honestly. He certainly had condemned her. He had condemned her and
had no doubt punished her to the extent of his power. And if he
could be brought to see that he had done this unjustly, then
certainly he must beg pardon. And when he considered it all, he
had to own that her intimacy with his uncle and his wife had not
been so much of her seeking as of theirs. It grieved him now that
it should have been so, but so it was. And after all this,--after
the affectionate surrender of herself to his wife's caprices which
the woman had made,--he had turned upon her and driven her away
with ignominy. That all was true. As he thought of it he became
hot, and was conscious of a quivering feeling round his heart.
These were bonds indeed; but they were bonds of such a nature as to
be capable of being rescinded and cut away altogether by absolute
bad conduct. If he could make it good to himself that in a matter
of such magnitude as the charge of his daughter she had been
untrue to him and had leagued herself against him, with an
unworthy lover, then, then,--all bonds would be rescinded!  Then
would his wrath be altogether justified!  Then would it have been
impossible that he should have done aught else than cast her out!
 As he thought of this he felt sure that she had betrayed him! How
great would be the ignominy to him should he be driven to own to
himself that she had not betrayed him!  'There should not have
been a moment,' he said to himself over and over again,--'not a
moment!'  Yes; she certainly had betrayed him.

There might still be safety for him in that confident assertion of
'not a moment'; but had there been anything of that conspiracy of
which he had certainly at first judged her to be guilty?  She had
told her story, and had then appealed to Lady Mary for evidence.
After five minutes of perfect stillness,--but five minutes of
misery, five minutes during which great beads of perspiration
broke out from him and stood upon his brow, he had to confess to
himself that he did not want any evidence. He did believe her
story. When he allowed himself to think she had been in league
with Tregear he had wronged her. He wiped away the beads from his
brow, and again repeated to himself those words which were now his
only comfort, 'There should not have been a moment;--not a moment!'

It was thus and only thus that he was enabled to assure himself
that there need be no acknowledgment of wrong done on his part.
Having settled this in his own mind he forced himself to attend a
meeting at which his assistance had been asked to a complex
question on Law Reform. The Duke endeavoured to give himself up
entirely to the matter; but through it all there was the picture
before him of Mrs Finn waiting for an answer to her letter. If he
should confirm himself in his opinion that he had been right, then
would any answer be necessary?  He might just acknowledge the
letter, after the fashion which has come up in official life, than
which silence is an insult much more bearable. But he did not wish
to insult, nor to punish her further. He would willingly have
withdrawn the punishment under which she was groaning could he
have done so with self-abasement. Or he might write as she had
done,--advocating his own cause with all his strength, using that
last one strong argument,--there should not have been a 'moment'.
But there would be something repulsive to his personal dignity in
the continued correspondence which this would produce. 'The Duke
of Omnium regrets to say, in answer to Mrs Finn's letter, that he
thinks no good can be attained by a prolonged correspondence.'
Such, or of such kind, he thought must be his answer. But would
this be a fair return for the solicitude shown to her by his
uncle, for the love which had made her so patient a friend to his
wife, for the nobility of her own conduct in many things?  Then
his mind reverted to certain jewels,--supposed to be of enormous
value,--which were still in his possession though they were the
property of this woman. They had been left to her by his uncle,
and she had obstinately refused to take them. Now they were lying
packed in the cellars of certain bankers,--but still they were in
his custody. What should he do now in this matter?  Hitherto,
perhaps once in every six months, he had notified to her that he
was keeping them as her curator, and she had always repeated that
it was a charge from which she could not relieve him. It had
become almost a joke between them. But how could he joke with a
woman with whom he had quarrelled after this internecine fashion?

What if he were to consult Lady Cantrip?  He could not do so
without a pang that would have been very bitter to him,--but any
agony would be better than arising from a fear that he had been
unjust to one who had deserved so well of him. No doubt Lady
Cantrip would see it in the same light as he had done. And then he
would be able to support himself by the assurance that that which
had judged to be right was approved of by one whom the world would
acknowledge to be a good judge on such a matter.

When he got home he found his son's letter telling him of the
election at Silverbridge. There was something in it which softened
his heart to that young man,--or perhaps it was that in the midst
of his many discomforts he wished to find something which at least
was not painful to him.  That his son and heir should insist in
entering political life in opposition to him was of course a
source of pain; but, putting that aside, the thing had been done
pleasantly enough, and the young member's letter had been written
with some good feeling. So he answered the letter as pleasantly as
he knew how.

'MY DEAR SILVERBRIDGE

'I am glad you are in Parliament and am glad also
that you should have been returned by the old borough;
though I would that you could have reconciled yourself
to the politics of your family. But there is nothing
disgraceful in such a change, and I am able to
congratulate you as a father should a son and to wish
you long life and success as a legislator.

'There are one or two things I would ask you to
remember;--and firstly this, that as you have
voluntarily undertaken certain duties you are bound as
an honest man to perform them as scrupulously as though
you were paid for doing them. There was no obligation
in you to seek the post;--but having sought it and
acquired it you cannot neglect the work attached to it
without being untrue to the covenant you have made. It
is necessary that a young member of Parliament should
bear this in mind, and especially a member who has not
worked his way up to notoriety outside the House,
because to him there will be great facility for
idleness and neglect.

'And then I would have you always remember the
purpose for which there is a parliament elected in this
happy and free country. It is not that some men may
shine there, that some may acquire power, or that all
may plume themselves on being the elect of the nation.
It often appears to me that some members of Parliament
so regard their success in life,--as the fellows of our
colleges do too often, thinking that their fellowships
were awarded for their comfort and not for the
furtherance of any object such as education or
religion. I have known gentlemen who have felt that in
becoming members of Parliament they had achieved an
object for themselves instead of thinking that they had
put themselves in the way of achieving something for
others. A member of Parliament should feel himself to
be the servant of his country,--and like every other
servant, he should serve. If this be distasteful to a
man he need not go into Parliament. If the harness gall
him he need not wear it. But if he takes the trappings,
then he should draw the coach. You are there as the
guardian of your fellow-countrymen,--that they may be
safe, they may be prosperous, that they may be well
governed and lightly burdened,--above all that they may
be free. If you cannot feel this to be your duty, you
should not be there at all.

'And I would have you remember also that the work
of a member of Parliament can seldom be of that
brilliant nature which is of itself charming; and that
the young member should think of such brilliancy as
being possible to him only at a distance. It should be
your first care to sit and listen so that the forms and
methods of the House may as it were soak into you
gradually. And then you must bear in mind that speaking
in the House is but a very small part of a member's
work, perhaps that part he may lay aside altogether
with the least stain on his conscience. A good member
of Parliament will be good upstairs in the Committee
Rooms, good downstairs to make and to keep a House,
good to vote, for his party if it may be nothing
better, but for the measures also which he believes to
be for the good of the country.

'Gradually, if you will give your thoughts to it,
and above all your time, the theory of legislation will
sink into your mind, and you will find that there will
come upon you the ineffable delight of having served
your country to the best of your ability.

'It is the only pleasure in life which has been
enjoyed without alloy by your affectionate father,

'OMNIUM.'

The Duke in writing this letter was able for a few moments to
forget Mrs Finn, and to enjoy the work which he had on hand.



CHAPTER 16

Poor Boy

The new member for Silverbridge, when he entered the House to take
the oath, was supported on the right and left by two staunch old
Tories. Mr Monk had seen him a few minutes previously,--Mr Monk who
of all Liberals was the firmest and than whom no one had been more
staunch to the Duke,--and had congratulated him on his election,
expressing at the same time some gentle regrets. 'I only wish you
could have come among us on the other side,' he said.

'But I couldn't,' said the young Lord.

'I am sure nothing but a conscientious feeling would have
separated you from your father's friends,' said the old Liberal.
And then they were parted, and the member for Silverbridge was
bustled up to the table between the two staunch Tories.

Of what else was done on that occasion nothing shall be said here.
No political work was required from him, except that of helping
for an hour or two to crowd the Government benches. But we will
follow him as he left the House. There were one or two others
quite as anxious as to his political career as any staunch old
Liberal. At any rate one other. He had promised that as soon as he
could get away from the House he would go to Belgrave Square and
tell Lady Mabel Grex all about it. When he reached the square it
was past seven, but Lady Mabel and Miss Cassewary were still in
the drawing-room. 'There seemed to be a great deal of bustle, and
I didn't understand much about it, said the Member.

'But you heard speeches?'  These were the speeches made on the
proposing and seconding of the address.

'Oh yes;--Lupon did it very well. Lord George didn't seem to be
quite as good. Then Sir Timothy Beeswax made a speech, and then Mr
Monk. After that I saw other fellows going away, so I bolted too.'

'If I were a member of Parliament I would never leave it while the
House was sitting,' said Miss Cassewary.

'If all were like that there wouldn't be seats for them to sit on,
said Silverbridge.

'A persistent member will always find a seat,' continued the
positive old lady.

'I am sure that Lord Silverbridge means to do his duty,' said Lady
Mabel.

'Oh yes;--I've thought a good deal about it, and I mean to try. As
long as a man isn't called upon to speak I don't see why it
shouldn't be easy enough.'

'I'm so glad to hear you say so!  Of course after a little time
you will speak. I should like to hear you make your first speech.'

'If I thought you were there, I'm sure I should not make it at
all.'  Just at this period Miss Cassewary, saying something as to
the necessity of dressing, and cautioning her young friend that
there was not much time to be lost, left the room.

'Dressing does not take me more than ten minutes,' said Lady
Mabel. Miss Cassewary declared this to be nonsense, but she
nevertheless left the room. Whether she would have done so if Lord
Silverbridge had not been Lord Silverbridge, but had been some
young man with whom it would not have been expedient that Lady
Mabel should fall in love, may perhaps be doubted. Lady Mabel
herself would not have remained. She had quite related the duties
of life, had had her little romance,--and had acknowledged that it
was foolish.

'I do so hope that you will do well,' she said, going back to the
parliamentary duties.

'I don't think I shall ever do much. I shall never be like my
father.'

'I don't see why not.'

'There never was anybody like him. I am always amusing myself, but
he never cared for amusement.'

'You are very young.'

'As far as I can learn he was just as he is now at my age. My
mother has told me that long before she married him he used to
spend all his time in the House. I wonder whether you would mind
reading the letter he wrote to me when he heard of my election.'
Then he took the epistle out of his pocket and handed it to Lady
Mabel.

'He means what he says.'

'He always does that.'

'And he really hopes that you will put your shoulder to the
wheel,--even though you must do so in opposition to him.'

'That makes no difference. I think my father is a very fine
fellow.'

'Shall you do as he tells you?'

'Well,--I suppose not;--except that he advises me to hold my tongue.
I think I shall do that.  I mean to go down there, you know, and I
daresay I shall be much the same as others.'

'Has he talked to you much about it?'

'No;--he never talks much. Every now and then he will give me a
downright lecture, or he will write me a letter like that; but he
never talks to any of us.'

'How very odd.'

'Yes; he is odd. He seems to be fretful when we are with him. A
good many things make him unhappy.'

'Your poor mother's death.'

'That first;--and then there are other things. I suppose he didn't
like the way I came to an end in Oxford.'

'You were a boy then.'

'Of course I was very sorry for it,--though I hated Oxford. It was
neither one thing nor another. You were your own master and yet
you were not.'

'Now you must be your own master.'

'I suppose so.'

'You must marry, and become a lord of the Treasury. When I was a
child I acted as a child. You know all about that.'

'Oh yes. And now I must throw off childish things. You mean that I
mustn't paint any man's house? Eh, Lady Mab.'

'That and the rest of it. You are a legislator now.'

'So is Popplecourt, who took his seat in the House of Lords two or
three months ago. He's the biggest young fool I know out. He
couldn't even paint a house.'

'He is not an elected legislator. It makes all the difference. I
quite agree with what the Duke says. Lord Popplecourt can't help
himself. Whether he's an idle young scamp or not, he must be a
legislator. But when a man goes into if for himself, as you have
done, he should make up his mind to be useful.'

'I shall vote with my party of course.'

'More than that, much more than that. if you didn't care for
politics you couldn't have taken that line of your own.'  When she
said this she knew that he had been talked into what he had done
by Tregear,--by Tregear, who had ambition, and intelligence, and
capacity for forming an opinion of his own. 'If you do not do it
for your own sake, you will for the sake of those who,--who,--who
are your friends,' she said at last, not feeling quite able to
tell him that he must do it for the sake of those that loved him.

'There are not very many I suppose who care about it.'

'Your father.'

'Oh yes,--my father.'

'And Tregear.'

'Tregear has got his own fish to fry.'

'Are there none others? Do you think we care nothing about it
here?'

'Miss Cassewary?'

'Well;--Miss Cassewary! A man might have a worse friend than Miss
Cassewary;--and my father.'

'I don't suppose Lord Grex cares a straw about me.'

'Indeed he does,--a great many straws. And so do I. Do you think I
don't care a straw about you?'

'I don't know why you should.'

'Because it is in my nature to be earnest. A girl comes out into
the world so young that she becomes serious, and steady as it
were, so much sooner than a man does.'

'I always think that nobody is so full of chaff as you are, Lady
Mab.'

'I am not chaffing now in recommending you go to work in the world
like a man.'  As she said this they were sitting on the same sofa,
but with some space between them. When Miss Cassewary had left the
room Lord Silverbridge was standing, but after a little he had
fallen into the seat, at the extreme corner, and had gradually
come a little nearer to her. Now in her energy she put our her
hand, meaning perhaps to touch lightly the sleeve of his coat,
meaning perhaps not quite to touch him at all. But as she did so
he put out his hand and took hold of hers.

She drew it away, not seeming to allow it to remain in his grasp
for a moment, but she did so, not angrily, or hurriedly, or with
any flurry. She did it as though it were natural that he should
take her hand and as natural that she should recover it. 'Indeed I
have hardly more than ten minutes left before dressing,' she said,
rising from her seat.

'If you will say that you care about it, you yourself, I will do
my best.'  As he made this declaration blushes covered his cheeks
and forehead.

'I do care about it,--very much; I myself,' said Lady Mabel, not
blushing at all. Then there was a knock at the door, and Lady
Mabel's maid, putting her head in, declared that my Lord had come
in and had already been some time in the dressing-room. 'Good-bye,
Lord Silverbridge,' she said quite gaily, and rather more aloud
than would have been necessary, had she not intended that the maid
should also hear her.

'Poor boy!' she said to herself as she was dressing. 'Poor boy!'
Then, when the evening was over she spoke to herself again about
him. 'Dear sweet boy!'  And then she sat and thought. How was it
that she was so old a woman, while he was so little more than a
child?  How fair he was, how far removed from conceit, how capable
of being made into man--in the process of time! What might not be
expected from him if he could be kept in good hands for the next
ten years!  But in whose hands?  What would she be in ten years,
she who already seemed to know the town and all its belongings so
well?  And yet she was as young in years as he. He, as she knew,
had passed his twenty-second birthday,--and so had she. That was
all. It might be good for her that she should marry him. She was
ambitious. And such a marriage would satisfy her ambition. Through
her father's fault, and her brother's she was likely to be poor.
This man would certainly be rich. Many of those who were buzzing
around her from day to day, were distasteful to her. From among
them she knew that she could not take a husband, let their rank
and wealth be what it might. She was too fastidious, too proud,
too prone to think that things could be with her as she liked
them!  This last was in all things pleasant to her. Though he was
but a boy, there was a certain boyish manliness about him. The very
way in which he had grasped at her hand and had then blushed ruby-
red at his own daring, had gone far with her. How gracious he was
to look at! Dear sweet boy! Love him? No;--she did not know that
she loved him. That dream was over. She was sure however that she
liked him.

But could she love him? That a woman should not marry a man
without loving him, she partly knew. But she thought she knew also
that there must be exceptions. She would do her very best to love
him. That other man should be banished from her very thoughts. She
would be such a wife to him that he should never know that he
lacked anything. Poor boy! Sweet dear boy!  He, as he went away to
his dinner, had his thoughts also about her. Of all the girls he
knew she was the jolliest,--and of all his friends she was the
pleasantest. As she was anxious that he should go to work in the
House of Commons he would go to work there. As for loving her!
Well;--of course he must marry some day, and why not Lady Mab as
well as anyone else.



CHAPTER 17

The Derby

An attendance at the Newmarket Second Spring Meeting had
unfortunately not been compatible with the Silverbridge election.
Major Tifto had therefore been obliged to look after the affair
alone.  'A very useful mare,' as Tifto had been in the habit of
calling a leggy, thoroughbred, meagre-looking brute named
Coalition, was on this occasion confided to the Major's sole care
and judgement. But Coalition failed, as coalitions always do, and
Tifto had to report to his noble patron that they had not pulled
off the event. It had been a match for four hundred pounds, made
indeed by Lord Silverbridge, but made at the suggestion of Tifto;--
and now Tifto wrote in a very bad humour about it. It had been
altogether his Lordship's fault in submitting to carry two pounds
more than Tifto had thought to be fair and equitable. The match
had been lost. Would Lord Silverbridge be so good as to pay the
money to Mr Green Griffin and debit him, Tifto, with the share of
the loss?

We must acknowledge that the unpleasant tone of the Major's letter
was due quite as much to the ill-usage he had received in
reference to that journey to Silverbridge, as to the loss of the
race. Within that little body there was a high-mounting heart, and
that heart had been greatly wounded by his Lordship's treatment.
Tifto had felt himself to have been treated like a servant. Hardly
an excuse had even been made. He had been simply told that he was
not wanted. He was apt sometimes to tell himself that he knew on
which side his bread was buttered. But perhaps he hardly knew how
best to keep the butter going. There was a little pride about him
which was antagonistic to the best interests of such a trade as
his. Perhaps it was well that he should inwardly suffer when
injured. But it could not be well that he should declare to such
men as Nidderdale, and Dolly Longstaff, and Popplecourt that he
didn't mean to put up with that sort of thing. He certainly should
not have spoken in this strain before Tregear. Of all men living
he hated and feared him the most. And he knew that no other man
loved Silverbridge as did Tregear. Had he been thinking of his
bread-and-butter, instead of giving way to the mighty anger of his
little bosom, he would have hardly declared openly at the club
that he would let Lord Silverbridge know that he did not mean to
stand any man's airs. But these extravagances were due perhaps to
whisky-and-water, and that kind of intoxication which comes to
certain men from momentary triumphs. Tifto could always be got to
make a fool of himself when surrounded by three or four men of
rank who, for the occasion, would talk to him as an equal. He
almost declared that Coalition had lost her match because he had
not been taken down at Silverbridge.

'Tifto is in a deuce of a way with you,' said Dolly Longstaff to
the young member.

'I know all about it,' said Silverbridge, who had had an interview
with his partner since the race.

'If you don't take care he'll dismiss you.'

Silverbridge did not care much about this, knowing that words of
wisdom did not ordinarily fall from the mouth of Dolly Longstaff.
But he was more moved when his friend Tregear spoke to him. 'I
wish you knew the kind of things that fellow Tifto says behind
your back.'

'As if I cared.'

'But you ought to care.'

'Do you care what every fellow says about you?'

'I care very much what those say whom I choose to live with me.
Whatever Tifto might say about me would be quite indifferent to
me, because we have nothing in common. But you and he are bound
together.'

'We have a horse or two in common; that's all.'

'But that is a great deal. The truth is he's a nasty, brawling,
boasting, ill-conditioned little reptile.'

Silverbridge of course did not acknowledge that this was true. But
he felt it, and almost repented of his trust in Tifto. But still
Prime Minister stood very well for the Derby. He was second
favourite, the odds against him being only four to one. The glory
of being part owner of a probable winner of the Derby was so much
to him that he could not bring himself to be altogether angry with
Tifto. There was no doubt that the horse's present condition was
due entirely to Tifto's care. Tifto spent in these few days just
before the race the greatest part of his time in the close
vicinity of the horse, only running up to London now and then, as
a fish comes up to the surface, for a breath of air. It is
impossible that Lord Silverbridge should separate himself from the
Major,--at any rate till after the Epsom meeting.

He had paid the money for the match without a word of reproach to
his partner, but still with a feeling that things were not quite
as they ought to be. In money matters his father had been liberal,
but not very definite. He had been told that he ought not to spend
above two thousand pounds a year, and had been reminded that there
was a house for him to use both in town and in the country. But he
had been given to understand also that any application made to Mr
Morton, if not very unreasonable, would be attended with success.
A solemn promise had been exacted from him that he would have no
dealings with money-lenders;--and then he had been set afloat.
There had been a rather frequent correspondence with Mr Morton,
who had once or twice submitted a total of the money paid on
behalf of his correspondent. Lord Silverbridge, who imagined
himself to be anything but extravagant, had wondered how the
figures could mount up so rapidly. But the money needed was always
forthcoming, and the raising of objections never seemed to be
carried back beyond Mr Morton. His promise to his father about the
money-lenders had been scrupulously kept. As long as ready money
can be made to be forthcoming without any charge for interest, a
young man must be very foolish who will prefer to borrow it at
twenty-five per cent.

Now had come the night before the Derby, and it must be
acknowledged that the young Lord was much fluttered by the
greatness of the coming struggle. Tifto, having seen his horse
conveyed to Epsom, had come up to London in order that he might
dine with his partner and hear what was being said about the race
at the Beargarden. The party dining there consisted of
Silverbridge, Dolly Longstaff, Popplecourt, and Tifto. Nidderdale
was to have joined them, but he told them on the day before, with
a sigh, that domestic duties were too strong for him. Lady
Nidderdale,--or if not Lady Nidderdale herself, then Lady
Nidderdale's mother,--was so far potent over the young nobleman as
to induce him to confine his Derby practices to the Derby-day.
Another guest had also been expected, the reason for whose non-
appearance must be explained somewhat at length. Lord Gerald
Palliser, the Duke's second son, was at this time at Cambridge,--
being almost as popular at Trinity as his brother had been at
Christ Church. It was to him quite a matter of course that he
should see his brother's horse run for the Derby. But,
unfortunately, in this very year a stand was being made by the
University pundits against a practice which they thought had
become too general. For the last year or two, it had been
considered almost as much a matter of course that a Cambridge
undergraduate should go to the Derby as that a Member of
Parliament should do so. Against this three or four rigid
disciplinarians had raised their voices,--and as a result, no young
man up at Trinity could get leave to be away on the Derby pretext.

Lord Gerald raged against the restriction very loudly. He at first
proclaimed his intention of ignoring the college authorities
altogether. Of course he would be expelled. But the order itself
was to his thinking so absurd,--the idea that he should not see his
brother's horse run was so extravagant,--that he argued that his
father could not be angry with him for incurring dismissal in so
excellent a cause. But his brother saw things in a different
light. He knew how his father had looked at him when he had been
sent away from Oxford, and he counselled moderation. Gerald should
see the Derby, but should not encounter that heaviest wrath of all
which comes from a man's not sleeping beneath his college roof.
There was a train which left Cambridge at an early hour, and would
bring him into London in time to accompany his friends to the
racecourse;--and another train, a special, which would take him
down after dinner, so that he and others should reach Cambridge
before the college gates were shut.

The dinner at the Beargarden was very joyous. Of course the state
of the betting in regard to Prime Minister was the subject
generally popular for the night. Mr Lupton came in, a gentleman
well known in all fashionable circles, parliamentary, social, and
racing, who was rather older than the company on this occasion,
but still not so much so as to be found to be an incumbrance.
Lord Glasslough too, and others joined them, and a good deal was
said about the horse. 'I never kept these things dark,' said
Tifto. 'Of course he is an uncertain horse.'

'Most horses are,' said Lupton.

'Just so, Mr Lupton. What I mean is, the Minister has got a bit of
a temper. But if he likes to do his best I don't think any three-
year-old in England can get his nose past him.'

'For half a mile he'd be nowhere with the Provence filly,' said
Glasslough.

'I'm speaking of a Derby distance, my Lord.'

'That's a kind of thing nobody really knows,' said Lupton.

'I've seen him 'ave his gallops,' said the little man, who in his
moments of excitement would sometimes fall away from that exact
pronunciation which had been one of the studies of his life,' and
have measured his stride. I think I know what pace means. Of
course I'm not going to answer for the 'orse. He's a temper, but
if things go favourably, no animal that ever showed on the Downs
was more likely to do the trick. Is there any gentleman here who
would like to bet me fifteen to one in hundreds against the two
events,--the Derby and the Leger?'  The desired odds were at once
offered by Mr Lupton, and the bet was booked.

This gave rise to other betting, and before the evening was over
Lord Silverbridge had taken three-and-a-half to one against his
horse to such an extent that he stood to lose twelve hundred
pounds. The champagne which he had drunk, and the news that
Quousque, the first favourite, had so gone to pieces that now
there was a question which was the first favourite, had so
inflated him, that, had he been left alone, he would almost have
wagered even money on his horse. In the midst of his excitement
there came to him a feeling that he was allowing himself to do
just that which he had intended to avoid. But then the occasion
was so peculiar!  How often can it happen to a man in his life
that he shall own a favourite for the Derby!  The affair was one
in which it was almost necessary that he should risk a little
money.

Tifto, when he got into his bed, was altogether happy. He had
added whisky-and-water to his champagne, and feared nothing. If
Prime Minister should win the Derby he would be able to pay all
that he owed, and to make a start with money in his pocket. And
then there would be attached to him all the infinite glory of
being the owner of the winner of the Derby. The horse was run in
his name. Thoughts as to great successes crowded themselves upon
his heated brain. What might not be open to him? Parliament!  The
Jockey Club! The mastership of one of the crack shire packs! Might
it not come to pass that he should some day become the great
authority in England upon races, racehorses, and hunters? If he
could be the winner of the Derby and Leger he thought that
Glasslough and Lupton would snub him no longer, that even Tregear
would speak to him, and that his pal the Duke's son would never
throw him aside again.

Lord Silverbridge had brought a drag with all its appendages.
There was a coach, the four bay horses, the harness, and the two
regulation grooms. When making this purchase he had condescended
to say a word to his father on the subject. 'Everybody belongs to
the four-in-hand club now,' said the son.

'I never did,' said the Duke.

'Ah,--if I could be like you!'

The Duke said that he would think about it, and then had told Mr
Morton that he was to pay the bill for this new toy. He had
thought about it, and had assured himself that driving a coach and
four was at present regarded as a fitting amusement for young men
of rank and wealth. He did not understand it himself. It seemed to
him to be as unnatural as though a gentleman should turn
blacksmith and make horseshoes for his amusement. Driving four
horses was hard work. But the same might be said of rowing. There
were men, he knew, who would spend their day standing at a lathe,
making little boxes for their recreation. He did not sympathise
with it. But the fact was so, and this driving of coaches was
regarded with favour. He had been a little touched by that word
his son had spoken, 'Ah,--if I could be like you!'  So he had given
the permission; the drag, horses, harness, and grooms had come
into the possession of Lord Silverbridge; and now they were put
into requisition to take their triumphant owner and his party down
to Epsom. Dolly Longstaff's team was sent down to meet them half-
way. Gerald Palliser, who had come up from Cambridge that morning,
was allowed to drive the first stage out of town to compensate him
for the cruelty done to him by the University pundits. Tifto, with
a cigar in his mouth, with a white hat and a blue veil, and a new
light-coloured coat, was by no means the least happy of the party.

How that race was run, and how both Prime Minister and Quousque
were beaten by an outsider named Fishknife, Prime Minister,
however, coming in a good second, the present writer having no
aptitude in that way, cannot describe. Such, however, were the
facts, and then Dolly Longstaff and Lord Silverbridge drove the
coach back to London. The coming back was not triumphant, though
the young fellows bore their failure well. Dolly Longstaff had
lost a 'pot of money', Silverbridge would have to draw upon the
inexhaustible Mr Morton for something over two thousand pounds,--in
regard to which he had no doubt as to the certainty with which the
money would be forthcoming, but he feared that it would give rise
to special notice from his father. Even the poor younger brother
had lost a couple of hundred pounds, for which he would have to
make his own special application to Mr Morton.

But Tifto felt it more than anyone. The horse ought to have won.
Fishknife had been favoured by such a series of accidents that the
whole affair had been a miracle. Tifto had these circumstances at
his fingers' ends, and in the course of the afternoon and evening
explained them accurately to all who would listen to him. He had
this to say on his own behalf,--that before the party had left the
course their horse stood first favourite for the Leger. But Tifto
was unhappy as he came back to town, and in spite of the lunch,
which had been very glorious, sat moody and sometimes even silent
within his gay apparel.

'It was the unfairest start I ever saw,' said Tifto, almost
getting up from his seat on the coach so as to address Dolly and
Silverbridge on the box.

'What the ---- is the good of that?' said Dolly from the coach-box.
'Take your licking and don't squeal.'

'That's all very well. I can take my licking as well as another
man. But one has to look to the causes of these things. I never
saw Peppermint ride so badly. Before he got round the corner I
wished I'd been on the horse myself.'

'I don't believe it was Peppermint's fault a bit,' said
Silverbridge.

'Well;--perhaps not. Only I did think I was a pretty good judge of
riding.'  Then Tifto again settled down into silence.

But though much money had been lost, and a great deal of
disappointment had to be endured by our party in reference to the
Derby, the most injurious and most deplorable event in the day's
history had not occurred yet. Dinner had been ordered at the
Beargarden at seven,--an hour earlier than would have been named
had it not been that Lord Gerald must be at Eastern Counties
Railway Station at nine pm. An hour an half for dinner and a cigar
afterwards, and half an hour to get to the railway station would
not be more than time enough.

But of all men alive Dolly Longstaff was the most unpunctual. He
did not arrive till eight. The others were not there before half-
past seven, and it was nearly eight before any of them sat down.
At half-past eight Silverbridge began to be very anxious about his
brother, and told him that he ought to start without further
delay. A hansom cab was waiting at the door, but Lord Gerald still
delayed. He knew, he said, that the special would not start till
half-past nine. There were a lot of fellows who were dining about
everywhere, and they would never get to the station by the hour
fixed. It became apparent to the elder brother that Gerald would
stay altogether unless he were forced to go, and at last he did
get up and pushed the young fellow out. 'Drive like the very
devil,' he said to the cabman, explaining to him something of the
circumstances. The cabman did do his best, but a cab cannot be
made to travel from the Beargarden, which as all the world knows
is close to St James's Street, to Liverpool Street in the City in
ten minutes. When Lord Gerald reached the station the train had
started.

At twenty minutes to ten the young man reappeared at the club.
'Why on earth didn't you take a special for yourself?' exclaimed
Silverbridge.

'They wouldn't give me one.'  After it was apparent to all of them
that what had just happened had done more to ruffle our hero's
temper than his failure and loss at the races.

'I wouldn't have had it to happen for any money you could name,'
said the elder brother to the younger, as he took him home to
Carlton Terrace.

'If they do send me down, what's the odds?' said the younger
brother, who was not quite as sober as he might have been.

'After what happened to me it will almost break the governor's
heart,' said the heir.



CHAPTER 18

One of the Results of the Derby

On the following morning at about eleven Silverbridge and his
brother were at breakfast at an hotel in Jermyn Street. They had
slept in Carlton Terrace, but Lord Gerald had done so without the
knowledge of the Duke. Lord Silverbridge, as he was putting
himself to bed, had made up his mind to tell the story to the Duke
at once, but when the morning came his courage failed him. The two
young men therefore slunk out of the house, and as there was no
breakfasting at the Beargarden they went to his hotel. They were
both rather gloomy, but the elder brother was the more sad of the
two. 'I'd give anything I have in the world,' he said, 'that you
hadn't come at all.'

'Things have been so unfortunate!'

'Why the deuce wouldn't you go when I told you?'

'Who on earth would have thought that they'd have been so
punctual? They never are punctual on the Great Eastern. It was an
infernal shame. I think I shall go at once to Harnage and tell him
about it.' Mr Harnage was Lord Gerald's tutor.

'But you have been in ever so many rows before.'

'Well;--I've been gated, and once when they'd gated me, I came
right upon Harnage on the bridge at King's'

'What sort of fellow is he?'

'He used to be good-natured. Now he has taken ever so many
crotchets into his head. It was he who began all this about none
of the men going to the Derby.'

'Did you ask him yourself for leave?'

'Yes; and when I told him about your owning Prime Minister he got
savage and declared that was the very reason why I shouldn't go.'

'You didn't tell me that.'

'I was determined I would go. I wasn't going to be made a child
of.'

At last it was decided that the two brothers should go down to
Cambridge together. Silverbridge would be able to come back to
London the same evening, so as to take his drag down to the Oaks
on the Friday,--a duty from which even his present misery would not
deter him. They reached Cambridge at about three, and Lord
Silverbridge at once called at the Master's lodge and sent in his
card. The Master of Trinity is so great that he cannot be supposed
to see all comers, but on this occasion Lord Silverbridge was
fortunate. With much trepidation he told his story. Such being the
circumstances, could anything be done to moderate the vials of
wrath which must doubtless be poured out over the head of his
unfortunate brother?

'Why come to me?' said the Master. 'From what you say yourself, it
is evident that you know that must rest with the College tutor.'

'I thought, sir, if you could say a word.'

'Do you think that it would be right that I should interfere for
one special man, and that a man of special rank?'

'Nobody thinks that would count for anything. But--'

'But what?' asked the Master.

'If you knew my father, sir!'

'Everybody knows your father;--every Englishman I mean. Of course I
know your father,--as a public man, and I know how much the country
owes to him.'

'Yes it does. But it is not that I mean. If you knew who this
would,--would,--break his heart.'  Then came a tear into the young
man's eye,--and there was something almost like a tear in the eye
of the old man too. 'Of course it was my fault. I got him to come.
He hadn't the slightest intention of staying. I think you will
believe what I say about that, sir.'

'I believe every word you say, my Lord.'

'I got into a row at Oxford. I daresay you heard. There never was
anything so stupid. That was a great grief to my father,--a very
great grief. It is so hard upon him because he never did anything
foolish himself.'

'You should try to imitate him,' Silverbridge shook his head. 'Or
at least not to grieve him.'

'That is it. He has got over the affair about me. As I'm the
eldest son I've got into Parliament, and he thinks perhaps that
all has been forgotten. An eldest son may, I fancy, be a greater
ass than his younger brother.'  The Master could not but smile as
he thought of the selection which had been made of a legislator.
'But if Gerald is sent down, I don't know how he will get over
it.'  And now the tears absolutely rolled down the young man's
face, so that he was forced to wipe them from his eyes.

The Master was much moved. That a young man should pray for
himself would be nothing to him. The discipline of the college was
not in his hands, and such prayers would avail nothing with him.
Nor would a brother praying simply for a brother avail much. A
father asking for his son might be resisted. But the brother
asking pardon for the brother on behalf of the father was almost
irresistible. But this man had long been in a position in which he
knew that no such prayers should ever prevail at all. In the first
place it was not his business. If he did anything, it would only
be by asking a favour when he knew that no favour should be
granted;--and a favour which he of all men should not ask, because
to him of all men it could not be refused. And then the very
altitude of the great Statesman whom he was invited to befriend,--
the position of this Duke who had been so powerful and might be
powerful again, was against any such interference. Of himself he
might be sure that he would certainly done this as readily for any
Mr Jones as for the Duke of Omnium; but were he to do it, it would
be said of him that it had been done because the benevolence would
seem to be self-seeking. 'Your father, if he were here,' said he,
'would know that I could not interfere.'

'And will he be sent down?'

'I do not know all the circumstances. From your own showing the
case seems to be one of great insubordination. To tell the truth,
Lord Silverbridge, I ought not to have spoken to you on the
subject at all.'

'You mean that I should not have spoken to you.'

'Well; I did not say so. And if you had been indiscreet I can
pardon that. I wish I could have served you; but I fear that it is
not in my power.'  Then Lord Silverbridge took his leave, and
going to his brother's rooms waited there till Lord Gerald
returned from his interview with the tutor.

'It's all up,' said he, chucking down his cap, striving to be at
his ease. 'I may pack up and go--just where I please. He says that
on no account will he have anything more to do with me. I asked
him what I was to do, and he said that the Governor had better
take my name off the books of the college. I did ask whether I
couldn't go over to Maclean.'

'Who is Maclean?'

'One of the other tutors. But the brute only smiled.'

'He thought you meant it for chaff.'

'Well;--I suppose I did mean to show him that I was not going to be
exterminated by him. He will write to the Governor today. And you
will have to talk to the Governor.'

Yes!  As Lord Silverbridge went back that afternoon to London he
thought very much of that talking to the Governor!  Never yet had
he been able to say anything very pleasant to 'the Governor.'  He
had himself been always in disgrace at Eton, and had been sent
away from Oxford. He had introduced Tregear into the family, which
of all the troubles perhaps was the worst. He had changed his
politics. He had spent more money than he ought to have done, and
now at this very moment must ask for a large sum. And he had
brought Gerald up to see the Derby, thereby causing him to be sent
away from Cambridge!  And through it all there was present to him
a feeling that by no words which he could use would he be able to
make his father understand how deeply he felt all this.

He could not bring himself to see the Duke that evening, and the
next morning he was sent for before he was out of bed. He found
his father at breakfast with the tutor's letter before him. 'Do
you know anything about this?' asked the Duke very calmly.

'Gerald ran up to see the Derby, and in the evening missed the
train.'

'Mr Harnage tells me that he had been expressly ordered not to go
to these races.'

'I suppose he was, sir.'

Then there was silence between them for some minutes. 'You might
as well sit down and eat your breakfast,' said the father. Then
Lord Silverbridge did sit down and pour himself out a cup of tea.
There was no servant in the room, and he dreaded to ring the bell.
'Is there anything you want?' asked the Duke. There was a small
dish of fried bacon on the table, and some cold mutton on the
sideboard. Silverbridge declaring that he had everything that was
necessary, got up and helped himself to the cold mutton. Then
again there was silence, during which the Duke crunched his toast
and made an attempt at reading the newspaper. But, soon pushing
that aside, he again took up Mr Harnage's letter. Silverbridge
watched every motion of his father as he slowly made his way
through the slice of cold mutton. 'It seems that Gerald is to be
sent away altogether.'

'I fear so, sir.'

'He has profited by your example at Oxford. Did you persuade him
to come to these races?'

'I am afraid I did.'

'Though you knew the orders which had been given?'

'I thought it was meant that he should not be away the night.'

'He had asked permission to go to the Derby and had been
positively refused. Did you know this?'

Silverbridge sat for some moments considering. He could not at
first quite remember what he had known and what he had not known.
Perhaps he entertained some faint hope that the question would be
allowed to go unanswered. He saw, however, from his father's eye
that that was impossible. And then he did remember it all. 'I
suppose I did know it.'

'And you were willing to imperil your brother's position in life,
and my happiness, in order that he might see a horse, of which I
believe you call yourself part owner, run a race?'

'I thought there would be no risk if he got back the same night. I
don't suppose there is any good in my saying it, but I never was
so sorry for anything in all my life. I feel as if I could go and
hang myself.'

'That is absurd,--and unmanly,' said the Duke. The expression of
sorrow, as it had been made, might be absurd and unmanly, but
nevertheless it had touched him. He was severe because he did not
know how far his severity wounded. 'It is a great blow,--another
great blow!  Races!  A congregation of all the worst blackguards
in the country mixed up with the greatest fools.'

'Lord Cantrip was there,' said Silverbridge; 'and I say Sir
Timothy Beeswax.'

'If the presence of Sir Timothy be an allurement to you I pity you
indeed. I have nothing further to say about it. You have ruined
your brother.'  He had been driven to further anger by this
reference to one man whom he respected and to another whom he
despised.

'Don't say that, sir.'

'What am I to say?'

'Let him be an attache, or something of that sort.'

'Do you believe it possible that he should pass any examination? I
think that my children between them will bring me to my grave. You
had better go now. I suppose you will want to be--at the races
again?'  Then the young man crept out of the room, and going to
his own part of the house shut himself up alone for nearly an
hour. What had he better do to give his father some comfort?
Should he abandon racing altogether, sell his share of Prime
Minister and Coalition, and go in hard and strong for committees,
debates, and divisions? Should he get rid of his drag, and resolve
to read up on Parliamentary literature? He was resolved upon one
thing at any rate. He would not go to the Oaks that day. And then
he was resolved on another thing. He would call on Lady Mab Grex
and ask her advice. He felt so disconsolate and insufficient for
himself that he wanted advice from someone whom he could trust.

He found Tifto, Dolly Longstaff, and one or two others at the
stables, from whence it was intended that the drag should start.
They were waiting, and rather angry because they had been kept
waiting. But the news, when it came, was very sad indeed. 'You
wouldn't mind taking the team down and back yourself; would you,
Dolly?' he said to Longstaff.

'You aren't going!' said Dolly, assuming a look of much heroic
horror.

'No;--I am not going today.'

'What's up?' asked Popplecourt.

'That's rather sudden, isn't it?' asked the Major.

'Well; yes. I suppose it is sudden.'

'It's throwing us over a little, isn't it?'

'Not that I see. You've got the trap and the horses.'

'Yes;--we've got the trap and the horses,' said Dolly, 'and I vote
we make a start.'

'As you are not going yourself, perhaps I'd better drive your
horses,' said Tifto.

'Dolly will take the team,' said his Lordship.

'Yes;--decidedly. I will take the team,' said Dolly. 'There isn't a
deal of driving wanted on the road to Epsom, but a man should know
how to hold his reins.'  This of course gave rise to some angry
words, but Silverbridge did not stop to hear them.

The poor Duke had no one to whom he could go for advice and
consolation. When his son left him he turned to his newspaper, and
tried to read it--in vain. His mind was too ill at ease to admit of
political matters. He was greatly grieved by this new misfortune
to Gerald, and by Lord Silverbridge's propensity to racing.

But though his sorrows were heavy, there was a sorrow heavier than
these. Lady Cantrip had expressed an opinion almost in favour of
Tregear--and had certainly expressed an opinion in favour of Mrs
Finn. The whole affair in regard to Mrs Finn had been explained to
her, and she had told the Duke that, according to her thinking,
Mrs Finn had behaved well!  When the Duke, with an energy which
was by no means customary with him, had asked the question, on the
answer to which so much depended, 'Should there have been a moment
lost?'  Lady Cantrip had assured him that not a moment had been
lost. Mrs Finn had at once gone to work, and had arranged that the
whole affair should be told to him, the Duke, in the proper way.
'I think she did,' said Lady Cantrip, 'what I myself should have
done in the circumstances.'

If Lady Cantrip was right, then must his apology to Mrs Finn be
ample, and abject. Perhaps it was this feeling which was at the
moment most vexatious to him.



CHAPTER 19

'No; My Lord. I Do Not.'

Between two and three o'clock Lord Silverbridge, in spite of his
sorrow, found himself able to eat his lunch at his club. The place
was deserted, the Beargarden world having gone to the races. As he
sat eating cold lamb and drinking soda-and-brandy he did confirm
himself in certain modified resolutions, which might be more
probably kept than those sterner laws of absolute renunciation to
which he had thought of pledging himself in his half-starved
morning condition. His father had spoken in very strong language
against racing,--saying that those who went were either fools or
rascals. He was sure this was exaggerated. Half the House of Lords
and two-thirds of the House of Commons were to be seen at the
Derby; but no doubt there were many rascals and fools, and he
could not associate with the legislators without finding himself
among the fools and rascals. He would,--and as soon as he could,--
separate himself from the Major. And he would not bet. It was on
that side of the sport that the rascals and the fools showed
themselves. Of what service could betting be to him whom
Providence had provided with all things wanted to make life
pleasant?  As to the drag, his father had in a certain measure
approved of that, and he would keep the drag, as he must have some
relaxation. But his great effort of all should be made in the
House of Commons. He would endeavour to make his father perceive
that he had appreciated that letter. He would always be in the
House soon after four, and would remain there,--or, if possible, as
long as the Speaker sat in the chair. He had already begun to feel
that there was a difficulty in keeping his seat upon those
benches. The half-hours there would be so much longer than
elsewhere!  An irresistible desire of sauntering out would come
upon him. There were men the very sound of whose voices was
already odious to him. There had come upon him a feeling in regard
to certain orators, that when once they had begun there was no
reason why they should ever stop. Words of some sort were always
forthcoming, like spiders' webs. He did not think that he could
learn to take a pleasure in sitting in the House; but he hoped
that he might be man enough to do it, though it was not pleasant.
He would begin today, instead of going to the Oaks.

But before he went to the House he would see Lady Mabel Grex. And
here it may be well to state that in making his resolutions as to
a better life, he had considered much whether it would not be well
for him to take a wife. His father had once told him that when he
married, the house in Carlton Terrace should be his own. 'I will
be a lodger if you will have me,' said the Duke; 'or if your wife
should not like that, I will find a lodging elsewhere.'  This had
been the sadness and tenderness which had immediately followed the
death of the Duchess. Marriage would steady him. Were he a married
man, Tifto would of course disappear. Upon the whole he thought it
would be good that should marry. And, if so, who could be so nice
as Lady Mabel?  That his father would be contented with Lady Mab,
he was inclined to believe. There was no better blood in England.
And Lady Mabel was known to be clever, beautiful, and, in her
peculiar circumstances, very wise.

He was aware, however, of a certain drawback. Lady Mabel as his
wife would be his superior, and in some degrees his master. Though
not older she was wiser than he,--and not only wiser but more
powerful also. And he was not quite sure but that she regarded him
as a boy. He thought that she did love him,--or would do so if he
asked her,--but that her love would be bestowed upon him as on an
inferior creature. He was already jealous of his own dignity, and
fearful lest he should miss the glory of being loved by this
lovely one for his own sake,--for his own manhood, and his own
gifts and character.

And yet his attraction to her was so great that now in the day of
his sorrow he could think of no solace but what was to be found in
her company. 'Not at the Oaks!' she said as soon as he was shown
into the drawing-room.

'No,--not at the Oaks. Lord Grex is there, I suppose?'

'Oh yes;--that is a matter of course. Why are you a recreant?'

'The House sits today.'

'How virtuous! Is it coming to that,--that when the House sits you
will never be absent?'

'That's the kind of life I'm going to lead. You haven't heard
about Gerald?'

'About your brother?'

'Yes;--you haven't heard?'

'Not a word. I hope there is not misfortune.'

'But indeed there is,--a most terrible misfortune.'  Then he told
the whole story. How Gerald had been kept in London, and how he
had gone down to Cambridge,--all in vain; how his father had taken
the matter to heart, telling him that he had ruined his brother;
and how he, in consequence, had determined not to go to the races.
'Then he said,' continued Silverbridge, 'that his children between
them would bring him to his grave.'

'That was terrible.'

'Very terrible.'

'But what did he mean by that?' asked Lady Mabel, anxious to hear
something about Lady Mary and Tregear.

'Well; of course what I did at Oxford made him unhappy; and now
there is this affair of Gerald's.'

'He did not allude to your sister?'

'Yes he did. You have heard of all that. Tregear told you.'

'He told me something.'

'Of course my father does not like it.'

'Do you approve of it?'

'No,' said he--curtly and sturdily.

'Why not?  You like Tregear.'

'Certainly I like Tregear. He is the friend among men, whom I like
the best. I have only two real friends.'

'Who are they?' she asked, sinking her voice very low.

'He is one;--and you are the other. You know that.'

'I hoped that I was one,' she said. 'But if you love Tregear so
dearly, why do you not approve of him for your sister?'

'I always knew that it would not do.'

'But why not?'

'Mary ought to marry a man of higher standing.'

'Of higher rank you mean. The daughter of Dukes have married
commoners before.'

'It is not exactly that. I don't like to talk of it in that way. I
knew it would make my father unhappy. In point of fact he can't
marry her. What is the good of approving of a thing that is
impossible?'

'I wish I knew your sister. Is she--firm?'

'Indeed she is.'

'I am not so sure you are.'

'No,' said he, after considering awhile; 'nor am I. But she is not
like Gerald or me. She is more obstinate.'

'Less fickle perhaps.'

'Yes, if you choose to call it fickle. I don't know that I am
fickle. If I were in love with a girl I should be true to her.'

'Are you sure of that?'

'Quite sure. If I were really in love with her I certainly should
not change. It is possible that I might be bullied out of it.'

'But she will not be bullied out of it?'

'Mary? No.  That is just it. She will stick to it if he does.'

'I would if I were she. Where will you find any young man equal to
Frank Tregear?'

'Perhaps you mean to cut poor Mary out.'

'That isn't a nice thing for you to say, Lord Silverbridge. Frank
is my cousin,--as indeed you are also; but it so happens that I
have seen a great deal of him all my life. And, though I don't
want to cut your sister out, as you so prettily say, I love him
well enough to understand that any girl whom he loves ought to be
true to him.'  So far what she said was very well, but she
afterwards added a word which might have been wisely omitted.
'Frank and I are almost beggars.'

'What an accursed thing money is,' he exclaimed, jumping up from
his chair.

'I don't agree with you at all. It is a very comfortable thing.'

'How is anybody who has got it to know if anybody cares for him?'

'You must find that out. There is such a thing I suppose as a real
sympathy.'

'You tell me to my face that you and Tregear would have been
lovers only that you are both poor.'

'I never said anything of the kind.'

'And that he is to be passed on to my sister because it is
supposed that she will have some money.'

'You are putting words into my mouth which I never spoke, and
ideas into my mind which I never thought.'

'And of course I feel the same about myself. How can a fellow help
it?  I wish you had a lot of money, I know.'

'It is very kind of you;--but why?'

'Well;--I can't quite explain myself,' he said, blushing as was his
wont. 'I daresay it wouldn't make any difference.'

'It would make a great difference to me. As it is, having none,
and knowing as I do that papa and Percival are getting things into
a worse mess every day, I am obliged to hope that I may some day
marry a man who has got an income.'

'I suppose so,' said he, blushing, but frowning at the same time.

'You see I can be very frank with a real friend. But I am sure of
myself in this--that I shall never marry a man I do not love. A
girl needn't love a man unless she likes it, I suppose. She
doesn't tumble into love as she does into the fire. It would not
suit me to marry a poor man, and so I don't mean to fall in love
with a poor man.'

'But you do mean to fall in love with a rich one?'

'That remains to be seen, Lord Silverbridge. The rich man will at
any rate have to fall in love with me first. If you know of any
one you need not tell him to be too sure because he has a good
income.'

'There's Popplecourt. He's his own master, and fool as he is, he
knows how to keep his money.'

'I don't want a fool. You must do better for me than Lord
Popplecourt.'

'What do you say to Dolly Longstaff?'

'He would be just the man, only he never would take the trouble to
come out and be married.'

'Or Glasslough?'

'I'm afraid he's cross, and wouldn't let me have my own way.'

'I can only think of one other;--but you would not take him.'

'Then you had better not mention him. It is no good crowding the
list with impossibles.'

'I was thinking of--myself.'

'You are certainly one of the impossibles.'

'Why, Lady Mab?'

'For twenty reasons. You are too young, and you are bound to
oblige your father, and you are to be wedded to Parliament,--at any
rate for the next ten years. And altogether it wouldn't do,--for a
great many reasons.'

'I suppose you don't like me well enough?'

'What a question to ask! No, my Lord I do not. There, that's what
you may call an answer. Don't you pretend to look offended,
because if you do, I shall laugh at you. If you may have your joke
surely I may have mine.'

'I don't see any joke in it.'

'But I do. Suppose I were to say the other thing. Oh, Lord
Silverbridge, you do me so much honour!  And now I come to think
about it, there is no one in the world I am so fond of as you.
Would that suit you?'

'Exactly.'

'But it wouldn't suit me. There's papa. Don't run away.'

'It's ever so much past five,' said the legislator, 'and I had
intended to be in the House more than an hour ago. Good-bye. Give
my love to Miss Cassewary.'

'Certainly. Miss Cassewary is your most devoted friend. Won't you
bring your sister to see me some day?'

'When she is in town I will.'

'I should like to know her. Good-bye.'

As he hurried down to the House in a hansom, he thought over it
all, and told himself that he feared it would not do. She might
perhaps accept him, but if so, she would do it simply in order
that she might become Duchess of Omnium. She might, he thought,
have accepted him then, had she chosen. He had spoken plainly
enough. But she had laughed at him. He felt that if she loved him,
there ought to have been something of that feminine tremor, of
that doubting, hesitating half-avowal of which he had perhaps read
in novels, and which his own instincts taught him to desire. But
there had been no tremor nor hesitating. 'No; my Lord, I do not,'
she had said when he asked her to her face whether she liked him
well enough to be his wife. 'No; my Lord I do not.'  It was not
the refusal conveyed in these words which annoyed him. He did
believe that if he were to press his suit with the usual forms she
would accept him. But it was that there should be such a total
absence of trepidation in her words and manner. Before her he
blushed and hesitated and felt that he did not know how to express
himself. If she would only have done the same, then there would
have been an equality. Then he could have seized her in his arms
and sworn that never, never, never would he care for any one but
her.

In truth he saw everything as it was only too truly. Though she
might choose to marry him if he pressed his request, she would
never subject herself to him as he would have the girl do whom he
loved. She was his superior, and in every word uttered between
them showed that it was so. But yet how beautiful she was;--how
much more beautiful than any other thing he had ever seen!

He sat on one of the high seats behind Sir Timothy Beeswax and Sir
Orlando Drought, listening, or pretending to listen, to the
speeches of three or four gentlemen respecting sugar, thinking of
all this till half-past seven;--and then he went to dine with the
proud consciousness of having done his duty. The forms and methods
of the House were, he flattered himself, soaking into him
gradually,--as his father had desired. The theory of legislation
was sinking into his mind. The welfare of the nation depended
chiefly on sugar. But he thought that, after all, his own welfare
must depend on the possession of Mab Grex.



CHAPTER 20

Then He Will Come Again

Lady Mabel, when her young lover left her, was for a time freed
from the necessity of thinking about him by her father. He had
returned from the Oaks in a very bad humour. Lord Grex had been
very badly treated by his son, whom he hated worse than any one
else in the world. On the Derby-day he had won a large sum of
money, which had been to him at the time a matter of intense
delight,--for he was in great want of money. But on this day he had
discovered that his son and heir had lost more than he had won,
and an arrangement had been suggested to him that his winnings
should go to pay Percival's losings. This was a mode of settling
affairs to which the Earl would not listen for a moment, had he
possessed the power of putting a veto upon it. But there had been
a transaction lately between him and his son with reference to the
cutting off a certain entail under which money was to be paid to
Lord Percival. This money had not yet been forthcoming, and
therefore the Earl was constrained to assent. This was very
distasteful to the Earl, and he came home therefore in a bad
humour, and said a great many disagreeable things to his daughter.
'You know, papa, if I could do anything I would.'  This she said
in answer to a threat, which he had made often before and now
repeated, of getting rid altogether of the house in Belgrave
Square. Whenever he made this threat he did not scruple to tell
her that the house had to be kept up solely for her welfare. 'I
don't see why the deuce you don't get married. You'll have to
sooner or later.'  That was not a pleasant speech for a daughter
to hear from her father. 'As to that,' she said, 'it must come or
not as chance will have it. If you want me to sign anything I will
sign it;'--for she had been asked to sign papers, or in other words
to surrender rights;--'but for that other matter it must be left to
myself.'  Then he had been very disagreeable indeed.

They dined together,--of course with all the luxury that wealth can
give. There was a well-appointed carriage to take them backwards
and forwards to the next square, such as an Earl should have. She
was splendidly dressed, as became an Earl's daughter, and he was
brilliant with some star which had been accorded to him by his
sovereign's grateful minister in return for staunch parliamentary
support. No one looking at them could have imagined that such a
father could have told such a daughter that she must marry herself
out of the way, because as an unmarried girl she was a burden.

During the dinner she was very gay. To be gay was a habit,--we may
almost say the work,--of her life. It so chanced that she sat
between Sir Timothy Beeswax, who in these days was a very great
man indeed, and that very Dolly Longstaff, whom Silverbridge in
his irony had proposed to her as a fitting suitor for her hand.

'Isn't Lord Silverbridge a cousin of yours?' asked Sir Timothy.

'A very distant one.'

'He has come over to us, you know. It is such a triumph.'

'I was so sorry to hear it.'  This, however, as the reader knows,
was a fib.

'Sorry!' said Sir Timothy. 'Surely Lord Grex's daughter must be a
Conservative.'

'Oh yes;--I am a Conservative because I was born one. I think that
people in politics should remain as they are born,--unless they are
very wise indeed. When men come to be statesmen, and all that kind
of thing, of course they can change backwards and forwards.'

'I hope that is not intended for me, Lady Mabel.'

'Certainly not. I don't knew enough about it to be personal.'
That, however, was again not quite true. 'But I have the greatest
possible respect for the Duke, and I think it a pity that he
should be made unhappy by his son. Don't you like the Duke?'

'Well;--yes;--yes in a way. He is a most respectable man; and has
been a good public servant.'

'All our lot are ruined, you know,' said Dolly, talking of the
races.

'Who are your lot, Mr Longstaff?'

'I'm one myself.'

'I suppose so.'

'I'm utterly smashed. Then there's Percival.'

'I hope he has not lost much. Of course you know he is my
brother.'

'Oh laws;--so he is. I always put my foot in it. Well;--he has lost
a lot. And so have Silverbridge and Tifto. Perhaps you don't know
Tifto.'

'I have not the pleasure of knowing Mr Tifto.'

'He is a major. I think you'd like Major Tifto. He's a sort of
racing coach to Silverbridge. You ought to know Tifto. And Tregear
is pretty nearly cleared out.'

'Mr Tregear! Mr Frank Tregear!'

'I'm told he has been hit very heavy. I hope he's not a friend of
yours, Lady Mabel.'

'Indeed he is;--a very dear friend and cousin.'

'That's what I hear. He's very much with Silverbridge you know.'

'I cannot think that Mr Tregear has lost money.'

'I hope he hasn't. I know I have. I wish someone would stick up
for me and say it was impossible.'

'But that is not Mr Tregear's way of living. I can understand that
Lord Silverbridge or Percival should lose money.'

'Or me?'

'Or you, if you like to say so.'

'Or Tifto?'

'I don't know anything about Mr Tifto.'

'Major Tifto.'

'Or Major Tifto;--what does it signify?'

'No;--of course. We inferior people may lose our money just as we
please. But a man who can look clever as Mr Tregear ought to win
always.'

'I told you just know that he was a friend of mine.'

'But don't you think that he does look clever?'  There could be no
question but that Tregear, when he disliked his company, could
show his dislike by his countenance; and it was not improbable
that he had done so in the presence of Mr Adolphus Longstaff. 'Now
tell the truth, Lady Mabel; does he not look conceited sometimes?'

'He generally looks as if he knew what he was talking about, which
is more than some other people do.'

'Of course he is a great deal more clever than I am. I know that.
But I don't think even he can be so clever as he looks, "Or you so
stupid", that's what you ought to say now.'

'Sometimes, Mr Longstaff, I deny myself the pleasure of saying
what I think.'

When all this was over she was very angry with herself for the
anxiety she had expressed about Tregear. This Mr Longstaff was,
she thought, exactly the man to report all she had said in the
public-room at the club. But she had been annoyed by what she had
heard as to her friend. She knew that he of all men should keep
himself free from such follies. Those others had, as it were, a
right to make fools of themselves. It had seemed so natural that
the young men of her own class should dissipate their fortunes and
their reputations by every kind of extravagance!  Her father had
done so, and she had never even ventured to hope that her brother
would not follow her father's example. But Tregear, if he gave way
to such follies as these, would soon fall headlong into a pit from
which there would be no escape. And if he did fall, she knew
herself well enough to be aware that she could not stifle, nor
even conceal the misery which this would occasion her. As long as
he stood well before the world she would be well able to assume
indifference. But were he to be precipitated into some bottomless
misfortunes then she could only throw herself after him. She could
see him marry, and smile,--and perhaps even like his wife. And
while he was doing so, she could also marry, and resolve that the
husband whom she took should be made to think he had a loving
wife. But were Frank to die,--then must she fall upon his body as
though he had been known by all the world to be her lover.
Something of this feeling came upon her now, when she heard that
he had been betting and had been unfortunate. She had been unable
so to subdue herself as to seem to be perfectly careless about it.
She had begun by saying that she had not believed it;--but she had
believed it. It was so natural that Tregear should have done as
the others did with whom he lived!  But then the misfortune would
be to him so terrible,--so irremediable! The reader, however, may
as well know at once there was a not a word of truth in the
assertion.

After dinner she went home alone. There were other festivities to
be attended, had she pleased to attend them; and poor Miss
Cassewary was dressed ready to go with her as chaperone;--but Miss
Cassewary was quite satisfied to be allowed to go to bed in lieu
of Mrs Montacute Jones's great ball. And she had gone to her
bedroom when Lady Mabel went to her. 'I am glad you are alone,'
she said, 'because I want to speak to you.'

'Is anything wrong?'

'Everything is wrong. Papa says he must give up this house.'

'He says that almost always when he comes back from the races, and
very often when he comes back from the club.'

'Percival has lost ever so much.'

'I don't think my Lord will hamper himself for your brother.'

'I can't explain it, but there is some horrible money
complication. It is hard upon you and me.'

'Who am I?' said Miss Cassewary.

'About the dearest friend that ever a poor girl had. It is hard
upon you,--and upon me. I have given up everything,--and what good
have I done?'

'It is hard, my dear.'

'But after all I do not care much for all that. The thing has been
going on for so long that one is used to it.'

'What is it then?'

'Ah;--yes;--what is it?  How am I to tell you?'

'Surely you can tell me,' said the old woman, putting out her hand
so as to caress the arm of the younger one.

'I could tell no one else; I am sure of that. Frank Tregear has
taken to gambling,--like the rest of them.'

'Who says so?'

'He has lost a lot of money at these races. A man who sat next to
me at dinner,--one of those stupid do-nothing fools that one meets
everywhere,--told me so. He is one of the Beargarden set, and of
course he knows all about it.'

'Did he say how much?'

'How is he to pay anything?  Of all things men do this is the
worst. A man who would think himself disgraced for ever if he
accepted a present of money will not scruple to use all his wits
to rob his friend of everything that he has by studying the run of
the cards or by watching the paces of some brutes of horses!  And
they consider themselves to be fine gentlemen!  A real gentleman
should never want the money out of another man's pocket;--should
never think of money at all.'

'I don't know how that is to be helped, my dear. You have got to
think of money.'

'Yes; I have to think of it, and do think of it, and because I do
so I am not what I call a gentleman.'

'No;--my dear, you're a lady.'

'Psha! you know what I mean. I might have had the feelings of a
gentleman as well as the best man that was ever born. I haven't;
but I have never done anything so mean as gambling. Now I have got
something else to tell you.'

'What is it? You do frighten me so when you look like that.'

'You may well be frightened,--for if this all comes round I shall
very soon be able to dispense with you altogether. His Royal
Highness Lord Silverbridge--'

'What do you mean, Mabel?'

'He's next door to a Royal Highness at any rate, and a much more
topping man than most of them. Well then;--His Serene Highness the
heir of the Duke of Omnium has done me the inexpressible honour of
asking me--to marry him.'

'No!'

'You may well say No. and to tell the exact truth, he didn't.'

'Then why do you say he did?'

'I don't think he did quite ask me, but he gave me to understand
that he would do so if I gave him any encouragement.'

'Did he mean it?'

'Yes;--poor boy!  He meant it. With a word;--with a look, he would
have been down there kneeling. He asked me whether I liked him
well enough. What do you think I did?'

'What did you do?'

'I spared him;--out of sheer downright Christian charity!  I said
to myself, "Love your neighbours."  "Don't be selfish." "Do unto
him as you would he should do unto you,"-that is, I think of his
welfare. Though I had him in my net, I let him go. Shall I go to
heaven for doing that?'

'I don't know,' said Miss Cassewarey, who was much perturbed by
the news she had just heard as to be unable to come to any opinion
on the point just raised.

'Or mayn't I rather go to the other place? From how much
embarrassment should I have relieved my father!  What a friend I
should have made for Percival!  How much I might have been able to
do for Frank!  And then what a wife I should have made him!'

'I think you would.'

'He'll never get another half so good; and he'll be sure to get
one before long. It is a sort of tenderness that is quite
inefficacious. He will become a prey, as I should have made him a
prey.  But where is there another who will treat him so well?'

'I cannot bear to hear you speak of yourself in that way.'

'But it is true. I know the sort of girl he should marry. In the
first place she should be two years younger, and four years
fresher. She should be able not only to like him and love him, but
to worship him. How well I can see her!  She should have fair
hair, and bright green-grey eyes, with the sweetest complexion,
and the prettiest little dimples;--two inches shorter than me, and
the delight of her life should be to hang with two hands on his
arm. She should have a feeling that her Silverbridge is an Apollo
upon earth. To me he is a rather foolish, but very, very sweet-
tempered young man;--anything rather than a god. If I thought that
he would get the fresh young girl with the dimples then I ought to
abstain.'

'If he was in earnest,' said Miss Cassewary, throwing aside all
this badinage and thinking of the main point, 'if he was in
earnest he will come again.'

'He was quite in earnest.'

'Then he will come again.'

'I don't think he will,' said Lady Mabel. 'I told him that I was
too old for him, and I tried to laugh him out of it. He does not
like being laughed at. He was been saved, and he will know it.'

'But if he should come again?'

'I shall not spare him again. No;--not twice. I felt it to be hard
to do so once, because I so nearly love him!  There are so many of
them who are odious to me, as to whom the idea of marrying them
seems to be mixed somehow with an idea of suicide.'

'Oh, Mabel!'

'But he is as sweet as a rose. If I were his sister, or his
servant, or his dog, I could be devoted to him. I can fancy that
his comfort and his success and his name should be everything to
me.'

'That is what a wife ought to feel.'

'But I could never feel him to be my superior. That is what a wife
ought to feel. Think of those two young men and the difference
between them!  Well;--don't look like that at me. I don't often
give way, and I dare say after all I shall live to be the Duchess
of Omnium.'  Then she kissed her friend and went away to her own
room.



CHAPTER 21

Sir Timothy Beeswax

There had lately been a great Conservative reaction in the
country, brought about in part by the industry and good management
of gentlemen who were strong on that side;--but due also in part to
the blunders and quarrels of their opponents. That these opponents
should have blundered and quarrelled, being men active and in
earnest, was to have been expected. Such blunderings and
quarrellings have been a matter of course since politics have been
politics, and since religion has been religion. When men combine
to do nothing, how should there be disagreement? When men combine
to do much, how should there not be disagreement?  Thirty men can
sit still, each as like the other as peas. But put your thirty men
up to run a race, and they will soon assume different forms. And
in doing nothing, you can hardly do amiss. Let the does of nothing
have something of action forced upon them, and they, too, will
blunder and quarrel.

The wonder is that there should ever be in a reforming party
enough of consentaneous action to carry any reform. The reforming
or Liberal party in British politics had thus stumbled,--and
stumbled till it fell. And now there had been a great Conservative
reaction!  Many of the most Liberal constituencies in the country
had been untrue to their old political convictions. And, as the
result, Lord Drummond was Prime Minister in the House of Lords,--
with Sir Timothy Beeswax acting as first man in the House of
Commons.

It cannot be denied that Sir Timothy had his good points as a
politician. He was industrious, patient, clear-sighted,
intelligent, courageous, and determined. Long before he had had a
seat in the House, when he was simply making his way up to the
probability of a seat by making a reputation as an advocate, he
had resolved that he would be more than an Attorney-General, more
than a judge,--more, as he thought it, than a Chief Justice; but at
any rate something different. This plan he had all but gained,--and
it must be acknowledged that he had been moved by a grand and
manly ambition. But there were drawbacks to the utility and beauty
of Sir Timothy's character as a statesman. He had no idea as to
the necessity or non-necessity of any measure whatever in
reference to the well-being of the country. It may, indeed, be
said that all such ideas were to him absurd, and the fact that
they should be held by his friends and supporters was an
inconvenience. He was not in accord with those who declare that a
Parliament is a collection of windbags which puff, and blow, and
crack to the annoyance of honest men. But to him Parliament was a
debating place, by having a majority in which, and by no other
means, he,--or another,--might become the great man of the day. By
no other than parliamentary means could such a one as he come to
be the chief man. And this use of Parliament, either on his own
behalf or on behalf of others, had been for so many years present
to his mind, that there seemed to be nothing absurd in an
institution supported for such a purpose. Parliament was a club so
eligible in its nature that all Englishmen wished to belong to it.
They who succeeded were acknowledged to be the cream of the land.
They who dominated in it were the cream of the cream. Those two
who were elected to be the chiefs of the two parties had more of
cream in their composition than any others. But he who could be
the chief of the strongest party, and who therefore, in accordance
with the prevailing arrangements of the country, should have the
power of making dukes, and bestowing garters and appointing
bishops, he who by attaining the first seat should achieve the
right of snubbing all before him, whether friends or foes, he,
according to the feelings of Sir Timothy, would have gained an
Elysium of creaminess not to be found in any other position on the
earth's surface. No man was more warmly attached to parliamentary
government than Sir Timothy Beeswax; but I do not think that he
ever cared much for legislation.

Parliamentary management was his forte. There have been various
rocks on which men have shattered their barks in their attempts to
sail successfully into the harbours of parliamentary management.
There is the great Senator who declared to himself that personally
he will have neither friend or foe. There is his country before
him and its welfare. Within his bosom is the fire of patriotism,
and within his mind the examples of all past time. He knows that
he can be just, he teaches himself to be eloquent, and he strives
to be wise. But he will not bend;--and at last, in some great
solitude, though closely surrounded by those whose love he has
neglected to acquire,--he breaks his heart.

Then there is he who is seeing the misfortune of that great one,
tells himself that patriotism, judgement, industry, and eloquence
will not suffice for him unless he himself can be loved. To do
great things a man must have a great following, and to achieve
that he must be popular. So he smiles and learns the necessary
wiles. He is all for his country and his friends,--but for his
friends first. He too must be eloquent and well instructed in the
ways of Parliament, must be wise and diligent; but in all that he
does and all that he says, he says he must first study his party.
It is well with him for a time;--but he has closed the door of his
Elysium too rigidly. Those without gradually become stronger than
his friends within, and so he falls.

But may not the door be occasionally opened to an outsider, so
that the exterior force be diminished?  We know how great is the
pressure of water, and how the peril of an overwhelming weight of
it may be removed by opening the way for a small current. There
comes therefore the Statesman who acknowledges to himself that he
will be pregnable. That, as a Statesman, he should have enemies is
a matter of course. Against moderate enemies he will hold his own.
But when there comes one immoderately forcible, violently
inimical, then to that man he will open his bosom. He will tempt
him into his camp with an offer of high command any foe that may
be worth his purchase. The loyalty of officers so procured must be
open to suspicion. The man who has said bitter things against you
will never sit at your feet in contented submission, nor will your
friend of any standing long endure to be superseded by such
converts.

All these dangers Sir Timothy had seen and studied, and for each
of them he had hoped to be able to provide an antidote. Love
cannot do  all. Fear acknowledges a superior. Love desires an
equal. Love is to be created by benefits done, and means
gratitude, which we all know to be weak. But hope, which refers
itself to benefits to come, is of all our feelings the strongest.
And Sir Timothy had parliamentary doctrines concealed in the
depths of his own bosom more important even than these. The
Statesman who falls is he who does much, and thus injures many.
The Statesman who stands the longest is he who does nothing and
injures no one. He soon knew that the work which he had taken in
hand required all the art of the great conjurer. He must be
possessed of tricks so marvellous that not even they who sat
nearest to him might know how there were performed.

For the executive or legislative business of the country he cared
little. The one should be left in the hands of men who liked
work;--of the other there should be little, or, if possible, none.
But Parliament must be managed,--and his party. Of patriotism he
did not know the meaning;--few, perhaps, do, beyond the feeling
that they would like to lick the Russians, or to get the better of
the Americans in a matter of fisheries or frontiers. But he
invented a pseudo-patriotic conjuring phraseology which no one
understood but which many admired. He was ambitious that it should
be said of him that he was far-and-away the cleverest of his
party. He knew himself to be clever. But he could only be far-and-
away the cleverest by saying and doing that which no one could
understand. If he could become master of some great hocus-pocus
system which could be made to be graceful to the ears and eyes of
many, which might for awhile seem to have within it some semi-
divine attribute, which should have all but divine power of
mastering the loaves and fishes, then would they who followed him
believe in him more firmly than other followers who had believed
in their leaders. When you see a young woman read a closed book
placed on her dorsal vertebrae,--if you do believe that she so
reads it, you think that she is endowed with a wonderful faculty!
 And should you also be made to believe that the same young woman
had direct communication with Abraham, by means of some invisible
wire, you would be apt to do a great many things as that young
woman might tell you. Conjuring, when not knowing to be conjuring,
is very effective.

Much, no doubt, of Sir Timothy's power had come from his
praiseworthy industry. Though he cared nothing for the making of
laws, though he knew nothing of finance, though he had abandoned
his legal studies, still he worked hard. And because he had worked
harder in a special direction than others around him, therefore he
was enabled to lead them. The management of a party is a very
great work in itself; and when to that is added the management of
the House of Commons, a man has enough upon his hands even he
neglects altogether the ordinary pursuits of a Statesman. Those
around Sir Timothy were fond of their party; but they were for the
most part men who had not condescended to put their shoulders to
the wheel as he had done. Had there been any great light among
them, had there been a Pitt or a Peel, Sir Timothy would probably
have become Attorney-General and have made his way to the bench;--
but there had been no Pitt or a Peel, and he had seen his opening.
He had studied the ways of Members. Parliamentary practice had
become familiar to him. He had shown himself to be ready at all
hours to fight the battle of the party he had joined. And no man
knew so well as did Sir Timothy how to elevate a simple
legislative attempt into a good faction fight. He had so mastered
his tricks of conjuring that no one could get to the bottom of
them, and had assumed a look of preternatural gravity which made
many young Members think that Sir Timothy was born to be a king of
men.

There was no doubt some among his older supporters who felt their
thraldom previously. There were some lords in the Upper House and
some of the sons of lords in the Lower,--with pedigrees going back
far enough for pride,--who found it irksome to recognise Sir
Timothy as a master. No doubt he had worked very hard, and had
worked for them. No doubt he knew how to do the work and they did
not. There was no other man among them to whom the lead could be
conveniently transferred. But yet they were uncomfortable,--and
perhaps a little ashamed.

It had arisen partly from this cause, that there had been
something of a counter reaction at the last general election. When
the Houses met the Ministers had indeed a majority, but a much
lessened majority. The old Liberal constituencies had returned to
an expression of their real feeling. This reassertion of the
progress of the tide, this recovery from the partial ebb which
checks the violence of every flow, is common enough in politics,
but at the present moment there were many who said that all this
had been accelerated by a feeling in the country that Sir Timothy
was hardly all that the country required as the leader of the
county party.



CHAPTER 22

The Duke in his Study

It was natural that at such a time, when success greater than had
been expected had attended the efforts of the Liberals, when some
dozen unexpected votes had been acquired, the leading politicians
of that party should have found themselves compelled to look about
them and see how these good things might be utilised. In February
they certainly had not expected to be called to power in the
course of the existing session. Perhaps they did not expect it
yet. There was still a Conservative majority,--though but a small
majority. But the strength of the minority consisted, not in the
fact that the majority against them was small, but that it was
decreasing. How quickly does the snowball grow into hugeness as it
is rolled on;--but when the change comes in the weather how quickly
does it melt, and before it is gone become a thing ugly, weak and
formless!  Where is the individual who does not assert to himself
that he would be more loyal to a falling than to a rising friend?
 Such is perhaps the nature of each one of us. But when any large
number of men act together, the falling friend is apt to be
deserted. There was a general feeling among politicians that Lord
Drummond's ministry,--or Sir Timothy's--was failing, and the
Liberals, though they could not yet count the votes by which they
might hope to be supported in power, nevertheless felt that they
ought to be looking to their arms.

There had been a coalition. They who are well read in the
political literature of their country will remember all about
that. It had perhaps succeeded in doing that for which it had been
intended. The Queen's government had been carried on for two or
three years. The Duke of Omnium had been the head of that
Ministry; but, during those years had suffered so much as to have
become utterly ashamed of the coalition,--so much as to have said
often to himself that under no circumstances would he again join
any Ministry. At this time there was no idea of another coalition.
 That is a state of things which cannot come about frequently,--
which can only be reproduced by men who have never hitherto felt
the mean insipidity of such a condition. But they who had served
on the Liberal side in that coalition must again put their
shoulders to the wheel. Of course it was in every man's mouth that
the Duke must be induced to forget his miseries and once more to
take upon himself the duties of an active servant of the State.

But they who were most anxious on the subject, such men as Lord
Cantrip, Mr Monk, our old friend Phineas Finn, and a few others,
were almost afraid to approach him. At the moment when the
coalition was broken up he had been very bitter in spirit,
apparently almost arrogant, holding himself aloof from his late
colleagues,--and since that, troubles had come to him, which had
aggravated the soreness of his heart. His wife had died, and he
had suffered much through his children. What Lord Silverbridge had
done at Oxford was a matter of general conversation, and also what
he had not done.

That the heir of the family should have become a renegade in
politics was supposed to have greatly affected the father. Now
Lord Gerald had been expelled from Cambridge, and Silverbridge was
on the turf in conjunction with Major Tifto!  Something, too, had
oozed out into general ears about Lady Mary,--something which
should have been kept secret as the grave. It had therefore come
to pass that it was difficult even to address the Duke.

There was but one man, and but one, who could do this with ease to
himself;--and that man was at last put into motion at the instance
of the leaders of the party. The old Duke of St Bungay wrote the
following letter to the Duke of Omnium. The letter purported to be
an excuse for the writer's own defalcations. But the chief object
of the writer was to induce the younger Duke once more to submit
to harness.

'Longroyston, 3 June, 187-

'DEAR DUKE OF OMNIUM,

'How quickly the things come round!  I had thought that I should
never again have been called upon even to think of the formation
of another Liberal Ministry; and now, though it was but yesterday
that were all telling ourselves that we were thoroughly manumitted
from our labours by the altered opinions of the country, sundry of
our old friends have again been putting their heads together.

'Did they not do so they would neglect a manifest duty. Nothing is
more essential to the political well-being of the country than
that the leaders on both sides in politics should be prepared for
their duties. But for myself, I am bound at last to put in the old
plea with a determination that it shall be respected. "Solve
senescentem."  It is now, if I calculate rightly, exactly fifty
years since I first entered public life in obedience to the advice
of Lord Grey. I had then already sat five years in the House of
Commons. I had assisted humbly in the emancipation of the Roman
Catholics, and have learned by the legislative troubles of just
half a century that those whom we then invited to sit with us in
Parliament have been in all things our worst enemies. But what
then? had we benefited only those who love us, would not the
sinners also,--or even the Tories,--have done as much as that?

'But such memories are of no avail now. I write to say that after
so much of active political life, I will at last retire. My
friends when they see me inspecting a pigsty or picking a peach
are apt to remind me that I can still stand on my legs, and with
more of compliment than of kindness will argue therefore that I
ought still to undertake active duties in Parliament. I can select
my own hours for pigs and peaches, and should I, through the
dotage of age, make mistakes as to the breeding of one or the
flavour of the other, the harm done will not go far. In politics I
have done my work.  What you and others in the arena do will
interest me more than all other things in this world, I think and
hope, to my dying day. But I will not trouble the workers with the
querulousness of old age.

'So much for myself. And let me, as I go, say a parting word to
him with whom in politics I have been for many years more in
accord than with any other leading man. As nothing but age or
infirmity would to my own mind have justified me in retiring, so
do I think that you, who can plead neither age nor infirmity, will
find yourself at last to want self-justification, if you permit
yourself to be driven from the task either by pride or
indifference.

'I should express my feelings better if were I to say by pride and
diffidence. I look to our friendship, to the authority given me by
my age, and to the thorough goodness of your heart for pardon in
thus accusing you. That little men should have ventured to ill-use
you, has hurt your pride. That these little men should have been
able to do so has created your diffidence. Put you to a piece of
work that a man may do, you have less false pride as to the way in
which you may do it than any man I have known; and, let the way be
open to you, as little diffidence as any. But in this political
mill of ours in England, a man cannot always find the way open to
do things. It does not often happen that an English statesman can
go in and make a great score off his own bat. But not the less is
he bound to play the game and to go to the wicket when he finds
that his time has come.

'There are, I think, two things for you to consider in this
matter, and two only. The first is your capacity, and the other is
your duty. A man may have found by experience that he is unfitted
for public life. You and I have known men in regard to whom we
have thoroughly wished that such experience had been reached. But
this is a matter in which a man who doubts himself is bound to
take the evidence of those around him. The whole party is most
anxious for your co-operation. If this be so,--and I make you the
assurance from most conclusive evidence,--you are bound to accept
the common consent of your political friends on that matter. You
perhaps think that a certain period of your life you failed. They
all agree with me that you did not fail. It is a matter on which
you should be bound by our opinion rather than by your own.

'As to that matter of duty, I shall have less difficulty in
carrying you with me. Though this renewed task may be personally
disagreeable to you, even though your tastes should lead you to
some other life,--which I think is not the case,--still if your
country wants you, you should serve your country. It is a work as
to which such a one as you has no option. Of most of those who
choose public life,--it may be said that were they not there, there
would be others as serviceable. But when a man such as you, has
shown himself to be necessary, as long as health and age permit,
he cannot recede without breach of manifest duty. The work to be
done is so important, the numbers to be benefited are so great,
that he cannot be justified in even remembering that he has a
self.

'As I have said before, I trust that my own age and your goodness
will induce you to pardon this great interference. But whether
pardoned or not I shall always be

'Your most affectionate friend,
'ST BUNGAY.'

The Duke,--our Duke,--on reading this letter was by no means pleased
by its contents. He could ill bear to be reminded either of his
pride or of his diffidence. And yet the accusations which others
made against him were as nothing to those which he charged
himself. He would do this till at last he was forced to defend
himself against himself by asking himself whether he could be
other than as God had made him. It is the last and poorest
makeshift of a defence to which a man can be brought in his own
court!  Was it his fault that he was so thin-skinned that all
things hurt him? When some coarse man said to him that which ought
not to have been said, was it his fault that at every word a
penknife had stabbed him?  Other men had borne these buffets
without shrinking, and had shown themselves thereby to be more
useful, much more efficacious; but he could no more imitate them
than he could procure for himself the skin of a rhinoceros, or the
tusk of an elephant. And this shrinking was what man called
pride,--was the pride of which his old friend wrote! 'Have I ever
been haughty, unless in my own defence?' he asked himself,
remembering certain passages of humility in his life,--and certain
passages of haughtiness also.

And the Duke told him also that he was diffident. Of course he was
diffident. Was it not one and the same thing? The very pride of
which he was accused was no more than a shrinking which comes from
the want of trust in oneself. He was a shy man. All his friends
and all his enemies knew that;--it was thus that he still
discoursed with himself;--a shy, self-conscious, timid, shrinking,
thin-skinned man!  Of course he was diffident. Then why urge him
on to tasks for which he was by nature unfitted?

And yet there was much in his old friend's letter which moved him.
There were certain words which he kept on repeating to himself.
'He cannot be justified in even remembering that he has a self'.
It was a hard thing to say of any man, but yet a true thing of
such a man as his correspondent had described. His correspondent
had spoken of a man who should know himself to be capable of
serving the State. If a man were capable, and was sure within his
own bosom of his own capacity, it would be his duty. But what if
he were not so satisfied?  What if he felt that any labours of his
would be vain, and all self-abnegation useless?  His friend had
told him that on that matter he was bound to take the opinion of
others. Perhaps so. But if so, had not that opinion been given to
him very plainly when he was told that he was both proud and
diffident?  That he was called upon to serve his country, by good
service, if such were within his power, he did acknowledge freely;
but not that he should allow himself to be stuck up as a ninepin
only to be knocked down!  There are politicians for whom such
occupation seems to be proper,--and who like it too. A little
office, a little power, a little rank, a little pay, a little
niche in the ephemeral history of the year will reward many men
adequately for being knocked down.

And yet he loved power, and even when thinking of all this allowed
his mind from time to time to run away into a dreamland of
prosperous political labours. He thought what it would be to be an
all-beneficent Prime Minister, with a loyal majority, with a well-
conditioned unanimous cabinet, with a grateful people, and an
appreciative Sovereign. How well might a man spend himself night
and day, even to death, in the midst of such labours as these.

Half an hour after receiving the Duke's letter he suddenly jumped
up and sat himself down at his desk. He felt it to be necessary
that he should at once write to his old friend;--and the more
necessary that he should do so at once, because he had resolved
that he would do so before he had made up his mind on the chief
subject of that letter. It did not suit him to say either that he
would or that he would not do as his friend had advised him. The
reply was made in a very few words. 'As to myself,' he said, after
expressing his regret that the Duke should find it necessary to
retire from public life--'as to myself, pray understand that
whatever I may do I shall never cease to be grateful for your
affectionate and high-spirited counsels.'

Then his mind recurred to a more immediate and, for the moment, a
heavier trouble. He had as yet given no answer to that letter from
Mrs Finn, which the reader will perhaps remember. It might indeed
be passed over without an answer; but that was impossible. She had
accused him in the very strongest language of injustice, and had
made him understand that if he were unjust to her, then would he
be most ungrateful. He, looking at the matter with his own lights,
had thought that he had been right, but had resolved to submit the
question to another person. As judge in the matter he had chosen
Lady Cantrip, and Lady Cantrip had given judgement against him.

He had pressed Lady Cantrip for a decided opinion, and she had
told him that she, in the same position, would have done just as
Mrs Finn had done. He had constituted Lady Cantrip his judge, and
had resolved that her judgement should be final. He declared to
himself that he did not understand it. If a man's house be on
fire, do you think of certain rules of etiquette before you bid
him send for the engines?  If a wild beast be loose, do you go
through some ceremony before you caution the wanderers abroad?
There should not have been a moment!  But, nevertheless, it was
now necessary that he should conform himself to the opinion of
Lady Cantrip, and in doing so he must apologise for the bitter
scorn with which he allowed himself to treat his wife's most loyal
and loving friend.

The few words to the Duke had not been difficult, but this letter
seemed to be an Herculean task. It was made infinitely more
difficult by the fact that Lady Cantrip had not seemed to think
that the marriage was impossible. 'Young people when they have set
their minds upon it do so generally prevail at last!'  These had
been her words, and they discomforted him greatly. She had thought
the marriage to be possible. Had she not almost expressed an
opinion that they ought to be allowed to marry?  And if so, would
it not be his duty to take his girl away from Lady Cantrip?  As to
the idea that young people, because they have declared themselves
to be in love, were to have just what they wanted,--with that he
did not agree at all. Lady Cantrip had told him that young people
generally prevail at last. He knew the story of one young person,
whose position in her youth had been very much the same as that of
his daughter now, and she had not prevailed. And in her case had
not the opposition which had been made to her wishes been most
fortunate?  That young person had become his wife, his Glencora,
his Duchess. Had she been allowed to have her own way when she was
a child, what would have been her fate? Ah what!  Then he had to
think of it all. Might she not have been alive now, and perhaps
happier than she had ever been with him? And had he remained
always unmarried, devoted simply to politics, would not the
troubles of the world have been lighter on him?  But what had that
to do with it?  In these matters it was not the happiness of this
or that individual which should be considered. There is a
propriety in things;--and only by an adherence to that propriety on
the part of individuals can the general welfare be maintained. A
King in his country, or the heir or the possible heir to the
throne, is debarred from what might possibly be a happy marriage
by regard to the good of his subjects. To the Duke's thinking the
maintenance of the aristocracy of the country was second only in
importance to the maintenance of the Crown. How should the
aristocracy be maintained if its wealth were allowed to fall into
the hands of an adventurer!

Such were the opinions with regard to his own order of one who was
as truly Liberal in his ideas as any man in England, and who had
argued out these ideas to their consequences. As by the spread of
education and increase of the general well-being every proletaire
was brought nearer to a Duke, so by such action would the Duke be
brought nearer to a proletaire. Such drawing-nearer of the classes
was the object to which all this man's political action tended.
And yet it was a dreadful thing to him that his own daughter
should desire to marry a man so much beneath her own rank and
fortunes as Frank Tregear.

He would not allow himself to believe that the young people could
ever prevail; but nevertheless, as the idea of the thing had not
alarmed Lady Cantrip as it had him, it was necessary that he
should make some apology to Mrs Finn. Each moment of
procrastination was a prick to his conscience. He now therefore
dragged out from the secrecy of some close drawer Mrs Finn's
letter and read it through to himself once again. Yet--it was true
that he had condemned her, and that he had punished her. Though he
had done nothing to her, said nothing, and written but very
little, still he had punished her most severely.

She had written as though the matter was almost one of life and
death to her. He could understand that too. His uncle's conduct to
this woman, and his wife's, had created the intimacy which had
existed. Through their efforts she had become almost as one of the
family. And now to be dismissed, like a servant who had misbehaved
herself!  And then her arguments in her own defence were all so
good,--if only that which Lady Cantrip had laid down as law was to
be held as law. He was aware now that she had had no knowledge of
the matter till his daughter had told her of her engagement at
Matching. Then it was evident also that she had sent this Tregear
to him immediately on her return to London. And at the end of the
letter she had accused him of what she had been pleased to call
his usual tenacity in believing ill of her!  He had been
obstinate,--too obstinate in this respect; but he did not love her
the better for having told him of it.

At last he did put his apology into words.

'MY DEAR MRS FINN,
'I believe I had better acknowledge to you at once that I
have been wrong in my judgement as to your conduct in a certain
matter. You tell me that I owe it to you to make this
acknowledgement,--and I make it. The subject is, as you may
imagine, so painful that I will spare myself if possible, any
further allusion to it. I believe I did you a wrong, and therefore
I ask your pardon.

'I should perhaps apologise also for delay in my reply. I have had
much to think of in this matter, and have many others also on my
mind.

'Believe me to be,
Yours faithfully,
OMNIUM.'

It was very short, and as being short was infinitely less
troublesome at the moment than a fuller epistle; but he was very
angry with himself, knowing that it was too short, feeling that it
was ungracious. He should have expressed a hope that he might soon
see her again,--only he had no such wish. There had been times at
which he had liked her, but he knew that he did not like her now.
And yet he was bound to be her friend!  If he could only do some
great thing for her, and thus satisfy his feeling of indebtedness
towards her!  But all the favours had been from her to him and
his.



CHAPTER 23

Frank Tregear Wants a Friend

Six or seven weeks had passed since Tregear had made his
communication to the Duke, and during that time he had heard not a
word about the girl he loved. He knew, indeed, that she was at the
Horns, and probably had reason to suppose that she was being
guarded there, as it were, out of his reach. This did not surprise
him; nor did he regard it as a hardship. It was to be expected
that she should be kept out of his sight. But this was a state of
things to which, as he thought, there should not be more than a
moderate amount of submission. Six weeks was not a very long
period, but it was perhaps long enough for evincing that respect
which he owed to the young lady's father. Something must be done
some day. How could he expect her to be true to him unless he took
some means of showing himself to be true to her?

In these days he did not live very much with her brother. He not
only disliked, but distrusted Major Tifto, and had so expressed
himself as to give rise to angry words. Silverbridge had said that
he knew how to take care of himself. Tregear had replied that he
had his doubts on that matter. Then the Member of Parliament had
declared that at any rate he did not intend to be taken care of by
Frank Tregear!  In such a state of things it was not possible that
there should be any close confidence as to Lady Mary. Nor does it
often come to pass that the brother is the confidant of his
sister's lover. Brothers hardly like their sisters to have lovers,
though they are often well satisfied that their sisters should
find husbands. Tregear's want of rank and wealth added something
to this feeling in the mind this brother, so that Silverbridge,
though he felt himself to be deterred by friendship from any open
opposition, still was almost inimical. 'It won't do, you know,' he
had said to his brother Gerald, shaking his head.

Tregear, however, was determined to be active in the matter, to
make some effort, to speak to somebody. But how to make an
effort,--and to whom should he speak?  Thinking of all this he
remembered that Mrs Finn had sent for him and had told him to go
with his love story to the Duke. She had been almost severe with
him;--but after the interview was over, he had felt that she had
acted well and wisely. He therefore determined that he would go to
Mrs Finn.

She had as yet received no answer from the Duke, though nearly a
fortnight had elapsed since she had written her letter. During
that time she had become very angry. She felt that he was not
treating her as a gentleman should treat a lady, and certainly not
as the husband of her late friend should have treated the friend
of his late wife. She had a proud consciousness of having behaved
well to the Pallisers, and now this head of the Pallisers was
rewarding her by evil treatment. She had been generous; he was
ungenerous. She had been honest; he was deficient even in that
honesty for which she had given him credit. And she had been
unable to obtain any of that consolation which could have come to
her from talking of her wrongs. She could not complain to her
husband because there were reasons that made it essential that her
husband should not quarrel with the Duke. She was hot with
indignation at the very moment that Tregear was announced.

He began by apologising for his intrusion, and she of course
assured him that he was welcome. 'After the liberty which I took
with you, Mr Tregear, I am only too well pleased that you should
come to see me.'

'I am afraid,' he said, 'that I was a little rough.'

'A little warm;--but that was to be expected. A gentleman never
likes to be interfered with on such a matter.'

'The position was and is difficult, Mrs Finn.'

'And I am bound to acknowledge the very ready way in which you did
what I asked you to do.'

'And now, Mrs Finn, what is to come next?'

'Ah!'

'Something must be done!  You know of course that the Duke did not
receive me with any great favour.'

'I did not suppose he would.'

'Nor did I. Of course he would object to such a marriage. But a
man in these days cannot dictate to his daughter what husband she
should marry.'

'Perhaps he can dictate to her what husband she shall not marry.'

'Hardly that. He may put impediments in the way; and the Duke will
do so. But if I am happy enough to have won the affection of his
daughter,--so as to make it essential to her happiness that she
should become my wife,--he will give way.'

'What am I to say, Mr Tregear?'

'Just what you think.'

'Why should I be made to say what I think on so delicate a matter?
 Or of what use would by my thoughts? Remember how far I am
removed from her.'

'You are his friend.'

'Not at all!  No one less so!'  As she said this she could not
hinder the colour from coming into her face. 'I was her friend,--
lady Glencora's; but with the death of my friend there was an end
of all that.'

'You were staying with him,--at his request. You told me so
yourself.'

'I shall never stay with him again. But all that, Mr Tregear, is
of no matter. I do not mean to say a word against him;--not a word.
But if you wish to interest any one as being the Duke's friend,
then I can assure you that I am the last person in London to whom
you should come. I know no one to whom the Duke is likely to
entertain any feelings so little kind towards me.'  This she said
in a peculiarly solemn way that startled Tregear. But before he
could answer her a servant entered the room with a letter. She
recognised at once the Duke's handwriting. Here was the answer for
which she had been so long waiting in silent expectation!  She
could not keep it unread till he was gone. 'Will you allow me a
moment,' she whispered, and then she opened the envelope. As she
read the few words her eyes became laden with tears. They quite
sufficed to relieve the injured pride which had sat so heavy at
her heart. 'I believe I did you a wrong, and therefore I ask you
your pardon!'  It was so like what she had believed the man to be!
 She could not be longer angry with him. And yet the very last
words she had spoken were words complaining of his conduct. 'This
is from the Duke,' she said, putting the letter back into its
envelope.

'Oh, indeed.'

'It is odd that it should have come while you were here.'

'Is it,--is it,--about Lady Mary?'

'No;--at least,--not directly. I perhaps spoke more harshly about
him than I should have done. The truth is I had expected a line
from him, and it had not come. Now it is here; but I do not
suppose I shall ever see much of him. My intimacy was with her.
But I would not wish you to remember what I said just now, if--if--'

'If what, Mrs Finn?  You mean perhaps, if I should ever be allowed
to call myself his son-in-law. It may seem to you to be arrogant,
but it is an honour which I expect to win.'

'Faint heart,--you know, Mr Tregear.'

'Exactly. One has to tell oneself that very often. You will help
me?'

'Certainly not,' she said, as though she were much startled. 'How
can I help you?'

'By telling me what I should do. I suppose if I were to go down to
Richmond I should not be admitted.'

'If you ask me, I think not;--not to see Lady Mary. Lady Cantrip
would perhaps see you.'

'She is acting the part of-Duenna.'

'As I should do so, if Lady Mary were staying with me. You don't
suppose that if she were here I would let her see you in my house
without her father's leave?'

'I suppose not.'

'Certainly not; and therefore I conceive that Lady Cantrip will
not do so either.'

'I wish she were here.'

'It would be of no use. I should be a dragon in guarding her.'

'I wish you would let me feel that you were like a sister to me in
this matter.'

'But I am not your sister, nor yet your aunt, nor yet your
grandmother. What I mean is that I cannot be on your side.'

'Can you not?'

'No, Mr Tregear. Think how long I have known these other people.'

'But just now you said that he was your enemy.'

'I did say so; but as I have unsaid it since, you as a gentleman
will not remember my words.  At any rate I cannot help you in
this.'

'I shall write to her.'

'It can be nothing to me. If you write she will show your letter
either to her father or to Lady Cantrip.'

'But she will read it first.'

'I cannot tell you how that may be. In fact I am the very last
person in the world to whom you should come for assistance in this
matter. If I gave any assistance to anybody I should be bound to
give it to the Duke.'

'I cannot understand that, Mrs Finn.'

'Nor can I explain it, but it would be so. I shall always be very
glad to see you, and I do feel that we ought to be friends,--
because I took such a liberty with you. But in this matter I
cannot help you.'

When she said this he had to take his leave. It was impossible
that he should further press his case upon her, though he would
have been very glad to extract from her some kindly word. It is
such a help in a difficulty to have somebody who will express even
a hope that the difficulty is perhaps not invincible!  He had no
one to comfort him in this matter. There was one dear friend,--as a
friend dearer than any other,--to whom he might go, and who would
after some fashion bid him prosper. Mabel would encourage him. She
had said that she would do so. But in making that promise she had
told him that Romeo would not have spoken of his love for Juliet
to Rosaline, whom he had loved before he saw Juliet. No doubt she
had gone on to tell him that he might come to her and talk freely
of his love for Lady Mary,--but after what had been said before he
felt that he could not do so without leaving a sting behind. When
a man's heart goes well with him,--so well as to be in some degree
oppressive to him even by its prosperity,--when the young lady has
jumped into his arms, and the father and the mother have been
quite willing, then he wants no confidant. He does not care to
speak very much off the matter which among his friends is apt to
become a subject for raillery. When you call a man Benedict he
does not come to you with ecstatic descriptions of the beauty and
the wit of his Beatrice. But no one was likely to call him
Benedict in reference to Lady Mary.

In spite of his manner, in spite of his apparent self-sufficiency,
this man was very soft within. Less than two years back he had
been willing to sacrifice all the world for his cousin Mabel, and
his cousin Mabel had told him that he was wrong. 'It does not pay
to sacrifice the world for love.'  So cousin Mabel had said, and
had added something as to its being necessary that she should
marry a rich man, and expedient that he should marry a rich woman.
He had thought much about it, and had declared to himself that on
no account would he marry a woman for her money. Then he had
encountered Lady Mary Palliser. There had been no doubt, no
resolution after that, no thinking about it,--but downright love.
There was nothing left of real regret for his cousin in his bosom.
She had been right. That love had been impossible. But this would
be possible,--ah, so deliciously possible,--if only her father and
mother would assist!  The mother, imprudent in this as in all
things, had assented. The reader knows the rest.

It was in every way possible. 'She will have money enough,' the
Duchess had said, 'if only her father can be brought to give it to
you.'  So Tregear had set his heart upon it, and had said to
himself that the thing was to be done. Then his friend the Duchess
had died, and the real difficulties had commenced. From that day
he had not seen his love, or heard from her. How was he to know
whether she would be true to him?  And where was he to seek for
that sympathy which he felt to be so necessary to him?  A wild
idea had come into his head that Mrs Finn would be his friend;--but
she had repudiated him.

He went straight home and at once wrote to the girl. The letter
was a simple love-letter, and as such need not be given here. In
what sweetest language he could find he assured her that even
though he should never be allowed to see her or to hear from her,
that still he should cling to her. And then he added this passage:
'If your love for me be what I think it is to be, no one can have
a right to keep us apart. Pray be sure that I shall not change. If
you change let me know it;--but I shall as soon expect the heavens
to fall.'



CHAPTER 24

She Must Be Made to Obey

Lady Mary Palliser down at the Horns had as much liberty allowed
to as is usually given to young ladies in these very free days.
There was indeed no restriction placed upon her at all. Had
Tregear gone down to Richmond and asked for the young lady, and
had Lady Cantrip at the time been out and the young lady at home,
it would have depended altogether upon the young lady whether she
would have seen her lover or not. Nevertheless Lady Cantrip kept
her eyes open, and when the letter came from Tregear she was aware
that the letter had come. But the letter found its way into Lady
Mary's hands and was read in the seclusion of her own bedroom. 'I
wonder whether you would mind reading that,' she said very shortly
afterwards to Lady Cantrip.  'What answer ought I to make?'

'Do you think any answer ought to be made, my dear?'

'Oh yes; I must answer him.'

'Would your papa wish it?'

'I told papa that I would not promise not to write to him. I think
I told him that he should see any letters that there were. But if
I show them to you, I suppose that will do as well.'

'You had better keep your word to him absolutely.'

'I am not afraid of doing so, if you mean that. I cannot bear to
give him pain, but this is a matter in which I mean to have my own
way.'

'Mean to have your own way!' said Lady Cantrip, much surprised by
the determined tone of the young lady.

'Certainly I do. I want you to understand so much!  I suppose papa
can keep us from marrying for ever and ever if he pleases, but he
never will make me say that I will give up Mr Tregear. And if he
does not yield I shall think him cruel. Why should he wish to make
me unhappy all my life?'

'He certainly does not wish that, my dear.'

'But he will do it.'

'I cannot go against your father, Mary.'

'No, I suppose not. I shall write to Mr Tregear, and then I will
show you what I have written. Papa shall see it too if he pleases.
I will do nothing secret, but I will never give up Mr Tregear.'

Lord Cantrip came down to Richmond that evening, and his wife told
him that in her opinion it would be best that the Duke should
allow the young people to marry, and should give them money enough
to live upon. 'Is not that a strong order?' asked the Earl. The
Countess acknowledged that it was a 'strong order', but suggested
that for the happiness of them all it might as well be done at
first as last.

The next morning Lady Mary showed her a copy of the reply which
she had already sent to her lover.

'DEAR FRANK,

'You may be quite sure that I shall never give you up. I will
not write more at present because papa does not wish me to do so.
I shall show papa your letter and my answer.

'Your own most affectionate
MARY.'

'Has it gone?' asked the Countess.

'I put it myself into the pillar letter-box.'  Then Lady Cantrip
felt that she had to deal with a very self-willed young lady
indeed.

That afternoon Lady Cantrip asked Lady Mary whether she might be
allowed to take the two letters up to town with the express
purpose of showing them to the Duke. 'Oh yes,' said Mary. 'I think
it would be so much the best. Give papa my kindest love, and tell
him from me that if he wants to make his poor little girl happy he
will forgive her and be kind to her in all this.'  Then the
Countess made some attempts to argue the matter. There were
proprieties! High rank might be a blessing or might be the
reverse--as people thought of it;--but all men acknowledged that
much was due to it. 'Noblesse oblige.'  It was often the case in
life that women were called upon by circumstances to sacrifice
their inclinations!  What right had a gentleman to talk of
marriage who had no means?  These things she said and very many
more, but it was to no purpose. The young lady asserted that as
the gentleman was a gentleman there need be no question as to
rank, and that in regard to money there need be no difficulty if
one of them had sufficient. 'But you have none but what your
father gives you,' said Lady Cantrip. 'Papa can give it us without
any trouble,' said Lady Mary. This child had a clear idea of what
she thought to be her own rights. Being the child of rich parents
she had the right to money. Being a woman she had a right to a
husband. Having been born free she had a right to choose one for
herself. Having had a man's love given to her she had a right to
keep it. 'One doesn't know which she is most like, her father or
her mother,' Lady Cantrip said afterwards to her husband. 'She has
his cool determination, and her hot-headed obstinacy.'

She did show the letters to the Duke, and in answer to a word or
two from him explained that she could not take upon herself to
debar her guest from the use of the post.  'But she will write
nothing without letting you know it.'

'She ought to write nothing at all.'

'What she feels is much worse than what she writes.'

'If there were no intercourse she would forget him.'

'Ah; I don't know,' said the Countess sorrowfully, 'I thought so
once.'

'All children are determined as long as they are allowed to have
their own way.'

'I mean to say that it is the nature of her character to be
obstinate. Most girls are prone to yield. They have not character
enough to stand against opposition. I am not speaking now only of
affairs like this. It would be the same with her in any thing.
Have you not always found it so?'

Then he had to acknowledge to himself that he had never found out
anything in reference to his daughter's character. She had been
properly sweet, affectionate, always obedient to him;--the most
charming plaything in the world on the few occasions in which he
had allowed himself to play. But as to her actual disposition, he
had never taken any trouble to inform himself. She had been left
to her mother,--as other girls are left. And his sons had been left
to their tutors. And now he had no control over any of them. 'She
must be made to obey like others,' he said at last, speaking
through his teeth.

There was something in this which almost frightened Lady Cantrip.
She could not bear to hear him say that the girl must be made to
yield with that spirit of despotic power under which women were
restrained in years now passed. If she could have spoken her own
mind it would have been to this effect: 'Let us do what we can to
lead her away from this desire of hers; and in order that we may
do so, let us tell her that her marriage with Mr Tregear is out of
the question. But if we do not succeed,--let us give way. Let us
make it a matter of joy that the young man himself is so
acceptable and well-behaved.'  That was her idea, and with that
she would have indoctrinated the Duke had she been able. But his
was different. 'She must be made to obey,' he said. And, as he
said it, he seemed to be indifferent to the sorrow which such
enforced obedience might bring upon his child. In answer to this
she could only shake her head. 'What do you mean?' he asked. 'Do
you think we ought to yield?'

'Not at once, certainly.'

'But at last?'

'What can you do, Duke?  If she be as firm as you, can you bear to
see her pine away in misery?'

'Girls do not do like that,' he said.

'Girls and men are very different. They gradually will yield to
external influences. English girls, though they become the most
loving wives in the world, do not generally become so riven by an
attachment as to become deep sufferers when it is disallowed. But
here, I fear, we have to deal with one who will suffer after this
fashion.'

'Why should she not be like others?'

'It may be so. We will try. But you see what she says in her
letter to him. She writes as though your authority were to be
nothing in that matter of giving up.  In all that she says to me
there is the same spirit. If she is firm, Duke, you must yield.'

'Never!  She shall never marry him with my sanction.'

There was nothing more to be said, and Lady Cantrip went her way.
But the Duke, though he could say nothing more, continued to think
of it hour after hour. He went down to the House of Lords to
listen to a debate in which it was intended to cover the ministers
with heavy disgrace. But the Duke could not listen even to his own
friends. He could listen to nothing as he thought of the condition
of his children.

He had been asked whether he could bear to see his girl suffer, as
though he were indifferent to the sufferings of his child. Did he
not know of himself that there was no father who would do more for
the welfare of his daughter?  Was he not sure of the tenderness of
his own heart?  In all that he was doing was he governed by
anything but a sense of duty? Was it personal pride or love of
personal aggrandisement? He thought that he could assure himself
that he was open to no such charge. Would he not die for her,--or
for them,--if he could so serve them?  Surely this woman had
accused him most wrongfully when she had intimated that he could
see his girl suffer without caring for it. In his indignation he
determined--for a while--that he would remove her from the custody
of Lady Cantrip. But then, where should he place her? He was aware
that his own house would be like a grave to a girl just fit to
come into this world. In this coming autumn she must go
somewhere,--with some one. He himself, in his present state of
mind, would be but a sorry travelling companion.

Lady Cantrip had said that the best hope of escape would lie in
the prospect of another lover. The prescription was disagreeable,
but it had availed in the case of his own wife. Before he had ever
seen her as Lady Glencora McCloskie she had been desirous of
giving herself and all her wealth to one Burgo Fitzgerald, who had
been altogether unworthy. The Duke could remember well how a
certain old Lady Midlothian had first told him that Lady Glencora's
property was very large, and had then added that the young lady
herself was very beautiful. And he could remember how his uncle,
the last duke, who had seldom taken much trouble in merely human
affairs, had said a word or two--'I have heard a whisper about you
and Lady Glencora McCloskie, nothing could be better.'  The result
had been undoubtedly good. His Cora and all her money had been
saved from a worthless spendthrift. He had found a wife who he now
thought had made him happy. And she had found at any rate a
respectable husband. The idea when picked to pieces is not a nice
idea. 'Let us look out for a husband for this girl, so that we may
get her married--out of the way of her lover.'  It is not nice. But
it had succeeded in one case, and why should it not succeed in
another?

But how was it to be done? Who should do it? Whom should he select
to play the part which he had undertaken in that other
arrangement? No worse person could be found then himself in
managing such an affair. When the idea had at first been raised he
had thought that Lady Cantrip would do it all; but now he was
angry with Lady Cantrip.

How was it to be done? How should it be commenced? How had it been
commenced in his own case? He did not in the least know how he had
been chosen. Was it possible that his uncle, who was the proudest
man in England, should have condescended to make a bargain with an
old dowager whom everybody had despised? And in what way had he
been selected? No doubt he had been known to be the heir-apparent
to a dukedom and ducal reverence. In his case old Lady Midlothian
had begun the matter with him. It occurred to him that in royal
marriages such beginnings are quite common.

But who should be the happy man? Then he began to count up the
requisite attributes. He must be of high rank, and an eldest son,
and the possessor of, or the heir to a good estate. He did despise
himself when he found that he put these things first,--as a matter
of course. Nevertheless he did put them first. He was ejecting
this other man because he possessed none of these attributes. He
hurried himself on to add that the man must be of good character,
and such as a young girl might learn to love. But yet he was aware
that he added these things for his conscience's sake. Tregear's
character was good, and certainly the girl loved him. But was it
not clear to all who knew anything of such matters that Mr Francis
Tregear should not have dared even to think of marrying the
daughter of the Duke of Omnium?

Who should be the happy man?  There were so many who evidently
were unfit. Young Lord Percival was heir to a ruined estate and
beggared peerage. Lord Glasslough was odious to all men. There
were three or four others of whom he thought that he knew some
fatal objection. But when he remembered Lord Popplecourt there
seemed to be no objection which need be fatal.

Lord Popplecourt was a young peer whose father had died two years
since and whose estates were large and unembarrassed. The late
lord, who had been a Whig of the old fashion, had been the Duke's
friend. They had been at Oxford and in the House of Commons
together, and Lord Popplecourt had always been true to his party.
As to the son, the Duke remembered to have heard lately that he
was not given to waste his money. He drove about London a good
deal, but had as yet not done anything very foolish. He had taken
his degree at Oxford, taken his seat in the House of Lords and had
once opened his mouth. He had not indeed appeared often again; but
at Lord Popplecourt's age much legislation is not to be expected
from a young peer. Then he thought of the man's appearance.
Popplecourt was not specially attractive, whereas Tregear was a
very handsome man. But so also had been Burgo Fitzgerald,--almost
abnormally beautiful, while he, Plantagenet Palliser, as he was
then, had been quite insignificant in appearance as Lord
Popplecourt.

Lord Popplecourt might possibly do. But then how should the matter
be spoken of to the young man? After all, would it not be best
that he should trust Lady Cantrip?



CHAPTER 25

A Family Breakfast-Table

Lord Silverbridge had paid all his Derby losses without any
difficulty. They had not been very heavy for a man in his
position, and the money had come without remonstrance. When asking
for it he was half-ashamed of himself, but could still find
consolation in remembering how much worse had plunged many young
men whom he knew. He had never 'plunged'. In fact he had made the
most prudent book in the world; and had so managed his affairs
that even now the horse which had been beaten was worth more than
all he had lost and paid. 'This is getting serious,' he had said
to his partner when, on making out a rough account, he had brought
in the Major in a debtor to him of more than a thousand pounds.
The Major remarked that as he was half-owner of the horses his
partner had good security for the money. Then something of an
unwritten arrangement was made. The 'Prime Minister' was now one
of the favourites for the Leger. If the horse won that race there
would be money enough for everything. If that race were lost, then
there should be a settlement by the transfer of the stud to the
younger partner. 'He's safe to pull it off,' said the Major.

At this time both his sons were living with the Duke in London. It
had been found impracticable to send Lord Gerald back to
Cambridge. The doors of Trinity were closed against him. But some
interest had been made in his favour, and he was to be transferred
to Oxford. All the truth had been told, and there had been a
feeling that the lad should be allowed another chance. He could
not however go to his new Alma Mater till after the long vacation.
In the meantime he was to be taken by a tutor down to a Cottage on
Dartmoor and there be made to read,--with such amusement in the
meantime as might be got from fishing, and playing cricket with
the West Devon county club. 'It isn't very bright look-out for the
summer,' his brother had said to him, 'but it's better then
breaking out on the loose altogether. You be a credit to the
family and all that sort of thing. Then I'll give up the borough
to you. But mind you stick to the Liberals. I've made an ass of
myself.'  However in these early days of June Lord Gerald had not
yet got his tutor.

Though the father and the two young men were living together they
did not see very much of each other. The Duke breakfasted at nine
and the repast was a very simple one. When they failed to appear,
he did not scold,--but would simply be disappointed. At dinner they
never met. It was supposed that Lord Gerald passed his mornings at
reading, and some little attempts were made in that direction. It
is to be feared they did not come to much. Silverbridge was very
kind to Gerald, feeling an increased tenderness for him on account
of that Cambridge mishap. Now they were much together, and
occasionally, by a strong effort, would grace their father's
breakfast-table with their company.

It was not often that he either reproached them or preached to
them. Though he could not live with them on almost equal terms, as
some fathers can live with their sons, though he could not laugh
at their fun or make them laugh at his wit, he knew that it would
have been better both for him and them if he had possessed this
capacity. Though the life which they lived was distasteful to
him,--though racehorses were an abomination to him, and the driving
of coaches a folly, and club-life a manifest waste of time, still
he recognised these things as being, if not necessary, yet
unavoidable evils. To Gerald he would talk about Oxford, avoiding
all allusion to past Cambridge misfortunes; but in the presence of
Silverbridge, whose Oxford career had been so peculiarly
unfortunate, he would make no allusion to either of the
universities. To his eldest son he would talk of Parliament which
of all subjects would have been the most congenial had they agreed
in politics. As it was he could speak more freely to him on that
than any other matter.

One Thursday night as the two brothers went to bed on returning
from the Beargarden, at a not very late hour, they agreed that
they would 'give the governor a turn' the next morning,--by which
they meant that they would drag themselves out of bed in time to
breakfast with him. The worst of it is that he will never let them
get anything to eat, said Gerald. But Silverbridge explained that
he had taken the matter into his own hands, and had specially
ordered broiled salmon and stewed kidneys. 'He won't like it, you
know,' said Gerald. 'I'm sure he thinks it wicked to eat anything
but toasted bacon before lunch.'

At a very little after nine Silverbridge was in the breakfast-
room, and there found his father. 'I suppose Gerald is not up
yet,' said the Duke almost crossly.

'Oh yes he is, sir. He'll be here directly.'

'Have you seen him this morning?'

'No; I haven't seen him. But I know he'll be here. He said he
would, last night.'

'You speak of it as if it were an undertaking.'

'No, not that, sir. But we are not always quite up to time.'

'No; indeed you are not. Perhaps you sit late at the House.'

'Sometimes I do,' said the young member, with a feeling almost
akin to shame as he remembered all the hours spent at the
Beargarden. 'I have had Gerald there in the Gallery sometimes. It
is just as well he should know what is being done.'

'Quite as well.'

'I shouldn't wonder if he gets a seat some day.'

'I don't know how that may be.'

'He won't change as I have done. He'll stick to your side. Indeed
I think he'd do better in the House than I shall. He has more gift
of the gab.'

'That is not the first requisite.'

'I know all that, sir. I've read your letter more than once, and I
showed it to him.'

There was something sweet and pleasant in the young man's manner
by which the father could hardly not be captivated. They had now
sat down, and the servant had brought in the unusual accessories
for a morning feast. 'What is all that?' asked the Duke.

'Gerald and I are so awfully hungry of a morning,' said the son
apologising.

'Well;--it's a very good thing to be hungry;--that is if you can get
plenty to eat. Salmon is it? I don't think I'll have any myself.
Kidneys! Not for me. I think I'll take a bit of fried bacon. I
also am hungry, but now awfully hungry.'

'You never seem to me to eat anything, sir.'

'Eating is an occupation from which I think a man takes the more
pleasure the less he considers it. A rural labourer who sits on
the ditch-side with his bread and cheese and an onion has more
enjoyment out of it than any Lucullus.'

'But he likes a good deal of it.'

'I do not think he ever over-eats himself,--which Lucullus does. I
have envied the ploughman his power,--his dura ilia,--but never an
epicure the appreciative skill of his palate. If Gerald does not
make haste he will have to exercise neither the one nor the other
upon that fish.'

'I will leave a bit for him, sir,--and here he is. You are twenty
minutes late, Gerald. My father says that bread and cheese and
onions would be better for you than salmon and stewed kidneys.'

'No, Silverbridge;--I said no such thing; but that if he were a
hedger and ditcher the bread and cheese would be as good.'

'I should not mind trying them all,' said Gerald. 'Only one never
does have such things for breakfast. Last winter a lot of us
skated to Ely, and we ate two or three loaves of bread and a whole
cheese, at a pot-house!  And as for beer, we drank the public
dry.'

'It was because for the time you had been a hedger and ditcher.'

'Proby was a ditcher I know, when he went right through into one
of the dykes. Just push on that dish Silverbridge. It's no good
you having the trouble of helping me half-a-dozen times. I don't
think things are a bit the nicer because they cost a lot of money.
I suppose that is what you mean, sir.'

'Something of that kind, Gerald. Not to have money for your
wants;--that must be troublesome.'

'Very bad indeed,' said Silverbridge, shaking his head wisely, as
a Member of Parliament might do who felt that something should be
done to put down such a lamentable state of things.

'I don't complain,' said Gerald. 'No fellow ever had less right to
complain. But I never felt that I had quite enough. Of course it
was my own fault.'

'I should say so, my boy. But then there are a great many like
you. Let their means be what they may, they never have quite
enough. To be in any difficulty with regard to money,--to owe what
you cannot pay, or even to have to abstain from things which you
have told yourself are necessary to yourself or to those who
depend on you,--creates a feeling of meanness.'

'That is what I have always felt,' said Silverbridge. 'I cannot
bear to think that I should like to have a thing and that I cannot
afford it.'

'You do not quite understand me, I fear. The only case in which
you can be justified in desiring that which you cannot afford is
when the thing is necessary;--as bread may be, or clothes.'

'As when a fellow wants a lot of new breeches before he has paid
his tailor's bill.'

'As when a poor man,' said the Duke impressively, 'may long to
give his wife a new gown, or his children boots to keep their feet
from the mud and snow.'  Then he paused a moment, but the serious
tone of his voice and the energy of his words had sent Gerald
headlong among his kidneys. 'I say that in such cases money must
be regarded as a blessing.'

'A ten-pound note will do so much,' said Silverbridge.

'But beyond that it ought to have no power of conferring
happiness, and certainly cannot drive away sorrow. Not though you
build palaces out into the deep, can that help you. You read your
Horace I hope. "Scandunt eodum quo dominus minae."'

'I recollect that,' said Gerald. 'Black care sits behind the
horseman.'

'Even though he have groom riding after him beautiful with
exquisite boots. As far as I have been able to look into the
world--'

'I suppose you know it as well as anybody,' said Silverbridge,--who
was simply desirous of making himself pleasant to the 'dear old
governor'.

'As far as my experience goes, the happiest man is he who, being
above the troubles which money brings, has his hands the fullest
of work. If I were to name the class of men whose lives are spent
with the most thorough enjoyment, I think I should name that of
barristers who are in large practice and also in Parliament.'

'Isn't it a great grind, sir?' asked Silverbridge.

'A very great grind, as you call it. And there may be the grind
and not the success. But--' He had now got up from his seat at the
table and was standing with his back against the chimney-piece,
and as he went on with his lecture,--as the word 'But' came from
his lips--he struck the fingers of one hand lightly on the palm of
the other as he had been known to do at some happy flight of
oratory in the House of Commons. 'But it is the grind that makes
the happiness. To feel that your hours are filled to overflowing,
that you can hardly barely steal minutes enough for sleep, that
the welfare of many is entrusted to you, that the world looks on
and approves, that some good is always being done to others,--above
all things some good to your country;--that is happiness. For
myself I can conceive none other.'

'Books,' suggested Gerald, as he put the last morsel of the last
kidney into his mouth.

'Yes, books!  Cicero and Ovid have told us that to literature only
could they look for consolation in their banishment. But then they
speak of a remedy for sorrow, not of a source for joy. No young
man should dare to neglect literature. At some period of his life
he will surely need consolation. And he may be certain that should
he live to be an old man, there will be none other,--except
religion. But for that feeling of self-contentment, which creates
happiness--hard work, and hard work alone, can give it to you.'

'Books are hard work themselves sometimes,' said Gerald.

'As for money,' continued the father, not caring to note this
interruption, 'if it be regarded in any other light than an as a
shield against want, as a rampart under the protection of which
you may carry on your battle, it will fail you. I was born a rich
man.'

'Few people have cared so little about it as you,' said the elder
son.

'And you, both of you, have been born to be rich.'  This assertion
did not take the elder son by surprise. It was a matter of course.
But Lord Gerald, who had never as yet heard anything as to his
future destiny from his father, was interested by the statement.
'When I think of all this,--of what constitutes happiness,--I am
almost tempted to grieve that it should be so.'

'If a large fortune were really a bad thing,' said Gerald, 'a man
could I suppose get rid of it.'

'No;--it is a thing of which a man cannot get rid,--unless by
shameful means. It is a burden which he must carry to the end.'

'Does anybody wish to get rid of it, as Sinbad did of the Old
Man?' asked Gerald pertinaciously. 'At any rate I have enjoyed the
kidneys.'

'You assured us just now that the bread and cheese at Ely were
just as good.'  The Duke as he said this looked as though he knew
that he had taken all the wind out of his adversary's sails.
'Though you add carriage to carriage, you will not be carried more
comfortably.'

'A second horse out hunting is a comfort,' said Silverbridge.

'Then at any rate don't desire a third for show. But such comforts
will cease to be joys when they become matters of course. That a
boy who does not see a pudding once a year should enjoy a pudding
when it comes I can understand; but the daily pudding, or the
pudding twice a day, is soon no more than a simple daily bread,--
which will or will not be sweet as it shall or shall not have been
earned.'  Then he went slowly to the door, but, as he stood with
the handle of it in his hand, he turned round and spoke another
word. 'When, hereafter, Gerald, you may chance to think of that
bread and cheese at Ely, always remember that you had skated from
Cambridge.'

The two brothers then took themselves to some remote part of the
house where arrangements had been made for smoking, and there they
finished the conversation.  'I was very glad to hear what he said
about you, old boy.'  This of course came from Silverbridge.

'I didn't quite understand him.'

'He meant you to understand that you wouldn't be like other
younger brothers.'

'Then what I have will be taken from you.'

'There is lots for three or four of us. I do agree that a fellow
has as much as he can spend he ought not to want anything more.
Morton was telling me the other day something about the settled
estates. I sat in that office with him all one morning. I could
not understand it all, but I observed that he said nothing about
the Scotch property. You'll be a laird, and I wish you joy with
all my heart. The governor will tell you all about it before long.
He's going to have two eldest sons.'

'What an unnatural piece of cruelty to me;--and so unnecessary!'

'Why?'

'He says that a property is no better than a burden. But I'll try
and bear it.'



CHAPTER 26

Dinner at the Beargarden

The Duke was in the gallery of the House of Commons which is
devoted to the use of peers, and Silverbridge having heard that
his father was there, had come up to him.  It was then about half-
past five, and the House had settled down to business. Prayers had
been read, petitions had been presented, and Ministers had gone
through their course of baiting with that equanimity and air of
superiority which always belongs to a well-trained occupant of the
Treasury bench.

The Duke was very anxious that his son should attend to his
parliamentary duties, but he was too proud a man and too generous
to come to the House as a spy. It was his present habit always to
be in his own place when the Lords were sitting, and to remain
there while the Lords sat. it was not, for many reasons, an
altogether satisfactory occupation, but it was the best which his
life afforded him. He would never, however, come across into the
other House, without letting his son know of his coming, and Lord
Silverbridge had on this occasion been on the look out, and had
come up to his father at once. 'Don't let me take you away,' said
the Duke, 'if you are particularly interested in your Chief's
defence,' for Sir Timothy Beeswax was defending some measure of
legal reform in which he was said to have fallen into trouble.

'I can hear it up here you know, sir.'

'Hardly if you are talking to me.'

'To tell the truth it's a matter I don't much care about. They've
got into some mess as to the number of Judges and what they ought
to do. Finn was saying that they had so arranged that there was
one Judge who never could possibly do anything.'

'If Mr Finn said so it would probably be so, with some allowance
for Irish exaggeration. He is a clever man, with less of his
country's hyperbole than others;--but still not without his share.'

'You know him well, I suppose.'

'Yes;--as one man does know another in the political world.'

'But he is a friend of yours? I don't mean an "honourable friend",
which is great bosh; but you know him at home.'

'Oh yes;--certainly. He has been staying with me at Matching. In
public life such intimacies come from politics.'

'You don't care much about him then.'

The Duke paused a moment before he answered. 'Yes I do;--and in
what I said just now perhaps I wronged him. I have been under
obligations to Mr Finn,--in a matter as to which he behaved very
well. I have found him to be a gentleman. If you come across him
in the House I would wish you to be courteous to him. I have not
seen him since we came from abroad. I have been able to see
nobody. But if ever again I should entertain my friends at my
table, Mr Finn would be one who would always be welcome there.'
This he said with a sadly serious air as though wishing that his
words should be noted. At the present moment he was remembering
that he owed recompense to Mrs Finn, and was making an effort to
pay the debt. 'But your leader is striking out into unwonted
eloquence. Surely we ought to listen to him.'

Sir Timothy was a fluent speaker, and when there was nothing to be
said was possessed of a great plenty of words. And he was gifted
with that peculiar power which enables a man to have the last word
in every encounter,--a power which we are apt to call repartee,
with is in truth the readiness which come from continual practice.
You shall meet two men of whom you shall know the one to be
endowed with the brilliancy of true genius, and the other to be
possessed of but moderate parts, and shall find the former never
able to hold his awn against the latter. In a debate, the man of
moderate parts will seem to be greater than the man of genius. But
this skill of tongue, this glibness of speech is hardly an affair
of intellect at all. It is--as is style to the writer,--not the
wares which he has to take to market, but the vehicle in which
they may be carried. Of what avail to you is it to have filled
granaries with corn if you cannot get your corn to the consumer?
Now Sir Timothy was a great vehicle, but he had not in truth much
corn to send. He could turn a laugh against an adversary;--no man
better. He could seize, at the moment, every advantage which the
opportunity might give him. The Treasury Bench on which he sat and
the big box on the table before him were to him fortifications of
which he knew how to use every stone. The cheers and jeers of the
House had been so measured by him that he knew the value and force
of every sound. Politics had never been to him a study; but to
parliamentary strategy he had devoted all his faculties. No one
knew so well as Sir Timothy how to make arrangements for business,
so that every detail should be troublesome to his opponents. He
could foresee a month beforehand that on a certain day a Royal
concert would make the House empty, and would generously give that
day to a less observant adversary. He knew how to blind the eyes
of members to the truth. Those on the opposite side of the House
would find themselves checkmated by his astuteness,--when with all
their pieces on the board, there should be none which they could
move. And this to him was Government!  It was to these purposes
that he conceived that a great Statesman should devote himself!
Parliamentary management!  That in his mind, was under the
Constitution of ours the one act essential for Government.

In all this he was very great; but when it might fall to his duty
either to suggest or defend any real piece of proposed legislation
he was less happy. On this occasion he had been driven to take the
matter in hand because he had previously been concerned in it as a
lawyer. He had allowed himself to wax angry as he endeavoured to
answer certain personal criticisms. Now Sir Timothy was never
stronger then when he simulated anger.  His mock indignation was
perhaps his most powerful weapon. But real anger is a passion
which few men can use with judgement. And now Sir Timothy was
really angry, and condescended to speak of our old friend Phineas
who had made the onslaught as a bellicose Irishman. There was an
over-true story as to our friend having once been seduced into
fighting a duel, and those who wished to decry him sometimes
alluded to the adventure. Sir Timothy had been called to order,
but the Speaker had ruled 'bellicose Irishman' was not beyond the
latitude of parliamentary animadversion. Then Sir Timothy had
repeated the phrase with emphasis, and the Duke hearing it in the
gallery had made his remark as to the unwonted eloquence of his
son's parliamentary chief.

'Surely we ought to listen to him,' said the Duke. And for a short
time they did listen. 'Sir Timothy is not a man I like, you know,'
said the son, feeling himself obliged to apologise for his
subjection to such a chief.

'I never particularly loved him myself.'

'They say he is a sort of necessity.'

'A Conservative Fate,' said the Duke.

'Well, yes; he is so,--so awfully clever! We all feel that we could
not get on without him. When you were in, he was one of your
party.'

'Oh yes;--he was one of us. I have no right to complain of you for
using him. But when you say you could not get on without him, does
it not occur to you that should he,--let us say be taken to
heaven,--you would have to get on without him.'

'Then he would be,--out of the way, sir.'

'What you mean perhaps is that you do not know how to get rid of
him.'

'Of course I don't pretend to know much about it; but they all
think that he does know how to keep the party together. I don't
think we are proud of him.'

'Hardly that.'

'He is awfully useful. A man has to look out so sharp to be always
ready for those other fellows!  I beg your pardon, sir, but I mean
your side.'

'I understand who the other fellows are.'

'And it isn't everybody who will go through such a grind. A man to
do it must be always ready. He has so many little things to think
of. As far as I can see we all feel that we could not get along
very well without him.'  Upon the whole the Duke was pleased with
what he heard from his son. The young man's ideas about politics
were boyish, but they were the ideas of a clear-headed boy.
Silverbridge had picked up some of the ways of the place, though
he had not yet formed any sound political opinions.

Then Sir Timothy finished a long speech with a flowery peroration,
in which he declared that if Parliament were desirous of keeping
the realms of Her Majesty free from the invasions of foreigners it
must be done by maintaining the dignity of the Judicial bench.
There were some clamours at this, and although it was now dinner-
time Phineas Finn, who had been called a bellicose Irishman, was
able to say a word or two. 'The Right Honourable gentleman no
doubt means,' said Phineas, 'that we must carry ourselves with
some increased external dignity. The world is bewigging itself,
and we must buy a bigger wig than any we have got, in order to
confront the world with proper self-respect. Turveydrop and
deportment will suffice for us against odds.'

About half-past seven the House became very empty. 'Where are
going to dine, sir?' asked Silverbridge. The Duke, with something
like a sigh, said he supposed he should dine at home.

'You never were at the Beargarden;--were you, sir?' asked
Silverbridge suddenly.

'Never,' said the Duke.

'Come and dine with me.'

'I am not a member of the club.'

'We don't care at all about that. Anybody can take anybody.'

'Does not that make it promiscuous?'

'Well;--no; I don't know that it does. It seems to go on very well.
I daresay there are some cads there sometimes. But I don't know
where one doesn't meet cads. There are plenty in the House of
Commons.'

'There is something in that, Silverbridge, which makes me think
that you have not realised the difference between private and
public life. In the former you choose your own associates and are
responsible for your choice. In the latter you are concerned with
others for the good of the State; and though even for the State's
sake, you would not willingly be closely allied with those whom
you think dishonest, the outward manners and fashions of life need
create no barriers. I should not turn up my nose at the House of
Commons because some constituency might send them an illiterate
shoemaker; but I might probably find the illiterate shoemaker an
unprofitable companion for my private hours.'

'I don't think there will be any shoemakers at the Beargarden.'

'Even if there were I would go and dine with you. I shall be glad
to see the place where you, I suppose, pass many hours.'

'I find it a very good shop to dine at. The place at the House is
so stuffy and nasty. Besides, one likes to get away for a time.'

'Certainly. I never was an advocate for living in the House. One
should always change the atmosphere.'  Then they got into a cab
and went to the club. Silverbridge was a little afraid of what he
was doing. The invitation had come from him on the spur of the
moment, and he hardly ventured to think that his father would
accept it. And now he did not quite know how the Duke would go
through the ceremony. 'The other fellows' would come and stare at
a man whom they had all been taught to regard as the most un-
Beargardenish of men. But he was especially anxious to make things
pleasant for his father.

'What shall I order?' said the son as he took the Duke into a
dressing-room to wash his hands. The Duke suggested that anything
sufficient for his son would certainly be sufficient for him.

Nothing especial occurred during the dinner, which the Duke
appeared to enjoy very much. 'Yes; I think it is a very good
soup,' he said. 'I don't think they ever give me any soup at
home.'  Then the son expressed his opinion that unless his father
looked about rather more sharply, 'they' very soon would provide
no dinner at all, remarking that experience had taught him that
the less people demanded the more they were 'sat upon'. The Duke
did like his dinner,--or rather he liked the feeling that he was
dining with his son. A report that the Duke of Omnium was with
Lord Silverbridge soon went round the room, and they who were
justified by some previous acquaintance came up to greet him. To
all who did so he was very gracious, and was specially so to Lord
Popplecourt, who happened to pass close by the table.

'I think he is a fool,' whispered Silverbridge as soon as
Popplecourt had passed.

'What makes you thinks so?'

'We thought him an ass at Eton.'

'He has done pretty well however.'

'Oh yes, in a way.'

'Somebody has told me that he is careful about his property.'

'I believe he is all that,' said Silverbridge.

'Then I don't see why you should think him a fool.'

To this Silverbridge made no reply; partly because he had nothing
to say,--but hindered also by the coming in of Tregear. This was an
accident, the possibility of which had not crossed him.
Unfortunately too the Duke's back was turned, so that Tregear, as
he walked up the room, could not see who was sitting at his
friend's table. Tregear coming up stood close to the Duke's elbow
before he recognised the man, and spoke some word or two to
Silverbridge. 'How do you do, Mr Tregear,' said the Duke, turning
round.

'Oh, my Lord. I did not know that it was you.'

'You hardly would. I am quite a stranger here. Silverbridge and I
came up from the House together, and he has been hospitable enough
to give me a dinner. I will tell you an odd thing for a London
man, Mr Tregear. I have not dined at a London club for fifteen
years before this.'

'I hope you like it, sir,' said Silverbridge.

'Very much indeed. Good-evening, Mr Tregear. I suppose you have to
go to dinner now.'

Then they went into one of the rooms upstairs to have coffee, the
son declining to go into the smoking-room, and assuring his father
that he did not in the least care about a cigar after dinner. 'You
would be smothered, sir.'  The Duke did as he was bidden and went
upstairs. There was in truth a strong reason for avoiding the
publicity of the smoking-room. When bringing his father to the
club he had thought nothing about Tregear but he had thought about
Tifto. As he entered he had seen Tifto at a table dining alone,
and had bobbed his head at him. Then he had taken the Duke to the
further end of the room, and had trusted that fear would keep the
major in his place. Fear had kept the Major in his place. When the
Major learned who the stranger was, he had become silent and
reserved. Before the father and son had finished their dinner,
Tifto had gone to his cigar; and so the danger was over.

'By George, there's Silverbridge has got his governor to dinner,'
said Tifto, standing in the middle of the room, and looking round
as though he were announcing some confusion of the heavens and
earth.

'Why shouldn't Silverbridge have his father to dine with him?'
asked Mr Lupton.

'I believe I know Silverbridge as well as any man, and by George
it is the very last thing of the kind that I should have expected.
There have been no end of quarrels.'

'There has been no quarrel at all,' said Tregear, who had just
then entered the room. 'Nothing on earth would make Silverbridge
quarrel with his father, and I think it would break the Duke's
heart to quarrel with his son.'  Tifto endeavoured to argue the
matter out, but Tregear having made the assertion on behalf of his
friend would not allow himself to be enticed into further speech.
 Nevertheless there was a good deal said by others during which
the Major drank two glasses of whisky-and-water. In the dining-
room he had been struck with awe by the Duke's presence, and had
certainly no idea of presenting himself personally to the great
man. But Bacchus lent him aid, and when the discussion was over
and the whisky had been swallowed, it occurred to him that he
would go upstairs and ask to be introduced.

In the meantime the Duke and his son were seated in close
conversation on one of the upstairs sofas. It was a rule at the
Beargarden that men might smoke all over the house except in the
dining-room;--but there was one small chamber called the library,
in which the practice was not often followed. The room was
generally deserted, and at this moment the father and son were the
only occupants. 'A club,' said the Duke, as he sipped his coffee,
'is a comfortable and economical residence. A man gets what he
wants well-served, and gets it cheap. But it has its drawbacks.'

'You always see the same fellows,' said Silverbridge.

'A man who lives much at a club is apt to fall into a selfish mode
of life. He is taught to think that his own comfort should always
be the first object. A man can never be happy unless his first
objects are outside himself. Personal self-indulgence begets a
sense of meanness which sticks to a man even when he has got
beyond all hope of rescue. It is for that reason;--among others,--
that marriage is so desirable.'

'A man should marry, I suppose.'

'Unless a man has on his shoulders the burden of a wife and
children he should, I think, feel that he has shirked out of
school. He is not doing his share of the work of the
Commonwealth.'

'Pitt was not married, sir.'

'No;--and a great many other good men have remained unmarried. Do
you mean to be another Pitt?'

'I don't intend to be Prime Minister.'

'I would not recommend you to entertain that ambition. Pitt
perhaps hardly had time for marriage. You may be more lucky.'

'I suppose I shall marry some day.'

'I should be glad to see you marry early,' said the Duke, speaking
in a low voice, almost solemnly, but in his quietest, sweetest ton
of voice. 'You are peculiarly situated. Though as yet you are only
the heir to the property and honours of our family, still, were
you married, almost everything would be at your disposal. There is
so much I should only be ready to give up to you!'

'I can't bear to hear you talking of giving up anything,' said
Silverbridge energetically.

Then the father looked round the room furtively, and seeing that
the door was shut, and that they were assuredly alone, he put out
his hand and gently stroked the young man's hair. It was almost a
caress,--as though he would have said to himself, 'Were he my
daughter, I would kiss him.' 'There is much I would fain give up,'
he said. 'If you were a married man the house in Carlton Terrace
would be fitter for you than for me. I have disqualified myself
for taking that part in society which should be filled by the head
of our family. You who have inherited so much from your mother
would, if you married pleasantly, do all that right well.'  He
paused for a moment and then asked a straightforward question,
very quickly--'You have never thought of anyone yet, I suppose?'

Silverbridge had thought very much of somebody. He was quite aware
that he had almost made an offer to Lady Mabel. She certainly had
not given him any encouragement; but the very fact that she had
not done so allured him all the more. He did believe that he was
thoroughly in love with Lady Mabel. She had told him that he was
too young,--but he was older than Lady Mab herself by a week. She
was beautiful;--that was certain. It was acknowledged by all that
she was clever. As for blood, of which he believed his father
thought much, there was perhaps none better in England. He had
heard it said of her,--as he now well remembered, in his father's
presence,--that she had behaved remarkably well in trying
circumstances. She had no fortune;--everybody knew that; but then
he did not want fortune. Would not this be a good opportunity for
breaking the matter to his father? 'You have never thought of any
one?' asked the Duke,--again very sweetly, very softly.

'But I have!' Lord Silverbridge as he made the announcement
blushed up to the eyes.

Then there came over the father something almost of fear. If he
was to be told, how would it be if he could not approve? 'Yes I
have,' said Silverbridge, recovering himself. 'If you wish it, I
will tell you who it is.'

'Nay, my boy;--as to that consult your own feelings. Are you sure
of yourself?'

'Oh, yes.'

'Have you spoken to her?'

'Well;--yes in part. She has not accepted me, if you mean that.
Rather the contrary.'

Now the Duke would have been very unwilling to say that his son
would certainly be accepted by any girl in England to whom he
might choose to offer his hand. But when the idea of a doubt was
suggested to him, it did seem odd that his son should ask in vain.
What other young man was there who could offer so much, and who
was at the same time so likely to be loved for his own sake? He
smiled however and was silent. 'I suppose I may as well out with
it,' said Silverbridge. 'You know Lady Mabel Grex?'

'Lady Mabel Grex. Yes,--I know her.'

'Is there any objection?'

'Is she not your senior?'

'No, sir; she is younger than I am.'

'Her father is not a man I esteem.'

'But she has always been so good!'  Then the Duke was again
silent. 'Have you not heard that, sir?'

'I think I have.'

'Is not that a great deal?'

'A very great deal. To be good must of all qualities be the best.
She is very beautiful.'

'I think so, sir. Of course she has no money.'

'It is not needed. It is not needed. I have no objection to make.
If you are sure of your own mind--'

'I am quite sure of that, sir.'

'Then I will raise no objection. Lady Mabel Grex! Her father, I
fear, is not a worthy man. I hear that he is a gambler.'

'He is so poor!'

'That makes it worse, Silverbridge. A man who gambles because he
has money that he can afford to lose is, to my thinking, a fool.
But he who gambles because he has none, is--well, let us hope the
best of him. You may give her my love.'

'She has not accepted me.'

'But should she do so, you may.'

'She almost rejected me. But I am not sure that she was in
earnest, and I mean to try again.'  Just at that moment the door
was opened and Major Tifto walked into the room.



CHAPTER 27

Major Tifto and the Duke

'I beg your pardon, Silverbridge,' said the Major, entering the
room, 'but I was looking for Longstaff.'

'He isn't here,' said Silverbridge, who did not wish to be
interrupted by his racing friend.

'Your father, I believe?' said Tifto. He was red in the face but
was in other respects perhaps improved in appearance by his
liquor. In his more sober moments he was not always able to assume
that appearance of equality with his companions which it was the
ambition of his soul to achieve. But a second glass of whisky-and-
water would always enable him to cock his tail and bark before the
company with all the courage of my lady's pug. 'Would you do me
the great honour to introduce me to his Grace?'

Silverbridge was not prone to turn his back upon a friend because
he was low in the world. He had begun to understand that he had
made a mistake by connecting himself with the Major, but at the
club he always defended his partner. Though he not infrequently
found himself obliged to snub the Major himself, he always
countenanced the little Master of the Hounds, and was true to his
own idea of 'standing to a fellow'.  Nevertheless he did not wish
to introduce his friend to his father. The Duke saw it all at a
glance, and felt that the introduction should be made. 'Perhaps,'
said he, getting up from his chair, 'this is Major Tifto.'

'Yes;--my Lord Duke. I am Major Tifto.'

The Duke bowed graciously. 'My father and I were engaged about
private matters.'

'I beg ten thousand pardons,' exclaimed the Major. 'I did not
intend to intrude.'

'I think we had done,' said the Duke. 'Pray sit down, Major
Tifto.'  The Major sat down. 'Though now I bethink myself, I have
to beg your pardon;--that I a stranger should ask you to sit down
in your own club.'

'Don't mention it, my Lord Duke.'

'I am so unused to clubs, that I forgot where I was.'

'Quite so, my Lord Duke. I hope you think that Silverbridge is
looking well?'

'Yes;--yes. I think so.' Silverbridge bit his lips, and turned his
face away to the door.

'We didn't make a very good thing of our Derby nag the other day.
Perhaps your Grace has heard all that?'

'I did hear that the horse in which you are both interested had
failed to win the race.'

'Yes, he did. The Prime Minister, we call him, your Grace,--out of
compliment to a certain Ministry which I wish was going on today
instead of the seedy lot we've got in. I think, my Lord Duke, that
any one you ask may tell you that I know what running is. Well;--I
can assure you,--your Grace, that is,--that since I've seen 'orses
I've never seen a 'orse fitter than him. When he got his canter
that morning, it was nearly even betting. Not that I or
Silverbridge were fools enough to put on anything at any rate. But
I never saw a 'orse so bad ridden. I don't mean to say anything,
my Lord Duke, against the man. But if that fellow hadn't been
squared, or else wasn't drunk, or else off his head, that 'orse
must have won,--my Lord Duke.'

'I do not know anything about racing, Major Tifto.'

'I suppose not, your Grace. But as I and Silverbridge are together
in this matter I thought I'd just let your Grace know that we
ought to have had a very good thing. I thought that perhaps your
Grace might like to know that.'

'Tifto, you are making an ass of yourself,' said Silverbridge.

'Making an ass of myself!' exclaimed the Major.

'Yes;--considerably.'

'I think you are a little hard upon your friend,' said the Duke,
with an attempt at a laugh. 'It is not to be supposed that he
should know how utterly indifferent I am to everything connected
with the turf.'

'I thought, my Lord Duke, you might care about learning how
Silverbridge was going on.'  This the poor little man said almost
with a whine. His partner's roughness had knocked out of him
nearly all the courage which Bacchus had given him.

'So I do; anything that interests him, interests me. But perhaps
of all his pursuits racing is the one to which I am least able to
lend an attentive ear. That every horse has a head, and that all
did have tails till they were ill-used, is the extent of my stable
knowledge.'

'Very good indeed, my Lord Duke, very good indeed! Ha, ha, ha!-all
horses have heads, and all have tails! Heads and tails. Upon my
word that is the best thing I have heard for a long time. I will
do myself the honour of wishing your Grace good-night. By-bye,
Silverbridge.'  Then he left the room, having been made supremely
happy by what he considered to have been the Duke's joke.
Nevertheless he would remember the snubbing and would be even with
Silverbridge some day. Did Lord Silverbridge think that he was
going to look after his Lordship's 'orses, and do this always on
the square, and then be snubbed for doing it!

'I am very sorry that he should have come in to trouble you,' said
the son.

'He has not troubled me much. I do not know whether he has
troubled you. If you are coming down to the House again I will
walk with you.'  Silverbridge of course had to go down to the
House again, and they started together. 'That man did not trouble
me Silverbridge; but the question is whether such an acquaintance
must not be troublesome to you.'

'I'm not very proud of him, sir.'

'But I think one ought to be proud of one's friends.'

'He isn't my friend in that way at all.'

'In what way then?'

'He understands racing.'

'He is the partner of your pleasure then;--the man whose society
you love to enjoy the recreation of the racecourse.'

'It is, sir, because he understands it.'

'I thought that a gentleman on the turf would have a trainer for
that purpose;--not a companion. You mean to imply that you can save
money by leaguing yourself with Major Tifto.'

'No, sir,--indeed.'

'If you associate with him, not for pleasure, then it must surely
be for profit. That you should do the former would be to me
surprising that I must regard it as impossible. That you should do
the latter--is, I think, a reproach.'  This, he said, with no tone
of anger in his voice,--so gently that Silverbridge at first hardly
understood it. But gradually all that was meant came in upon him,
and he felt himself to be ashamed of himself.

'He is bad,' he said at last.

'Whether he is bad I will not say; but I am sure that you can gain
nothing by his companionship.'

'I will get rid of him,' said Silverbridge, after a considerable
pause. 'I cannot do so at once, but I will do it.'

'It will be better, I think.'

'Tregear has been telling me the same thing.'

'Is he objectionable to Mr Tregear?' asked the Duke.

'Oh yes. Tregear cannot bear him. You treated him a great deal
better than Tregear ever does.'

'I do not deny that he is entitled to be treated well;--but so also
is your groom. Let us say no more about him. And so it is to be
Mabel Grex?'

'I did not say so, sir. How can I answer for her? Only it was so
pleasant for me to know that you would approve if it should come
off.'

'Yes;--I will approve. When she has accepted you--'

'But I don't think she will.'

'If she should, tell her that I will go to her at once. It will be
much to have a new daughter;--very much that you should have a
wife. Where would she like to live?'

'Oh, sir, we haven't got as far as that.'

'I dare say not; I dare say not,' said the Duke. 'Gatherum is
always thought to be dull.'

'She wouldn't like Gatherum, I'm sure.'

'Have you asked her?'

'No, sir. But nobody likes Gatherum.'

'I suppose not. And yet, Silverbridge, what a sum of money it
cost!'

'I believe it did.'

'All vanity; and vexation of spirit!'

The Duke no doubt thinking of certain scenes passed at the great
house in question, which scenes had not been delightful to him.
'No, I don't suppose she would wish to live at Gatherum. The Horns
was given expressly by my uncle to your dear mother, and I should
like Mary to have the place.'

'Certainly.'

'You should live among your tenantry. I don't care so very much
for Matching.'

'It is the one place you do like, sir.'

'However, we can manage all that. Carlton Terrace I do not
particularly like; but it is a good house, and there you should
hang up your hat when in London. When it is settled, let me know
at once.'

'But if it should never be settled?'

'I will ask no questions; but if it be settled tell me.'  Then in
Palace Yard he was turning to go, but before he did so, he said
another word leaning on his son's shoulder. 'I do not think that
Mabel Grex and Major Tifto would do well together at all.'

'There shall be an end to that, sir.'

'God bless you my boy!' said the Duke.

Lord Silverbridge sat in the House,--or to speak more accurately,
in the smoking-room of the House--for about an hour thinking over
all that had passed between him and his father. He certainly had
not intended to say anything about Lady Mab, but on the spur of
the moment it had all come out. Now at any rate it was decided for
him that he must, in set terms, ask her to be his wife. The scene
which had just occurred had made him thoroughly sick of Major
Tifto. He must get rid of the Major, and there could be no way of
doing this at once so easy and so little open to observation as
marriage. If he were but once engaged to Mabel Grex the dismissal
of Tifto would be quite a matter of course. He would see Lady
Mabel again on the morrow and ask her in direct language to be his
wife.



CHAPTER 28

Mrs Montacute Jones's Garden-Party

It was known to all the world that Mrs Montacute Jones's first
great garden-party was to come off on Wednesday, the sixteenth of
June, at Roehampton. Mrs Montacute Jones, who lived in Grosvenor
Place and had a country house in Gloucestershire, and a place for
young men to shoot at in Scotland, also kept a suburban elysium in
Roehampton, in order that she might give two garden-parties every
year. When it is said that all these costly luxuries appertained
to Mrs Montacute Jones, it is to be understood that they did in
truth belong to Mr Jones, of whom nobody heard much. But of Mrs
Jones,--that is, Mrs Montacute Jones,--everybody heard a great deal.
She was an old lady who devoted her life to the amusement of--not
only her friends, but very many who were not her friends. No doubt
she was fond of Lords and Countesses, and worked very hard to get
round her all the rank and fashion of the day. It must be
acknowledged that she was a worldly old woman. But no more good-
natured old woman lived in London, and everybody liked to be asked
to her garden-parties. On this occasion there was to be a
considerable infusion of royal blood,--German, Belgian, French,
Spanish, and of native growth. Everybody, who was asked would go,
and everybody had been asked,--who was anybody. Lord Silverbridge
had been asked, and Lord Silverbridge intended to be there. Lady
Mary his sister, could even be asked, because her mother was
hardly more than three months dead; but it is understood in the
world that women mourn longer than men.

Silverbridge had mounted a private hansom cab in which he could be
taken about rapidly,--and, as he said himself, without being shut
up in a coffin. In this vehicle he had himself taken to
Roehampton, purporting to kill two birds with one stone. He had
not as yet seen his sister since she had been with Lady Cantrip.
He would on this day come back by the Horns.

He was well aware that Lady Mab would be at the garden-party. What
place could be better for putting the question he had to ask! He
was by no means so confident as the heir to so many good things
might perhaps have been without overdue self-confidence.

Entering through the house into the lawn he encountered Mrs
Montacute Jones, who, with a seat behind her on the terrace,
surrounded by flowers, was going through the immense labour of
receiving her guests.

'How very good of you to come all this way, Lord Silverbridge, to
eat my strawberries.'

'How very good of you to ask me!  I did not come to eat your
strawberries but to see your friends.'

'You ought to have said you came to see me, you know. Have you met
Miss Boncassen yet?'

'The American beauty? No.  Is she here?'

'Yes; and she particularly wants to be introduced to you; you
won't betray me, will you?'

'Certainly not; I am true as steel.'

'She wanted, she said, to see if the eldest son of the Duke of
Omnium really did look like any other man.'

'Then I don't want to see her,' said Silverbridge, with a look of
vexation.

'There you are wrong, for there was a real downright fun in the
way she said it. There they are, and I shall introduce you.'  Then
Mrs Montacute Jones absolutely left her post for a minute or two,
and taking the young lord down the steps of the terrace did
introduce him to Mr Boncassen, who was standing there amidst a
crowd, and to Miss Boncassen.

Mr Boncassen was an American who had lately arrived in England
with the object of carrying out certain literary pursuits in which
he was engaged within the British Museum. He was an American who
had nothing to do with politics and nothing to do with trade.  He
was a man of wealth and a man of letters. And he had a daughter
who was said to be the prettiest young woman either in Europe or
America at the present time.

Isabel Boncassen was certainly a very pretty girl. I wish that my
reader would believe my simple assurance. But no such simple
assurance was ever believed, and I doubt even whether any
description will procure for me from the reader that amount of
faith which I desire to achieve. But I must make the attempt.
General opinion generally considered Miss Boncassen to be small,
but she was in truth something above the average height of English
women. She was slight, without that look of slimness which is
common to girls, and especially to American girls. That her figure
was perfect the reader may believe my word, as any detailed
description of her arms, feet, bust, and waist, would be
altogether ineffective. Her hair was dark brown and plentiful; but
it added but little to her charms, which depended on other
matters. Perhaps what struck the beholder first was the excessive
brilliancy of her complexion. No pink was every pinker, no
alabaster whiteness was ever more like alabaster; but under and
around and through it all there was a constant changing hue which
gave a vitality to her countenance which no fixed colours can
produce. Her eyes, too, were full of life and brilliancy, and even
when she was silent her mouth would speak. Nor was there a fault
within the oval of her face upon which the hypercritics of mature
age could set a finger. Her teeth were excellent both in form and
colour, but were seen seldom. Who does not know that look of
ubiquitous ivory produced by teeth which are too perfect in a face
which is otherwise poor?  Her nose at the base spread a little,--so
that it was not purely Grecian. But who has ever seen a nose to be
eloquent and expressive, which did not spread?  It was, I think,
the vitality of her countenance,--the way in which she could speak
with every feature, the command which she had of pathos, of
humour, of sympathy, of satire, the assurance which she gave by
every glance of her eye, every elevation of her brow, every curl
of her lip, that she was alive to all that was going on,--it was
all this rather than those feminine charms which can be catalogued
and labelled that made all acknowledge that she was beautiful.

'Lord Silverbridge,' said Mr Boncassen, speaking a little through
his nose, 'I am proud to make your acquaintance, sir. Your father
is a man for whom we in our country have a great respect. I think,
sir, you must be proud of such a father.'

'Oh yes,--no doubt,' said Silverbridge awkwardly. Then Mr Boncassen
continued his discourse with the gentlemen around him. Upon this
our friend turned to the young lady. 'Have you been long in
England, Miss Boncassen?'

'Long enough to have heard about you and your father,' she said,
speaking with no slightest twang.

'I hope you have not heard evil of me.'

'Well!'

'I'm sure you can't have heard much good.'

'I know you didn't win the Derby.'

'You've been long enough to hear that.'

'Do you suppose we don't interest ourselves about the Derby in New
York? Why, when we arrived at Queenstown I was leaning over the
taffrail so that I might ask the first man on board the tender
whether the Prime Minister had won.'

'And he said he hadn't.'

'I can't conceive why you of all men should call your horse by
such a name. If my father had been President of the United States,
I don't think I'd call a horse President.'

'I didn't name the horse.'

'I'd have changed it. But is it not very impudent of me to be
finding fault with you the first time I have ever met you?  Shall
you have a horse at Ascot?'

'There will be something going, I suppose. Nothing that I care
about.'  Lord Silverbridge had made up his mind that he would not
go to the races with Tifto before the Leger. The Leger would be an
affair of such moment as to demand his presence. After that should
come the complete rupture between him and Tifto.

Then there was movement among the elders, and Lord Silverbridge
soon found himself walking alone with Miss Boncassen. It seemed to
her to be quite natural to do so, and there certainly was no
reason why he should decline anything so pleasant. It was thus
that he had intended to walk with Mabel Grex;--only as yet he had
not found her. 'Oh, yes,' said Miss Boncassen, when they had been
together about twenty minutes; 'we shall be here all the summer,
and the fall, and all the winter. Indeed father means to read
every book in the British Museum before he goes back.'

'He'll have something to do.'

'He reads by steam, and he has two or three young men with him to
take it all down and make other books out of it;--just as you'll
see a lady take a lace shawl and turn it all about till she has
trimmed a petticoat with it. It is the same lace all through,--and
so I tell father it's the same knowledge.'

'But he puts it where more people will find it.'

'The lady endeavours to do the same with the lace. That depends on
whether people look up or down. Father however is a very learned
man. You mustn't suppose that I am laughing at him. He is going to
write a very learned book. Only everybody will be dead before it
can be half finished.'  They still went on together, and then he
gave her his arm and took her into the place where the
strawberries and cream were prepared. As he was going in he saw
Mabel Grex walking with Tregear, and she bowed to him pleasantly
and playfully. 'Is that lady a great friend of yours?' asked Miss
Boncassen.

'A very great friend indeed.'

'She is very beautiful.'

'And clever as well,--and good as gold.'

'Dear me!  Do tell me who it is that owns all these qualities.'

'Lady Mabel Grex. She is daughter of Lord Grex. That man with her
is my particular friend. His name is Frank Tregear, and they are
cousins.'

'I am so glad they are cousins.'

'Why glad?'

'Because his being with her won't make you unhappy.'

'Supposing I was in love with her,--which I am not,--do you suppose
it would make me jealous to see her with another man?'

'In our country it would not. A young lady may walk about with a
young gentleman just as she might with another young lady; but I
thought it was different here. Do you know, by judging English
ways, I believe I am behaving very improperly in walking about
with you so long. Ought I not to tell you to go away?'

'Pray do not.'

'As I am going to stay here so long I wish to behave well in
English eyes.'

'People know who you are, and discount all that.'

'If the difference be very marked they do. For instance, I needn't
wear a hideous long bit of cloth over my face in Constantinople
because I am a woman. But when the discrepancies are small, then
they have to be attended to. So I shan't walk about with you any
more.'

'Oh yes you will,' said Silverbridge, who began to think that he
liked walking about with Miss Boncassen.

'Certainly not. There is Mr Sprottle. He is father's Secretary. He
will take me back.'

'Can not I take you back as well as Mr Sprottle?'

'Indeed no;--I am not going to monopolise such a man as you. Do you
think that I don't understand that everybody will be making
remarks upon that American girl who won't leave the son of the
Duke of Omnium alone?  There is your particular friend Lady Mabel,
and here is my particular friend Mr Sprottle.'

'May I come and call?'

'Certainly. Father will only be too proud,--and I shall be prouder.
Mother will be the proudest of all. Mother very seldom goes out.
Till we get a house we are at The Langham. Thank you, Mr Sprottle.
I think we'll go and find father.'

Lord Silverbridge found himself close to Lady Mabel and Tregear,
and also to Miss Cassewary, who had now joined Lady Mabel. He had
been much struck with the American beauty, but was not on that
account the less anxious to carry out his great plan. It was
essentially necessary that he should do so at once, because the
matter had been settled between him and his father. He was anxious
to assure her that if she would consent, then the Duke would be
ready to pour out all kinds of paternal blessings on their heads.
'Come and take a turn among the haycocks,' he said.

'Frank declares,' said Lady Mabel, 'that the hay is hired for the
occasion. I wonder whether that is true?'

'Anybody can see,' said Tregear, 'that it has not been cut off the
grass it stands upon.'

'If I could find Mrs Montacute Jones I'd ask her where she got
it,' said Lady Mabel.

'Are you coming?' asked Silverbridge impatiently.

'I don't think I am. I have been walking round the haycocks till I
am tired of them.'

'Anywhere else then?'

'There isn't anywhere else. What have you done with your American
beauty? The truth is, Lord Silverbridge, you ask me for my company
when she won't give you hers any longer. Doesn't it look like it,
Miss Cassewary?'

'I don't think Lord Silverbridge is the man to forget an old
friend for a new one.'

'Not though the new friend be as lovely as Miss Boncassen?'

'I don't know that I ever saw a prettier girl,' said Tregear.

'I quite admit it,' said Lady Mabel. 'But that is no salve for my
injured feelings. I have heard so much talk about Miss Boncassen's
beauty for the last week, that I mean to get up a company of
British females, limited, for the express purpose of putting her
down. Who is Miss Boncassen that we are all to be put on one side
for her?'

Of course he knew that she was joking, but he hardly knew how to
take her joke. There is a manner of joking which carries with it
much serious intention. He did feel that Lady Mabel was not
gracious to him because he had spent half an hour with this new
beauty, and he was half inclined to be angry with her. Was it
fitting that she should be cross with him, seeing that he was
resolved to throw at her feet all the good things that he had in
the world? 'Bother Miss Boncassen,' he said; 'you might as well
come and take a turn with a fellow.'

'Come along, Miss Cassewary,' said she. 'We will go around the
haycocks yet once again.'  So they turned and the two ladies
accompanied Lord Silverbridge.

But this was not what he wanted. He could not say what he had to
say in the presence of Miss Cassewary,--nor could he ask her to
take herself off in another direction. Nor could he take himself
off. Now that he had joined himself to these two ladies he must
make with them the tour of the gardens. All this made him cross.
'These kind of things are a great bore,' he said.

'I dare say you would rather be in the House of Commons;--or,
better still, at the Beargarden.'

'You mean to be ill-natured when you say that, Lady Mab.'

'You ask me to come and walk with you, and then you tell us that
we are bores!'

'I did nothing of the kind.'

'I should have thought that you would be particularly pleased with
yourself for coming here today, seeing that you have made Miss
Boncassen's acquaintance. To be allowed to walk half and hour
alone with the acknowledged beauty of the two hemispheres ought to
be enough even for Lord Silverbridge.'

'That is nonsense, Lady Mab.'

'Nothing give so much zest to admiration as novelty. A republican
charmer must be exciting after all the blasees habituees of the
London drawing-room.'

'How can you talk such nonsense, Mabel?' said Miss Cassewary.

'But it is so. I feel that people must be sick of seeing me. I
know I am very often sick of seeing them. Here is something
fresh,--and not only unlike, but so much more lovely. I quite
acknowledge that I may be jealous, but no one can say that I am
spiteful. I wish that some republican Adonis or Apollo would crop
up,--so that we might have our turn. But I don't think the
republican gentlemen are equal to the republican ladies. Do you,
Lord Silverbridge?

'I haven't thought about it.'

'Mr Sprottle for instance.'

'I have not the pleasure of knowing Mr Sprottle.'

'Now we've been around the haycocks, and really, Lord
Silverbridge, I don't think we have gained much by it. Those
forced marches never do any good.'  And so they parted.

He was thinking with a bitter spirit of the ill-result of the
morning's work when he again found himself close to Miss barbarian
in the crowd of departing people on the terrace. 'Mind you keep
your word,' she said. And then she turned to her father, 'Lord
Silverbridge has promised to call.'

'Mrs Boncassen will be delighted to make his acquaintance.'

He got into his cab and was driven off before Richmond. As he went
he began to think of the two young women with whom he had passed
his morning. Mabel had certainly behaved badly to him. Even if she
suspected nothing of his object, did she not owe it to their
friendship to be more courteous to him than she had been? And if
she suspected that object, should she not at any rate given him
that opportunity?

Or could it be that she was really jealous of the American girl?
No;--that idea he rejected instantly. It was not compatible with
the innate modesty of his disposition. But no doubt the American
girl was very lovely. Merely as a thing to be looked at she was
superior to Mabel. He did feel that as to mere personal beauty she
was in truth superior to anything he had ever seen before. And she
was clever too;--and good-humoured;--whereas Mabel had been both
ill-natured and unpleasant.



CHAPTER 29

The Lovers Meet

Lord Silverbridge found his sister alone. 'I particularly want
you,' said he, 'to come and call upon Lady Mabel Grex. She wishes
to know you, and I am sure you would like her.'

'But I haven't been out anywhere yet,' she said. 'I don't feel as
though I wanted to go anywhere.'

Nevertheless she was very anxious to know Lady Mabel Grex, of whom
she had heard much. A girl if she has had a former love passage
says nothing of it to her new lover; but a man is not so reticent.
Frank Tregear had perhaps not told her everything, but he had told
her something. 'I was very fond of her,--very fond of her,' he had
said. 'And so I am still,' he had added. 'As you are my love of
loves, she is my friend of friends.'  Lady Mary had been satisfied
by the assurance, but had become anxious to see the friend of
friends. She resisted at first her brother's entreaties. She felt
that her father in delivering her over to the seclusions of The
Horns had intended to preclude her from showing herself in London.
She was conscious that she was being treated with cruelty, and had
a certain pride in her martyrdom. She would obey her father to the
letter; she would give him no right to call her conduct in
question; but he and any other to whom he might entrust the care
of her, should be made to know that she thought him cruel. He had
his power to which she must submit. But she also had hers,--to
which it was possible he might be made to submit. 'I do not know
that papa would wish me to go,' she said.

'But it is just what he would wish. He thinks a good deal about
Mabel.'

'Why should he think of her at all?'

'I can't exactly explain,' said Silverbridge, 'but he does.'

'If you mean to tell me that Mabel Grex is anything particular to
you, and that papa approves of it, I will go round the world to
see her.'  But he had not meant to tell his this. The request had
been made at Lady Mabel's instance. When his sister had spoken of
her father's possible objection, then he had become eager in
explaining the Duke's feeling, not remembering that such anxiety
might betray himself. At that moment Lady Cantrip came in, and the
question was referred to her. She did not see any objection to
such a visit, and expressed her opinion that it would be a good
thing that Mary should be taken out. 'She should begin to go
somewhere,' said Lady Cantrip. And so it was decided. On the next
Friday he would come down early in his hansom and drive her up to
Belgrave Square. Then he would take her to Carlton Terrace, and
Lady Cantrip's carriage should pick her up there and bring her
home. He would arrange it all.

'What did you think of the American beauty?' asked Lady Cantrip
when that was settled.

'I thought she was a beauty.'

'So I perceived. You had eyes for nobody else,' said Lady Cantrip,
who had been at the garden-party.

'Somebody introduced her to me, and then I had to walk about the
grounds with her. That's the kind of thing one always does in
these places.'

'Just so. That is what "those places" are meant for, I suppose.
But it was not apparently a great infliction.'  Lord Silverbridge
had to explain that it was not an infliction;--that it was a
privilege, seeing that Miss Boncassen was both clever and lovely;
but that it did not mean anything in particular.

When he took his leave he asked his sister to go out into the
grounds with him for a moment. This she did almost unwillingly,
fearing that he was about to speak to her of Tregear. But he had
no such purpose on his mind. 'Of course you know,' he began, 'all
that was nonsense you were saying about Mabel.'

'I did not know.'

'I was afraid you might blurt out something before her.'

'I should not be so imprudent.'

'Girls do make such fools of themselves sometimes. They are always
thinking about people being in love. But it is the truth that my
father said to me the other day how very much he liked what he had
heard of her, and that he would like you to know her.'

On that same evening Silverbridge wrote from the Beargarden the
shortest possible note to Lady Mabel, telling her what he had
arranged. 'I and Mary propose to call in B. Square on Friday at
two. I must be early because of the House. You will give us lunch.
S.'  There was no word of endearment,--none of those ordinary words
which people who hate each other use to one another. But he
received the next day at home a much more kindly-written note from
her:

'DEAR LORD SILVERBRIDGE,

'You are so good!  You always do just what you think people
will like best. Nothing could please me so much as seeing your
sister, of whom of course I have heard very very much. There shall
be nobody here but Miss Cass.

'Yours most sincerely,
M.G.'

'How I do wish I were a man!' his sister said to him when they
were in the hansom together.

'You'd have a great deal more trouble.'

'But I'd have a hansom of my own, and go where I pleased. How
would you like to be shut up in a place like The Horn?'

'You can go out if you like.'

'Not like you. Papa thinks it's the proper place for me to live
in, and so I must live there. I don't think a woman ever chooses
how or where she shall live herself.'

'You are not going to take up woman's rights, I hope.'

'I think I shall if I stay at The Horns much longer. What would
papa say if he heard that I was going to give a lecture at the
Institute?'

'The governor has had so many things to bear that a trifle such as
that would make but little difference.'

'Poor papa!'

'He was dreadfully cut up about Gerald. And then he is so good! He
said more to me about Gerald than he ever did about my own little
misfortune at Oxford; but to Gerald himself he said almost
nothing. Now he has forgiven me because he thinks I am constant at
the House.'

'And are you?'

'Not so much as he thinks. I do go there,--for his sake. He has
been so good about my changing sides.'

'I think you were quite right there.'

'I am beginning to think I was quite wrong. What did it matter to
me?'

'I suppose it did make papa unhappy.'

'Of course it did;--and then this affair of yours.'  As soon as
this was said Lady Mary at once hardened her heart against her
father. Whether Silverbridge was or was not entitled to his own
political opinions,--seeing that the Pallisers had for ages been
known as staunch Whigs and Liberals,--might be a matter for
question. But that she had a right to her own lover she thought
there could be no question. As they were sitting in the cab he
could hardly see her face, but he was aware that she was in some
fashion arming herself against opposition.  'I am sure that this
makes him very unhappy,' continued Silverbridge.

'It cannot be altered,' she said.

'It will have to be altered.'

'Nothing can alter it. He might die, indeed;--or so might I.'

'Or he might see that it is no good,--and change his mind,'
suggested Silverbridge.

'Of course that is possible,' said Lady Mary very curtly,--showing
plainly by her manner that the subject was one which she did not
choose to discuss any further.

'It is very good of you to come to me,' said Lady Mabel, kissing
her new acquaintance. 'I have heard so much about you.'

'And I also of you.'

'I, you know, am one of your brother's stern Mentors. There are
three or four of us determined to make him a pattern young
legislator. Miss Cassewary is another. Only she is not quite so
stern as I am.'

'He ought to be very much obliged.'

'But he is not;--not a bit. Are you, Lord Silverbridge?'

'Not so much as I ought to be, perhaps.'

'Of course there is an opposing force. There are the race-horses,
and the drag, and Major Tifto. No doubt you have heard of Major
Tifto. The Major is the Mr Worldly-Wise-man who won't let
Christian go to the Straight Gate. I am afraid he hasn't read his
Pilgrim's Progress. But we shall prevail, Lady Mary, and he will
get to the beautiful city at last.'

'What is the beautiful city?' he asked.

'A seat in the Cabinet, I suppose;--or that general respect which a
young nobleman achieves when he shows himself able to sit on a
bench for six consecutive hours without appearing to go to sleep.'

Then they went to lunch, and Lady Mary found herself to be happy
with her new acquaintance. Her life since her mother's death had
been so sad, that this short escape from it was a relief to her.
Now for awhile she found herself almost gay. There was an easy
liveliness about Lady Mabel,--a grain of humour and playfulness
conjoined,--which made her feel at home at once. And it seemed to
her as though her brother was at home. He called the girl Lady
Mab, and Queen Mab, and once plain Mabel, and the old woman he
called Miss Cass. It surely, she thought, must be the case that
Lady Mabel and her brother were engaged.

'Come upstairs into my own room,--it is nicer than this,' said Lady
Mabel, and they went from the dining-room into a pretty little
sitting-room with which Silverbridge was very well acquainted.
'Have you heard of Miss Boncassen?' Mary said she had heard
something of Miss Boncassen's great beauty. 'Everybody is talking
about her. Your brother met at Mrs Montacute Jones's garden-party,
and was made a conquest of instantly.'

'I wasn't made a conquest of at all,' said Silverbridge.

'Then he ought to have been made a conquest of. I should be if I
were a man. I think she is the loveliest person to look at and the
nicest person to listen to that I ever came across. We all feel
that, as far as this season is concerned, we are cut out. But we
don't mind it so much because she is a foreigner.'  Then just as
she said this the door was opened and Frank Tregear was announced.

Everybody present there knew as well as does the reader, what was
the connection between Tregear and Lady Mary Palliser.  And each
knew that the other knew it. It was therefore impossible for them
not to feel themselves guilty among themselves. The two lovers had
not seen each other since they had been together in Italy. Now
they were brought face to face in this unexpected manner!  And
nobody except Tregear was at first quite sure whether somebody had
done something to arrange the meeting. Mary might naturally
suspect that Lady Mabel had done this in the interest of her
friend Tregear, and Silverbridge could not but suspect that it was
so. Lady Mabel, who had never before met the other girl, could
hardly refrain from thinking that there had been some underhand
communication,--and Miss Cassewary was clearly of the opinion that
there had been some understanding.

Silverbridge was the first to speak. 'Halloo, Tregear, I didn't
know that we were to see you.'

'Nor I, that I should see you,' said he. Then of course there was
a shaking of hands all round, in the course of which ceremony he
came to Mary the last. She gave him her hand, but had not a word
to say to him. 'If I had known that you were here,' he said, 'I
should not have come; but I need hardly say how glad I am to see
you,--even in this way.'  Then the two girls were convinced that
the meeting was accidental; but Miss Cass still had her doubts.

Conversation became at once very difficult. Tregear seated himself
near, but not very near, to Lady Mary, and made some attempt to
talk to both the girls at once. Lady Mabel plainly showed that she
was not at her ease;--whereas Mary seemed to be stricken dumb by
the presence of her lover.  Silverbridge was so much annoyed by a
feeling that this interview was a treason to his father, that he
sat cudgelling his brain to think how he should bring it to an
end. Miss Cassewary was dumb-founded by the occasion. She was the
one elder in the company who ought to see that no wrong was
committed. She was not directly responsible to the Duke of Omnium,
but she was thoroughly permeated by a feeling that it was her duty
to take care that there should be no clandestine love meetings in
Lord Grex's house. At last Silverbridge jumped up from his chair.
'Upon my word, Tregear, I think you had better go,' said he.

'So do I,' said Miss Cassewary. 'If it is an accident--'

'Of course it is an accident,' said Tregear angrily,--looking round
at Mary, who blushed up to her eyes.

'I did not mean to doubt it,' said the old lady. 'But as it has
occurred, Mabel, don't you think that he had better go?'

'He won't bite anybody, Miss Cass.'

'Certainly not,' said Mary, speaking for the first time. 'But now
he is here--' Then she stopped herself, rose from the sofa, sat
down, and then rising again, stepped up to her lover,--who rose at
the same moment,--and threw herself into his arms and put up her
lips to be kissed.

'This won't do at all,' said Silverbridge. Miss Cassewary clasped
her hands together and looked up to heaven. She probably had never
seen such a thing done before. Lady Mabel's eyes were filled with
tears, and though in all this there was much to cause her anguish,
still in her heart of hearts, she admired the brave girl who could
thus show her truth to her lover.

'Now go,' said Mary, through her sobs.

'Now own one,' ejaculated Tregear.

'Yes, yes, yes; always your own. Go,--go, go.'  She was weeping and
sobbing as she said this, and hiding her face with her
handkerchief. He stood for a moment irresolute, and then left the
room without a word of adieu to anyone.

'You have behaved very badly,' said the brother.

'She has behaved like an angel,' said Mabel, throwing her arms
round Mary, as she spoke, 'like an angel. If there had been a girl
whom you loved and who loved you, would you have not wished it?
Would you not have worshipped her for showing that she was not
ashamed of her love?'

'I am not a bit ashamed,' said Mary.

'And I say you have no cause. No one knows him like I do. How good
he is, and how worthy!'  Immediately after that Silverbridge took
his sister away, and Lady Mabel, escaping from Miss Cass was
alone. 'She loves him almost as I have loved him,' she said to
herself. 'I wonder whether he can love her as he did me?'



CHAPTER 30

What Came of the Meeting

Not a word was said in the cab as Lord Silverbridge took his
sister to Carlton Terrace, and he leaving her without any
reference to the scene which had taken place, when an idea struck
him that this would be cruel. 'Mary,' he said, 'I was very sorry
for all that.'

'It was not my doing.'

'I suppose it was nobody's doing. But I am very sorry that it
occurred. I think you should have controlled yourself.'

'No!' she almost shouted.

'I think so.'

'No;--if you mean by controlling myself, holding my tongue. He is
the man I love,--whom I have promised to marry.'

'But, Mary,--do ladies generally embrace their lovers in public?'

'No;--nor should I. I never did such a thing in my life before. But
as he was there I had to show that I was not ashamed of him!  Do
you think I should have done it if you all had not been there?'
Then again she burst into tears.

He did not know quite what to make of it. Mabel Grex had declared
that she had behaved like an angel. But yet, as he thought of what
he had seen, he shuddered with vexation. 'I was thinking of the
governor.'

'He shall be told everything.'

'That you met Tregear?'

'Certainly; and that I--kissed him. I will do nothing that I am
ashamed to tell everybody.'

'He will be very angry.'

'I cannot help it. He should not treat me as he is doing. Mr
Tregear is a gentleman. Why did he let him come? Why you bring
him? But it is of no use. The thing is settled. Papa can break my
heart, but he cannot make me say that I am not engaged to Mr
Tregear.'

On that night Mary told the whole of her story to Lady Cantrip.
There was nothing she tried to conceal. 'I got up,' she said, 'and
threw my arms round him. Is he not all the world to me?'

'Had it been planned?' asked Lady Cantrip.

'No;--no! Nothing had been planned. They are cousins and very
intimate, and he goes there constantly. Now I want you to tell
papa all about it.'

Lady Cantrip began to think that it had been an evil day for her
when she had agreed to take charge of this very determined young
lady, but she consented to write to the Duke. As the girl was in
her hands she must take care not to lay herself open to
reproaches. As this objectionable lover had either contrived a
meeting, or had met her without contriving, it was necessary that
the Duke should be informed. 'I would rather you wrote the
letter,' said Lady Mary. 'But pray tell him that all along I have
meant him to know about it.'

Till Lady Cantrip seated herself at her writing-table she did not
know how great the difficulty would be. It cannot in any
circumstance be easy to write to a father of his daughter's love
for an objectionable lover; but the Duke's character added much to
the severity of the task. And then that embrace!  She knew that
the Duke would be struck with horror as he read of such a tale,
and she found herself almost struck with horror as she attempted
to write it. When she came to the point she found that she could
not write it. 'I fear there was a good deal of warmth shown on
both sides,' she said, feeling that she was calumniating the man,
as to whose warmth she had heard nothing. 'It is quite clear,' she
added, 'that this is not a passing fancy on her part.'

It was impossible that the Duke should be made to understand
exactly what had occurred. That Silverbridge had taken Mary he did
understand, and that they had together gone to Lord Grex's house.
He understood also that the meeting had taken place in the
presence of Silverbridge and Lady Mabel. 'No doubt it was all an
accident,' Lady Cantrip wrote. How could it be an accident?

'You had Mary up in town on Friday?' he said to his son on the
following Sunday morning.

'Yes, sir.'

'And that friend of yours came in?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Do you not know what my wishes are?'

'Certainly I do;--but I could not help his coming. You do not
suppose that anybody had planned it?'

'I hope not.'

'It was simply an accident. Such an accident as must occur over
and over again,--unless Mary is to be locked up.'

'Who talks of locking anybody up? What right have you to speak in
that way?'

'I only meant that of course they will stumble across each other
in London.'

'I think I will go abroad,' said the Duke. He was silent for
awhile, and then repeated his words. 'I think I will go abroad.'

'Not for long I hope, sir.'

'Yes;--to live there. Why should I stay here? What good can I do
here? Everything I see and everything I hear is a pain to me.'
The young man of course could not but go back in his mind to the
last interview which he had had with his father, when the Duke had
been so gracious and apparently so well pleased.

'Is there anything else wrong,--except about Mary?' Silverbridge
asked.

'I am told Gerald owes about fifteen hundred pounds at Cambridge.'

'So much as that!  I knew that he had a few horses there.'

'It is not the money, but the absence of principle,--that a young
man should have no feeling that he ought to live within certain
prescribed means!  Do you know what you have had from Mr Morton?'

'Not exactly, sir.'

'It is different with you. But a man, let him be who he may,
should live within certain means. As for your sister, I think she
will break my heart.'  Silverbridge found it impossible to say
anything in answer to this. 'Are you going to church?' asked the
Duke.

'I was not thinking of doing so particularly.'

'Do you not ever go?'

'Yes;--sometimes. I will go with you now, if you like it, sir.'

'I had thought of going, but my mind is too much harassed. I do
not see why you should not go.'

But Silverbridge, though he had been willing to sacrifice his
morning to his father,--for it was, I fear, in that way that he
looked at it,--did not see any reason for performing a duty which
his father himself omitted. And there were various matters also
which harassed him. On the previous evening, after dinner, he had
allowed himself to back the Prime Minister for the Leger to a very
serious amount. In fact he had plunged, and now stood to lose some
twenty thousand pounds on the doings of the last night. And he had
made these bets under the influence of Major Tifto. It was the
remembrance of this, after the promise he had made to his father,
that annoyed him the most. He was imbued with a feeling that it
behoved him as a man to 'pull himself together' as he would have
said himself, and to live in accordance with certain rules. He
could make the rules easily enough, but he had never yet succeeded
in keeping any one of them. He had determined to sever himself
from Tifto, and, in doing that, had intended to sever himself from
the affairs of the turf generally. This resolution was not yet a
week old. It was on that evening that he had resolved that Tifto
should no longer be his companion; and now he had to confess to
himself that because he had drunk three or four glasses of
champagne he had been induced by Tifto to make those wretched
bets.

And he had told his father that he intended to ask Mabel Grex to
be his wife. He had so committed himself that the offer must now
be made. He did not specially regret that, though he wished that
he had been more reticent. 'What a fool a man is to blurt out
everything!' he said to himself. A wife would be a good thing for
him; and where could he possibly find a better wife than Mabel
Grex? In beauty she was no doubt inferior to Miss Boncassen. There
was something about Miss Boncassen which made it impossible to
forget her. But Miss Boncassen was an American, and on many
accounts out of the question. It did not occur to him that he
would fall in love with Miss Boncassen for a few weeks. No doubt
there were objections to marriage. It clipped a fellow's wings.
But then, if he were married, he might be sure that Tifto would be
laid aside. It was a great thing to have got his father's assured
consent to a marriage. It meant complete independence in money
matters.

Then his mind ran away to a review of his father's affairs. It was
a genuine trouble to him that his father should be so unhappy. Of
all the griefs which weighed upon the Duke's mind, that in
reference to his sister was the heaviest. The money which Gerald
owed at Cambridge would be nothing if that sorrow could be
conquered. Nor had Tifto and his own extravagances caused the Duke
any incurable wounds. If Tregear could be got out of the way his
father, he thought, might be reconciled to other things. He felt
very tender-hearted about his father; but he had no remorse in
regard to his sister as he made up his mind that he would speak
very seriously to Tregear.

He had wandered into St James's Park, and had lighted by this time
half-a-dozen cigarettes one after another, as he sat on one of the
benches. He was a handsome youth, all but six feet high, with
light hair, with round blue eyes, and with all that aristocratic
look, which had belonged so peculiarly to the late Duke but which
was less conspicuous in the present head of the family. He was a
young man whom you would hardly pass in a crowd without
observing,--but of whom you would say, after due observation, that
he had not as yet put off all his childish ways. He now sat with
his legs stretched out, with his cane in his hands, looking down
upon the water. He was trying to think. He worked hard at
thinking. But the bench was hard, and, upon the whole, he was not
satisfied with his position. He had just made up his mind that he
would look up Tregear, when Tregear himself appeared on the path
before him.

'Tregear!' exclaimed Silverbridge.

'Silverbridge!' exclaimed Tregear.

'What on earth makes you walk about here on a Sunday morning?'

'What on earth makes you sit there? That I should walk here, which
I often do, does not seem to me odd. But that I should find you is
marvellous. Do you often come?'

'Never was here in my life before. I strolled because I had things
to think of.'

'Questions to be asked in Parliament? Notices of motions,
Amendments in Committee, and that kind of thing?'

'Go on, old fellow.'

'Or perhaps Major Tifto has made important revelations.'

'D--- Major Tifto.'

'With all my heart,' said Tregear.

'Sit down here,' said Silverbridge. 'As it happened, at the moment
when you came up I was thinking of you.'

'That was kind.'

'And I was determined to go to you. All this about my sister must
be given up.'

'Must be given up!'

'It can never lead to any good. I meant that there can never be a
marriage.'  Then he paused, but Tregear was determined to hear him
out. 'It is making my father so miserable that you would pity him
if you could see him.'

'I dare say I should. When I see people unhappy I always pity
them. What I would ask you to think of is this. If I were to
commission you to tell your sister that everything between us
should be given up, would not she be so unhappy that you would
have to pity her?'

'She would get over it.'

'And so will your father.'

'He has a right to have his own opinion on such a matter.'

'And so have I. And so has she. His rights in the matter are very
clear and very potential. I am quite ready to admit that we cannot
marry for many years to come, unless he will provide the money.
You are quite at liberty to tell him that I say so. I have no
right to ask your father for a penny, and I will never do so.  The
power is all in his hands. As far as I know my own purposes, I
shall not make any immediate attempt even to see her. We did meet,
as you saw, the other day, by the merest chance. After that, do
you think that your sister wishes me to give her up?'

'As for supposing that girls are to have what they wish, that is
nonsense.'

'For young men I suppose equally so. Life ought to be a life of
self-denial no doubt. Perhaps it might be my duty to retire from
this affair, if by doing so I should sacrifice only myself. The
one person of whom I am bound to think in this matter is the girl
I love.'

'That is just what she says about you.'

'I hope so.'

'In that way you support each other. If it were any other man
circumstanced just like you are, and any other girl placed like
Mary, you would be the first to say that the man was behaving
badly. I don't like to use hard language to you, but in such a
case you would be the first to say of another man--that he was
looking after the girl's money.'

Silverbridge as he said this looked forward steadfastly on to the
water, regretting much that cause for quarrel should have arisen,
but thinking that Tregear would find himself obliged to quarrel.
But Tregear, after a few moments' silence, having thought it out,
determined that he would not quarrel. 'I think I probably might,'
he said laying his hand on Silverbridge's arm. 'I think I perhaps
might express such an opinion.'

'Well then!'

'I have to examine myself, and find whether I am guilty of the
meanness which I might perhaps be too ready to impute to another.
I have done so, and I am quite sure that I am not drawn to your
sister by any desire for her money. I did not seek her because she
was a rich man's daughter, nor,--because she is a rich man's
daughter will I give her up. Nothing but a word from her shall
induce me to leave her;--but a word from her, if it comes from her
own lips,--shall do so.'  Then he took his friend's hand in his,
and having grasped it, walked away without saying another word.



CHAPTER 31

Miss Boncassen's River-Party No. 1

Thrice within the next three weeks did Lord Silverbridge go forth
to ask Mabel to be his wife, but thrice in vain.   On one occasion
she would talk on other things. On the second Miss Cassewary would
not leave her. On the third the conversation turned in a very
disagreeable way on Miss Boncassen, as to whom Lord Silverbridge
could not but think that Lady Mabel said some very ill-natured
things. It was no doubt true that he, during the last three weeks,
had often been in Miss Boncassen's company, that he had danced
with her, ridden with her, taken her to the House of Lords and the
House of Commons, and was now engaged to attend upon her at a
river-party up above Maidenhead. But Mabel had certainly no right
to complain. Had he not thrice during the same period come there
to lay the coronet at her feet;--and now, at this very moment, was
it not her fault that he was not going through the ceremony?

'I suppose,' she said, laughing, 'that it is all settled.'

'What is all settled?'

'About you and the American beauty.'

'I am not aware that anything in particular has been settled.'

'Then it ought to be,--oughtn't it? For her sake, I mean.'

'That is so like an English woman,' said Lord Silverbridge.
'Because you cannot understand a manner of life a little different
from your own you will impute evil.'

'I have imputed no evil, Lord Silverbridge, and you have no right
to say so.'

'If you mean to assert,' said Miss Cass, 'that the manners of
American young ladies are freer than those of English young
ladies, it is you that are taking away their characters.'

'I don't say it would be at all bad,' continued Lady Mabel. 'She
is a beautiful girl, and very clever, and would make a charming
Duchess. And then it would be such a delicious change to have an
American Duchess.'

'She wouldn't be a Duchess.'

'Well, Countess, with Duchessship before her in the remote future.
Wouldn't it be a change, Miss Cass?'

'Oh decidedly!' said Miss Cass.

'And very much for the better. Quite a case of new blood, you
know. Pray don't suppose that I mean to object. Everybody who
talks about it approves. I haven't heard a single dissentient
voice. Only as it has gone so far, and English people are too
stupid you know to understand all these new ways,--don't you think
perhaps--?'

'No, I don't think. I don't think anything except that you are
very ill-natured.'  Then he got up and, after making formal adieux
to both the ladies, left the house.

As soon as he was gone Lady Mabel began to laugh, but the least
apprehensive ears would have perceived that the laughter was
affected. Miss Cassewary did not laugh at all, but sat bolt
upright and looked very serious. 'Upon my honour,' said the
younger lady, 'he is the most beautifully simple-minded human
being I ever knew in my life.'

'Then I wouldn't laugh at him.'

'How can one help it? But of course I do it with a purpose.'

'What purpose?'

'I think he is making a fool of himself. If somebody does not
interfere he will go so far that he will not be able to draw back
without misbehaving.'

'I thought,' said Miss Cassewary, in a very low voice, almost
whispering. 'I thought that he was looking for a wife elsewhere.'

'You need not think of it again,' said Lady Mab, jumping up from
her seat. 'I had thought of it too. But as I told you before, I
spared him. He did not really mean it with me;--nor does he mean it
with this American girl. Such young men seldom mean. They drift
into matrimony. But she will not spare him. It would be a national
triumph. All the States would sing a paean