st volume of his
Biblioteca Espanola contains an analysis accompanied with extracts from
more than seven hundred different works, with biographical sketches of
their authors; the whole bearing most honorable testimony to the talent
and various erudition of the Spanish Jews.

[12] Basnage, History of the Jews, book 7, chap. 5, 15, 16.--Castro,
Biblioteca Espanola, tom. i. pp. 116, 265, 267.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana,
tom. i. p. 906;--tom. ii. pp. 63, 147, 459.--Samuel Levi, treasurer of
Peter the Cruel, who was sacrificed to the cupidity of his master, is
reported by Mariana to have left behind him the incredible sum of 400,000
ducats to swell the royal coffers. Tom. ii. p. 82.

[13] Sir Walter Scott, with his usual discernment, has availed himself of
these opposite traits in his portraits of Rebecca and Isaac in Ivanhoe, in
which he seems to have contrasted the lights and shadows of the Jewish
character. The humiliating state of the Jews, however, exhibited in this
romance, affords no analogy to their social condition in Spain; as is
evinced not merely by their wealth, which was also conspicuous in the
English Jews, but by the high degree of civilization, and even political
consequence, which, notwithstanding the occasional ebullitions of popular
prejudice, they were permitted to reach there.

[14] Calumnies of this kind were current all over Europe. The English
reader will call to mind the monkish fiction of the little Christian,

  "Slain with cursed Jewes, as it is notable,"

singing most devoutly after his throat was cut from ear to ear, in
Chaucer's Prioresse's Tale. See another instance in the old Scottish
ballad of the "Jew's Daughter" in Percy's "Reliques of Ancient Poetry."

[15] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 43.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana,
tom. ii. pp. 186, 187.--In 1391, 5000 Jews were sacrificed to the popular
fury, and, according to Mariana, no less than 10,000 perished from the
same cause in Navarre about sixty years before. See tom. i. p. 912.

[16] According to Mariana, the restoration of sight to the blind, feet to
the lame, even life to the dead, were miracles of ordinary occurrence with
St. Vincent. (Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 229, 230.) The age of miracles
had probably ceased by Isabella's time, or the Inquisition might have been
spared. Nic. Antonio, in his notice of the life and labors of this
Dominican, (Bibliotheca Vetus, tom. ii. pp. 205, 207,) states that he
preached his inspired sermons in his vernacular Valencian dialect to
audiences of French, English, and Italians, indiscriminately, who all
understood him perfectly well; "a circumstance," says Dr. McCrie, in his
valuable "History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation in
Spain," (Edinburgh, 1829.) "which, if it prove anything, proves that the
hearers of St. Vincent possessed more miraculous powers than himself, and
that they should have been canonized, rather than the preacher." P. 87,
note.

[17] They were interdicted from the callings of vintners, grocers,
taverners, especially of apothecaries, and of physicians, and nurses.
Ordenancas Reales, lib. 8, tit. 3, leyes 11, 15, 18.

[18] No law was more frequently reiterated than that prohibiting the Jews
from acting as stewards of the nobility, or farmers and collectors of the
public rents. The repetition of this law shows to what extent that people
had engrossed what little was known of financial science in that day. For
the multiplied enactments in Castile against them, see Ordenancas Reales,
(lib. 8, tit. 3.) For the regulations respecting the Jews in Aragon, many
of them oppressive, particularly at the commencement of the fifteenth
century, see Fueros y Observancias del Reyno de Aragon, (Zaragoza, 1667,)
tom. i. fol. 6.--Marca Hispanica, pp. 1416, 1433.--Zurita, Anales, tom.
iii. lib. 12, cap. 45.

[19] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 43.--Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, pref. p. 26.--A manuscript entitled _Tizon de Espana_,
(Brand of Spain,) tracing up many a noble pedigree to a Jewish or
Mahometan root, obtained a circulation, to the great scandal of the
country, which the efforts of the government, combined with those of the
Inquisition, have not been wholly able to suppress. Copies of it, however,
are now rarely to be met with. (Doblado, Letters from Spain, (London,
1822,) let. 2.) Clemencin notices two works with this title, one as
ancient as Ferdinand and Isabella's time, and both written by bishops.
Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. p. 125.

[20] Mariana, Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. p. 479.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
part. 2, cap. 77.

[21] Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap, 43. Vol. I.--21.

[22] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
part. 2, cap. 77.--Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla, p. 386.--Mem. de la Acad.
de Hist., tom. vi. p. 44.--Llorente, tom. i. pp. 143, 145.

Some writers are inclined to view the Spanish Inquisition, in its origin,
as little else than a political engine. Guizot remarks of the tribunal, in
one of his lectures, "Elle contenait en germe ce qu'elle est devenue; mais
elle ne l'etait pas en commencant: elle fut d'abord plus politique que
religieuse, et destinee a maintenir l'ordre plutot qu'a defendre la foi."
(Cours d'Histoire Moderne, (Paris, 1828-30,) tom. v. lec. 11.) This
statement is inaccurate in reference to Castile, where the facts do not
warrant us in imputing any other motive for its adoption than religious
zeal. The general character of Ferdinand, as well as the circumstances
under which it was introduced into Aragon, may justify the inference of a
more worldly policy in its establishment there.

[23] Essai sur les Moeurs et l'Esprit des Nations, chap. 176.

[24] Sigueenza, Historia de la Orden de San Geronimo, apud Mem. de la Acad.
de Hist., tom. vi. Ilust. 13.--This anecdote is more characteristic of the
order than the individual. Oviedo has given a brief notice of this
prelate, whose virtues raised him from the humblest condition to the
highest posts in the church, and gained him, to quote that writer's words,
the appellation of "El sancto, o el buen arzobispo en toda Espana."
Quincuagenas, MS., dial. de Talavera.

[25] Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 323.

[26] The uniform tenderness with which the most liberal Spanish writers of
the present comparatively enlightened age, as Marina, Llorente, Clemencin,
etc., regard the memory of Isabella, affords an honorable testimony to the
unsuspected integrity of her motives. Even in relation to the Inquisition,
her countrymen would seem willing to draw a veil over her errors, or to
excuse her by charging them on the age in which she lived.

[27] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, part. 2. cap. 77.--Bernaldez, Reyes
Catolicos, MS., cap. 43.--Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. pp.
143-145.--Much discrepancy exists in the narratives of Pulgar, Bernaldez,
and other contemporary writers, in reference to the era of the
establishment of the modern Inquisition. I have followed Llorente, whose
chronological accuracy, here and elsewhere, rests on the most authentic
documents.

[28] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., ubi supra.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
part. 2, cap. 77.--I find no contemporary authority for imputing to
Cardinal Mendoza an active agency in the establishment of the Inquisition,
as is claimed for him by later writers, and especially his kinsman and
biographer, the canon Salazar de Mendoza. (Cron. del Gran Cardenal, lib.
1, cap. 49.--Monarquia, tom. i. p. 336.) The conduct of this eminent
minister in this affair seems, on the contrary, to have been equally
politic and humane. The imputation of bigotry was not cast upon it, until
the age when bigotry was esteemed a virtue.

[29] In the interim, a caustic publication by a Jew appeared, containing
strictures on the conduct of the administration, and even on the Christian
religion, which was controverted at length by Talavera, afterwards
archbishop of Granada. The scandal occasioned by this ill-timed production
undoubtedly contributed to exacerbate the popular odium against the
Israelites.

[30] It is worthy of remark, that the famous cortes of Toledo, assembled
but a short time previous to the above-mentioned ordinances, and which
enacted several oppressive laws in relation to the Jews, made no allusion
whatever to the proposed establishment of a tribunal, which was to be
armed with such terrific powers.

[31] This ordinance, in which Llorente discerns the first regular
encroachment of the new tribunal on the civil jurisdiction, was aimed
partly at the Andalusian nobility, who afforded a shelter to the Jewish
fugitives. Llorente has fallen into the error, more than once, of speaking
of the count of Arcos, and marquis of Cadiz, as separate persons. The
possessor of both titles was Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, who inherited the
former of them from his father. The latter (which he afterwards made so
illustrious in the Moorish wars) was conferred on him by Henry IV., being
derived from the city of that name, which had been usurped from the crown.

[32] The historian of Seville quotes the Latin inscription on the portal
of the edifice in which the sittings of the dread tribunal were held. Its
concluding apostrophe to the Deity is one that the persecuted might join
in, as heartily as their oppressors. "Exurge Domine; judica causam tuam;
capite nobis vulpes." Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla, p. 389.

[33] Ordenancas Reales, lib. 8, tit. 3, ley 26.

[34] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. pp. 153-159.

[35] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 44.--Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, tom. 1, p. 160.--L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 164.--
The language of Bernaldez as applied to the four statues of the
_quemadero_, "_en que_ los quemavan," is so equivocal, that it has led to
some doubts whether he meant to assert that the persons to be burnt were
enclosed in the statues, or fastened to them. Llorente's subsequent
examination has led him to discard the first horrible supposition, which
realized the fabled cruelty of Phalaris.--This monument of fanaticism
continued to disgrace Seville till 1810, when it was removed in order to
make room for the construction of a battery against the French.

[36] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 164.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., cap. 44.--Mariana, lib. 24, cap. 17.--Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, ubi supra.--L. Marineo diffuses the 2000 capital executions
over several years. He sums up the various severities of the Holy Office
in the following gentle terms. "The church, who is the mother of mercy and
the fountain of charity, content with the imposition of penances,
generously accords life to many who do not deserve it. While those who
persist obstinately in their errors, after being imprisoned on the
testimony of trust-worthy witnesses, she causes to be put to the torture,
and condemned to the flames; some miserably perish, bewailing their
errors, and invoking the name of Christ, while others call upon that of
Moses. Many again, who sincerely repent, she, notwithstanding the
heinousness of their transgressions, _merely sentences to perpetual
imprisonment_"! Such were the tender mercies of the Spanish Inquisition.

[37] Bernaldez states, that guards were posted at the gates of the city of
Seville in order to prevent the emigration of the Jewish inhabitants,
which indeed was forbidden under pain of death. The tribunal, however, had
greater terrors for them, and many succeeded in effecting their escape.
Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 44.

[38] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 164.--Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla,
p. 396.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, part. 2, cap. 77.--Garibay, Compendio,
tom. ii. lib. 18, cap. 17.--Paramo, De Origine Inquisitionis, lib. 2, tit.
2, cap. 2.--Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. pp. 163-173.

[39] Over these subordinate tribunals Ferdinand erected a court of
supervision, with appellate jurisdiction, under the name of Council of the
Supreme, consisting of the grand inquisitor, as president, and three other
ecclesiastics, two of them doctors of law. The principal purpose of this
new creation was to secure the interest of the crown in the confiscated
property, and to guard against the encroachment of the Inquisition on
secular jurisdiction. The expedient, however, wholly failed, because most
of the questions brought before this court were determined by the
principles of the canon law, of which the grand inquisitor was to be sole
interpreter, the others having only, as it was termed, a "consultative
voice." Llorente, tom. i. pp. 173, 174.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol.
324.--Riol, Informe, apud Semanario Erudito, tom. iii. pp. 156 et seq.

[40] Puigblanch, Inquisition Unmasked, vol. i. chap. 4.--Llorente, Hist.
de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 6, art. 1; chap. 9, art. 1, 2.--The
witnesses were questioned in such general terms, that they were even kept
in ignorance of the particular matter respecting which they were expected
to testify. Thus, they were asked "if they knew anything which had been
said or done contrary to the Catholic faith, and the interests of the
tribunal." Their answers often opened a new scent to the judges, and thus,
in the language of Montanus, "brought more fishes into the inquisitors'
holy angle." See Montanus, Discovery and Playne Declaration of sundry
subtill Practises of the Holy Inquisition of Spayne, Eng. trans. (London,
1569,) fol. 14.

[41] Limborch, Inquisition, book 4, chap. 20.--Montanus, Inquisition of
Spayne, fol. 6-15.--Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 6.
art. 1; chap. 9, art. 4-9.--Puigblanch, Inquisition Unmasked, vol. i.
chap. 4.

[42] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 9, art. 7.--By a
subsequent regulation of Philip II., the repetition of torture in the same
process was strictly prohibited to the inquisitors. But they, making use
of a sophism worthy of the arch-fiend himself, contrived to evade this
law, by pretending after each new infliction, of punishment that they had
only suspended, and not terminated, the torture!

[43] Montanus, Inquisition of Spayne, fol. 24 et seq.--Limborch,
Inquisition, vol. ii. chap. 29.--Puigblanch, Inquisition Unmasked, vol. i.
chap. 4.--Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, ubi supra.--I shall spare the
reader the description of the various modes of torture, the rack, fire,
and pulley, practised by the inquisitors, which have been so often
detailed in the doleful narratives of such as have had the fortune to
escape with life from the fangs of the tribunal. If we are to believe
Llorente, these barbarities have not been decreed for a long time. Yet
some recent statements are at variance with this assertion. See, among
others, the celebrated adventurer Van Halen's "Narrative of his
Imprisonment in the Dungeons of the Inquisition at Madrid, and his Escape
in 1817-18."

[44] The prisoner had indeed the right of challenging any witness on the
ground of personal enmity. (Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i.
chap. 9, art. 10.) But as he was kept in ignorance of the names of the
witnesses employed against him, and as even, if he conjectured right, the
degree of enmity, competent to set aside testimony, was to be determined
by his judges, it is evident that his privilege of challenge was wholly
nugatory.

[45] Confiscation had long been decreed as the punishment of convicted
heretics by the statutes of Castile. (Ordenancas Reales, lib. 8, tit. 4.)
The avarice of the present system, however, is exemplified by the fact,
that those who confessed and sought absolution within the brief term of
grace allowed by the inquisitors from the publication of their edict, were
liable to arbitrary fines; and those who confessed after that period,
escaped with nothing short of confiscation. Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, tom. i. pp. 176, 177.

[46] Ibid., tom. i. p. 216.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 324.--Salazar
de Mendoza, Monarquia, tom. i. fol. 337.--It is easy to discern in every
part of the odious scheme of the Inquisition the contrivance of the monks,
a class of men, cut off by their profession from the usual sympathies of
social life, and who, accustomed to the tyranny of the confessional, aimed
at establishing the same jurisdiction over thoughts, which secular
tribunals have wisely confined to actions. Time, instead of softening,
gave increased harshness to the features of the new system. The most
humane provisions were constantly evaded in practice; and the toils for
ensnaring the victim were so ingeniously multiplied, that few, very few,
were permitted to escape without some censure. Not more than one person,
says Llorente, in one or perhaps two thousand processes, previous to the
time of Philip III., received entire absolution. So that it came to be
proverbial that all who were not roasted, were at least singed.

  "Devant l'Inquisition, quand on vient a jube,
  Si l'on ne sort roti, l'on sort au moins flambe."

[47] Montanus, Inquisition of Spayne, fol. 46.--Puigblanch, Inquisition
Unmasked, vol. i. chap. 4.--Every reader of Tacitus and Juvenal will
remember how early the Christians were condemned to endure the penalty of
fire. Perhaps the earliest instance of burning to death for heresy in
modern times occurred under the reign of Robert of France, in the early
part of the eleventh century. (Sismondi, Hist. des Francais, tom. iv.
chap. 4.) Paramo, as usual, finds authority for inquisitorial autos da fe,
where one would least expect it, in the New Testament. Among other
examples, he quotes the remark of James and John, who, when the village of
Samaria refused to admit Christ within its walls, would have called down
fire from heaven to consume its inhabitants. "Lo," says Paramo, "fire, the
punishment of heretics; for the Samaritans were the heretics of those
times." (De Origine Inquisitionis, lib. 1, tit. 3, cap. 5.) The worthy
father omits to add the impressive rebuke of our Saviour to his over-
zealous disciples. "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. The son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."

[48] Puigblanch, vol. i. chap. 4.--The inquisitors, after the celebration
of an auto da fe at Guadaloupe, in 1485, wishing probably to justify these
bloody executions in the eyes of the people, who had not yet become
familiar with them, solicited a sign from the Virgin (whose shrine in that
place is noted all over Spain) in testimony of her approbation of the Holy
Office. Their petition was answered by such a profusion of miracles, that
Dr. Francis Sanctius de la Fuente, who acted as scribe on the occasion,
became out of breath, and, after recording sixty, gave up in despair,
unable to keep pace with their marvellous rapidity. Paramo, De Origine
Inquisitionis, lib. 2, tit. 2, cap. 3.

[49] _San benito_, according to Llorente, (tom. i. p. 127,) is a
corruption of _saco bendito_, being the name given to the dresses
worn by penitents previously to the thirteenth century.

[50] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 9, art. 16.--
Puigblanch, Inquisition Unmasked, vol. i. chap. 4.--Voltaire remarks
(Essai sur les Moeurs, chap. 140) that, "An Asiatic, arriving at Madrid on
the day of an auto da fe, would doubt whether it were a festival,
religious celebration, sacrifice, or massacre;--it is all of them. They
reproach Montezuma with sacrificing human captives to the gods.--What
would he have said, had he witnessed an auto da fe?"

[51] The government, at least, cannot be charged with remissness in
promoting this. I find two ordinances in the royal collection of
_pragmaticas_, dated in September, 1501, (there must be some error in
the date of one of them,) inhibiting, under pain of confiscation of
property, such as had been _reconciled_, and their children by the
mother's side, and grandchildren by the father's, from holding any office
in the privy council, courts of justice, or in the municipalities, or any
other place of trust or honor. They were also excluded from the vocations
of notaries, surgeons, and apothecaries. (Pragmaticas del Reyno, fol. 5,
6.) This was visiting the sins of the fathers, to an extent unparalleled
in modern legislation. The sovereigns might find a precedent in a law of
Sylla, excluding the children of the proscribed Romans from political
honors; thus indignantly noticed by Sallust. "Quin solus omnium, post
memoriam hominum, supplicia in post futuros composuit; _quis prius
injuria quam vita certa esset_." Hist. Fragments, lib. 1.

[52] The Aragonese, as we shall see hereafter, made a manly though
ineffectual resistance, from the first, to the introduction of the
Inquisition among them by Ferdinand. In Castile, its enormous abuses
provoked the spirited interposition of the legislature at the commencement
of the following reign. But it was then too late.

[53] 1485-6. (Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. p. 239.)--In
Seville, with probably no greater apparatus, in 1482, 21,000 processes
were disposed of. These were the first fruits of the Jewish heresy, when
Torquemada, although an inquisitor, had not the supreme control of the
tribunal.

[54] Llorente afterwards reduces this estimate to 8800 burnt, 96,504
otherwise punished; the diocese of Cuenca being comprehended in that of
Murcia. (Tom. iv. p. 252.) Zurita says, that, by 1520, the Inquisition of
Seville had sentenced more than 4000 persons to be burnt, and 30,000 to
other punishments. Another author whom he quotes, carries up the estimate
of the total condemned by this single tribunal, within the same term of
time, to 100,000. Anales, tom. iv. fol. 324.

[55] By an article of the primitive instructions, the inquisitors were
required to set apart a small portion of the confiscated estates for the
education and Christian nurture of minors, children of the condemned.
Llorente says, that, in the immense number of processes, which he had
occasion to consult, he met with no instance of their attention to the
fate of these unfortunate orphans! Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap.
8.

[56] Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 44.--Torquemada waged war upon freedom of
thought, in every form. In 1490, he caused several Hebrew Bibles to be
publicly burnt, and some time after, more than 6000 volumes of Oriental
learning, on the imputation of Judaism, sorcery, or heresy, at the autos
da fe of Salamanca, the very nursery of science. (Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 8, art. 5.) This may remind one of the
similar sentence passed by Lope de Barrientos, another Dominican, about
fifty years before, upon the books of the marquis of Villena. Fortunately
for the dawning literature of Spain, Isabella did not, as was done by her
successors, commit the censorship of the press to the judges of the Holy
Office, notwithstanding such occasional assumption of power by the grand
inquisitor.

[57] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, part. 2, cap. 77.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 164.--The prodigious desolation of the land may be
inferred from the estimates, although somewhat discordant, of deserted
houses in Andalusia. Garibay (Compendio, lib. 18, cap. 17,) puts these at
three, Pulgar (Reyes Catolicos, part. 2, cap. 77,) at four, L. Marineo
(Cosas Memorables, fol. 164,) as high as five thousand.

[58] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 7, art. 8; chap. 8,
art. 6.

[59] Nic. Antonio, Bibliotheca Vetus, tom. ii. p. 340.--Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 8, art. 6.

[60] "Per la fe--il tutto lice." Gerusalemme Liberata, cant. 4, stanza 26.




CHAPTER VIII.

REVIEW OF THE POLITICAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONDITION OF THE SPANISH ARABS
PREVIOUS TO THE WAR OF GRANADA.

Conquest of Spain by the Arabs.--Cordovan Empire.--High Civilization and
Prosperity.--Its Dismemberment.--Kingdom of Granada.--Luxurious and
Chivalrous Character.--Literature of the Spanish Arabs.--Progress in
Science.--Historical Merits.--Useful Discoveries.--Poetry and Romance.--
Influence on the Spaniards.


We have now arrived at the commencement of the famous war of Granada,
which terminated in the subversion of the Arabian empire in Spain, after
it had subsisted for nearly eight centuries, and with the consequent
restoration to the Castilian crown of the fairest portion of its ancient
domain. In order to a better understanding of the character of the Spanish
Arabs, or Moors, who exercised an important influence on that of their
Christian neighbors, the present chapter will be devoted to a
consideration of their previous history in the Peninsula, where they
probably reached a higher degree of civilization than in any other part of
the world. [1]

It is not necessary to dwell upon the causes of the brilliant successes of
Mahometanism at its outset,--the dexterity with which, unlike all other
religions, it was raised upon, not against, the principles and prejudices
of preceding sects; the military spirit and discipline, which it
established among all classes, so that the multifarious nations who
embraced it, assumed the appearance of one vast, well-ordered camp; [2]
the union of ecclesiastical with civil authority intrusted to the caliphs,
which enabled them to control opinions, as absolutely as the Roman
pontiffs in their most despotic hour; [3] or lastly, the peculiar
adaptation of the doctrines of Mahomet to the character of the wild tribes
among whom they were preached. [4] It is sufficient to say, that these
latter, within a century after the coming of their apostle, having
succeeded in establishing their religion over vast regions in Asia, and on
the northern shores of Africa, arrived before the Straits of Gibraltar,
which, though a temporary, were destined to prove an ineffectual bulwark
for Christendom.

The causes which have been currently assigned for the invasion and
conquest of Spain, even by the most credible modern historians, have
scarcely any foundation in contemporary records. The true causes are to be
found in the rich spoils offered by the Gothic monarchy, and in the thirst
of enterprise in the Saracens, which their long uninterrupted career of
victory seems to have sharpened, rather than satisfied. [5] The fatal
battle, which terminated with the slaughter of King Roderic and the flower
of his nobility, was fought in the summer of 711, on a plain washed by the
Guadalete near Xerez, about two leagues distant from Cadiz. [6] The Goths
appear never to have afterwards rallied under one head, but their broken
detachments made many a gallant stand in such strong positions as were
afforded throughout the kingdom; so that nearly three years elapsed before
the final achievement of the conquest. The policy of the conquerors, after
making the requisite allowance for the evils necessarily attending such an
invasion, [7] may be considered liberal. Such of the Christians, as chose,
were permitted to remain in the conquered territory in undisturbed
possession of their property. They were allowed to worship in their own
way; to be governed, within prescribed limits, by their own laws; to fill
certain civil offices, and serve in the army; their women were invited to
intermarry with the conquerors; [8] and, in short, they were condemned to
no other legal badge of servitude than the payment of somewhat heavier
imposts than those exacted from their Mahometan brethren. It is true the
Christians were occasionally exposed to suffering from the caprices of
despotism, and, it may be added, of popular fanaticism. [9] But, on the
whole, their condition may sustain an advantageous comparison with that of
any Christian people under the Mussulman dominion of later times, and
affords a striking contrast with that of our Saxon ancestors after the
Norman conquest, which suggests an obvious parallel in many of its
circumstances to the Saracen. [10]

After the further progress of the Arabs in Europe had been checked by the
memorable defeat at Tours, their energies, no longer allowed to expand in
the career of conquest, recoiled on themselves, and speedily produced the
dismemberment of their overgrown empire. Spain was the first of the
provinces which fell off. The family of Omeya, under whom this revolution
was effected, continued to occupy her throne as independent princes, from
the middle of the eighth to the close of the eleventh century, a period
which forms the most honorable portion of her Arabian annals.

The new government was modelled on the eastern caliphate. Freedom shows
itself under a variety of forms; while despotism, at least in the
institutions founded on the Koran, seems to wear but one. The sovereign
was the depositary of all power, the fountain of honor, the sole arbiter
of life and fortune. He styled himself "Commander of the Faithful," and,
like the caliphs of the east, assumed an entire spiritual as well as
temporal supremacy. The country was distributed into six
_capitanias_, or provinces, each under the administration of a _wali_, or
governor, with subordinate officers, to whom was intrusted a more
immediate jurisdiction over the principal cities. The immense authority
and pretensions of these petty satraps became a fruitful source of
rebellion in later times. The caliph administered the government with
the advice of his _mexuar_, or council of state, composed of his principal
_cadis_ and _hagibs_, or secretaries. The office of prime minister, or
chief hagib, corresponded, in the nature and variety of its functions,
with that of a Turkish grand vizier. The caliph reserved to himself the
right of selecting his successor from among his numerous progeny; and this
adoption was immediately ratified by an oath of allegiance to the heir
apparent from the principal officers of state. [11]

The princes of the blood, instead of being condemned, as in Turkey, to
waste their youth in the seclusion of the harem, were intrusted to the
care of learned men, to be instructed in the duties befitting their
station. They were encouraged to visit the academies, which were
particularly celebrated in Cordova, where they mingled in disputation, and
frequently carried away the prizes of poetry and eloquence. Their riper
years exhibited such fruits as were to be expected from their early
education. The race of the Omeyades need not shrink from a comparison with
any other dynasty of equal length in modern Europe. Many of them amused
their leisure with poetical composition, of which numerous examples are
preserved in Conde's History; and some left elaborate works of learning,
which have maintained a permanent reputation with Arabian scholars. Their
long reigns, the first ten of which embrace a period of two centuries and
a half, their peaceful deaths, and unbroken line of succession in the same
family for so many years, show that their authority must have been founded
in the affections of their subjects. Indeed, they seem, with one or two
exceptions, to have ruled over them with a truly patriarchal sway; and, on
the event of their deaths, the people, bathed in tears, are described as
accompanying their relics to the tomb, where the ceremony was concluded
with a public eulogy on the virtues of the deceased, by his son and
successor. This pleasing moral picture affords a strong contrast to the
sanguinary scenes which so often attend the transmission of the sceptre
from one generation to another, among the nations of the east. [12]

The Spanish caliphs supported a large military force, frequently keeping
two or three armies in the field at the same time. The flower of these
forces was a body-guard, gradually raised to twelve thousand men, one-
third of them Christians, superbly equipped, and officered by members of
the royal family. Their feuds with the eastern caliphs and the Barbary
pirates required them also to maintain a respectable navy, which was
fitted out from the numerous dock-yards that lined the coast from Cadiz to
Tarragona.

The munificence of the Omeyades was most ostentatiously displayed in their
public edifices, palaces, mosques, hospitals, and in the construction of
commodious quays, fountains, bridges, and aqueducts, which, penetrating
the sides of the mountains, or sweeping on lofty arches across the
valleys, rivalled in their proportions the monuments of ancient Rome.
These works, which were scattered more or less over all the provinces,
contributed especially to the embellishment of Cordova, the capital of the
empire. The delightful situation of this city, in the midst of a
cultivated plain washed by the waters of the Guadalquivir, made it very
early the favorite residence of the Arabs, who loved to surround their
houses, even in the cities, with groves and refreshing fountains, so
delightful to the imagination of a wanderer of the desert. [13] The public
squares and private court-yards sparkled with _jets d'eau_, fed by
copious streams from the Sierra Morena, which, besides supplying nine
hundred public baths, were conducted into the interior of the edifices,
where they diffused a grateful coolness over the sleeping-apartments of
their luxurious inhabitants. [14]

Without adverting to that magnificent freak of the caliphs, the
construction of the palace of Azahra, of which not a vestige now exists,
we may form a sufficient notion of the taste and magnificence of this era
from the remains of the far-famed mosque, now the cathedral of Cordova.
This building, which still covers more ground than any other church in
Christendom, was esteemed the third in sanctity by the Mahometan world,
being inferior only to the Alaksa of Jerusalem and the temple of Mecca.
Most of its ancient glories have indeed long since departed. The rich
bronze which embossed its gates, the myriads of lamps which illuminated
its aisles, have disappeared; and its interior roof of odoriferous and
curiously carved wood has been cut up into guitars and snuff-boxes. But
its thousand columns of variegated marble still remain; and its general
dimensions, notwithstanding some loose assertions to the contrary, seem to
be much the same as they were in the time of the Saracens. European
critics, however, condemn its most elaborate beauties as "heavy and
barbarous." Its celebrated portals are pronounced "diminutive, and in very
bad taste." Its throng of pillars gives it the air of "a park rather than
a temple," and the whole is made still more incongruous by the unequal
length of their shafts, being grotesquely compensated by a proportionate
variation of size in their bases and capitals, rudely fashioned after the
Corinthian order. [15]

But if all this gives us a contemptible idea of the taste of the Saracens
at this period, which indeed, in architecture, seems to have been far
inferior to that of the later princes of Granada, we cannot but be
astonished at the adequacy of their resources to carry such magnificent
designs into execution. Their revenue, we are told in explanation,
amounted to eight millions of _mitcales_ of gold, or nearly six
millions sterling; a sum fifteen-fold greater than that which William the
Conqueror, in the subsequent century, was able to extort from his
subjects, with all the ingenuity of feudal exaction. The tone of
exaggeration, which distinguishes the Asiatic writers, entitles them
perhaps to little confidence in their numerical estimates. This immense
wealth, however, is predicated of other Mahometan princes of that age; and
their vast superiority over the Christian states of the north, in arts and
effective industry, may well account for a corresponding superiority in
their resources.

The revenue of the Cordovan sovereigns was derived from the fifth of the
spoil taken in battle, an important item in an age of unintermitting war
and rapine; from the enormous exaction of one-tenth of the produce of
commerce, husbandry, flocks, and mines; from a capitation tax on Jews and
Christians; and from certain tolls on the transportation of goods. They
engaged in commerce on their own account, and drew from mines, which
belonged to the crown, a conspicuous part of their income. [16]

Before the discovery of America, Spain was to the rest of Europe what her
colonies have since become, the great source of mineral wealth. The
Carthaginians, and the Romans afterwards, regularly drew from her large
masses of the precious metals. Pliny, who resided some time in the
country, relates that three of her provinces were said to have annually
yielded the incredible quantity of sixty thousand pounds of gold. [17] The
Arabs with their usual activity penetrated into these arcana of wealth.
Abundant traces of their labors are still to be met with along the barren
ridge of mountains that covers the north of Andalusia; and the diligent
Bowles has enumerated no less than five thousand of their excavations in
the kingdom or district of Jaen. [18]

But the best mine of the caliphs was in the industry and sobriety of their
subjects. The Arabian colonies have been properly classed among the
agricultural. Their acquaintance with the science of husbandry is shown in
their voluminous treatises on the subject, and in the monuments which they
have everywhere left of their peculiar culture. The system of irrigation,
which has so long fertilized the south of Spain, was derived from them.
They introduced into the Peninsula various tropical plants and vegetables,
whose cultivation has departed with them. Sugar, which the modern
Spaniards have been obliged to import from foreign nations in large
quantities annually for their domestic consumption, until within the last
half century that they have been supplied by their island of Cuba,
constituted one of the principal exports of the Spanish Arabs. The silk
manufacture was carried on by them extensively. The Nubian geographer, in
the beginning of the twelfth century, enumerates six hundred villages in
Jaen as engaged in it, at a time when it was known to the Europeans only
from their circuitous traffic with the Greek empire. This, together with
fine fabrics of cotton and woollen, formed the staple of an active
commerce with the Levant, and especially with Constantinople, whence they
were again diffused, by means of the caravans of the north, over the
comparatively barbarous countries of Christendom.

The population kept pace with this general prosperity of the country. It
would appear from a census instituted at Cordova, at the close of the
tenth century, that there were at that time in it six hundred temples and
two hundred thousand dwelling-houses; many of these latter being,
probably, mere huts or cabins, and occupied by separate families. Without
placing too much reliance on any numerical statements, however, we may
give due weight to the inference of an intelligent writer, who remarks
that their minute cultivation of the soil, the cheapness of their labor,
their particular attention to the most nutritious esculents, many of them
such as would be rejected by Europeans at this day, are indicative of a
crowded population, like that, perhaps, which swarms over Japan or China,
where the same economy is necessarily resorted to for the mere sustenance
of life. [19]

Whatever consequence a nation may derive, in its own age, from physical
resources, its intellectual development will form the subject of deepest
interest to posterity. The most flourishing periods of both not
unfrequently coincide. Thus the reigns of Abderrahman the Third, Alhakem
the Second, and the regency of Almanzor, embracing the latter half of the
tenth century, during which the Spanish Arabs reached their highest
political importance, may be regarded as the period of their highest
civilization under the Omeyades; although the impulse then given carried
them forward to still further advances, in the turbulent times which
followed. This beneficent impulse is, above all, imputable to Alhakem. He
was one of those rare beings, who have employed the awful engine of
despotism in promoting the happiness and intelligence of his species. In
his elegant tastes, appetite for knowledge, and munificent patronage he
may be compared with the best of the Medici. He assembled the eminent
scholars of his time, both natives and foreigners, at his court, where he
employed them in the most confidential offices. He converted his palace
into an academy, making it the familiar resort of men of letters, at whose
conferences he personally assisted in his intervals of leisure from public
duty. He selected the most suitable persons for the composition of works
on civil and natural history, requiring the prefects of his provinces and
cities to furnish, as far as possible, the necessary intelligence. He was
a diligent student, and left many of the volumes which he read enriched
with his commentaries. Above all, he was intent upon the acquisition of an
extensive library. He invited illustrious foreigners to send him their
works, and munificently recompensed them. No donative was so grateful to
him as a book. He employed agents in Egypt, Syria, Irak, and Persia, for
collecting and transcribing the rarest manuscripts; and his vessels
returned freighted with cargoes more precious than the spices of the east.
In this way he amassed a magnificent collection, which was distributed,
according to the subjects, in various apartments of his palace; and which,
if we may credit the Arabian historians, amounted to six hundred thousand
volumes. [20]

If all this be thought to savor too much of eastern hyperbole, still it
cannot be doubted that an amazing number of writers swarmed over the
Peninsula at this period. Casiri's multifarious catalogue bears ample
testimony to the emulation, with which not only men, but even women of the
highest rank, devoted themselves to letters; the latter contending
publicly for the prizes, not merely in eloquence and poetry, but in those
recondite studies which have usually been reserved for the other sex. The
prefects of the provinces, emulating their master, converted their courts
into academies, and dispensed premiums to poets and philosophers. The
stream of royal bounty awakened life in the remotest districts. But its
effects were especially visible in the capital. Eighty free schools were
opened in Cordova. The circle of letters and science was publicly
expounded by professors, whose reputation for wisdom attracted not only
the scholars of Christian Spain, but of Prance, Italy, Germany, and the
British Isles. For this period of brilliant illumination with the Saracens
corresponds precisely with that of the deepest barbarism of Europe; when a
library of three or four hundred volumes was a magnificent endowment for
the richest monastery; when scarcely a "priest south of the Thames," in
the words of Alfred, "could translate Latin into his mother tongue;" when
not a single philosopher, according to Tiraboschi, was to be met with in
Italy, save only the French pope Sylvester the Second, who drew his
knowledge from the schools of the Spanish Arabs, and was esteemed a
necromancer for his pains. [21]

Such is the glowing picture presented to us of Arabian scholarship, in the
tenth and succeeding centuries, under a despotic government and a sensual
religion; and, whatever judgment may be passed on the real value of all
their boasted literature, it cannot be denied, that the nation exhibited a
wonderful activity of intellect, and an apparatus for learning (if we are
to admit their own statements) unrivalled in the best ages of antiquity.

The Mahometan governments of that period rested on so unsound a basis,
that the season of their greatest prosperity was often followed by
precipitate decay. This had been the case with the eastern caliphate, and
was now so with the western. During the life of Alhakem's successor, the
empire of the Omeyades was broken up into a hundred petty principalities;
and their magnificent capital of Cordova, dwindling into a second-rate
city, retained no other distinction than that of being the Mecca of Spain.
These little states soon became a prey to all the evils arising out of a
vicious constitution of government and religion. Almost every accession to
the throne was contested by numerous competitors of the same family; and a
succession of sovereigns, wearing on their brows but the semblance of a
crown, came and departed, like the shadows of Macbeth. The motley tribes
of Asiatics, of whom the Spanish Arabian population was composed, regarded
each other with ill-disguised jealousy. The lawless predatory habits,
which no discipline could effectually control in an Arab, made them ever
ready for revolt. The Moslem states, thus reduced in size and crippled by
faction, were unable to resist the Christian forces, which were pressing
on them from the north. By the middle of the ninth century, the Spaniards
had reached the Douro and the Ebro. By the close of the eleventh, they had
advanced their line of conquest, under the victorious banner of the Cid,
to the Tagus. The swarms of Africans who invaded the Peninsula, during the
two following centuries, gave substantial support to their Mahometan
brethren; and the cause of Christian Spain trembled in the balance for a
moment on the memorable day of Navas de Tolosa. But the fortunate issue of
that battle, in which, according to the lying letter of Alfonso the Ninth,
"one hundred and eighty-five thousand infidels perished, and only five and
twenty Spaniards," gave a permanent ascendency to the Christian arms. The
vigorous campaigns of James the First, of Aragon, and of St. Ferdinand, of
Castile, gradually stripped away the remaining territories of Valencia,
Murcia, and Andalusia; so that, by the middle of the thirteenth century,
the constantly contracting circle of the Moorish dominion had shrunk into
the narrow limits of the province of Granada. Yet on this comparatively
small point of their ancient domain, the Saracens erected a new kingdom of
sufficient strength to resist, for more than two centuries, the united
forces of the Spanish monarchies.

The Moorish territory of Granada contained, within a circuit of about one
hundred and eighty leagues, all the physical resources of a great empire.
Its broad valleys were intersected by mountains rich in mineral wealth,
whose hardy population supplied the state with husbandmen and soldiers.
Its pastures were fed by abundant fountains, and its coasts studded with
commodious ports, the principal marts in the Mediterranean. In the midst,
and crowning the whole, as with a diadem, rose the beautiful city of
Granada. In the days of the Moors it was encompassed by a wall, flanked by
a thousand and thirty towers, with seven portals. [22] Its population,
according to a contemporary, at the beginning of the fourteenth century,
amounted to two hundred thousand souls; [23] and various authors agree in
attesting, that, at a later period, it could send forth fifty thousand
warriors from its gates. This statement will not appear exaggerated, if we
consider that the native population of the city was greatly swelled by the
influx of the ancient inhabitants of the districts lately conquered by the
Spaniards. On the summit of one of the hills of the city was erected the
royal fortress or palace of the Alhambra, which was capable of containing
within its circuit forty thousand men. [24] The light and elegant
architecture of this edifice, whose magnificent ruins still form the most
interesting monument in Spain for the contemplation of the traveller,
shows the great advancement of the art since the construction of the
celebrated mosque of Cordova. Its graceful porticoes and colonnades, its
domes and ceilings, glowing with tints, which, in that transparent
atmosphere, have lost nothing of their original brilliancy, its airy
halls, so constructed as to admit the perfume of surrounding gardens and
agreeable ventilations of the air, and its fountains, which still shed
their coolness over its deserted courts, manifest at once the taste,
opulence, and Sybarite luxury of its proprietors. The streets are
represented to have been narrow, many of the houses lofty, with turrets of
curiously wrought larch or marble, and with cornices of shining metal,
"that glittered like stars through the dark foliage of the orange groves;"
and the whole is compared to "an enamelled vase, sparkling with hyacinths
and emeralds." [25] Such are the florid strains in which the Arabic
writers fondly descant on the glories of Granada.

At the foot of this fabric of the genii lay the cultivated _vega_, or
plain, so celebrated as the arena, for more than two centuries, of Moorish
and Christian chivalry, every inch of whose soil may be said to have been
fertilized with human blood. The Arabs exhausted on it all their powers of
elaborate cultivation. They distributed the waters of the Xenil, which
flowed through it, into a thousand channels for its more perfect
irrigation. A constant succession of fruits and crops was obtained
throughout the year. The products of the most opposite latitudes were
transplanted there with success; and the hemp of the north grew luxuriant
under the shadow of the vine and the olive. Silk furnished the principal
staple of a traffic that was carried on through the ports of Almeria and
Malaga. The Italian cities, then rising into opulence, derived their
principal skill in this elegant manufacture from the Spanish Arabs.
Florence, in particular, imported large quantities of the raw material
from them as late as the fifteenth century. The Genoese are mentioned as
having mercantile establishments in Granada; and treaties of commerce were
entered into with this nation, as well as with the crown of Aragon. Their
ports swarmed with a motley contribution from "Europe, Africa, and the
Levant," so that "Granada," in the words of the historian, "became the
common city of all nations." "The reputation of the citizens for trust-
worthiness," says a Spanish writer, "was such, that their bare word was
more relied on, than a written contract is now among us;" and he quotes
the saying of a Catholic bishop, that "Moorish works and Spanish faith
were all that were necessary to make a good Christian." [26]

The revenue, which was computed at twelve hundred thousand ducats, was
derived from similar, but, in some respects, heavier impositions than
those of the caliphs of Cordova. The crown, besides being possessed of
valuable plantations in the vega, imposed the onerous tax of one-seventh
on all the agricultural produce of the kingdom. The precious metals were
also obtained in considerable quantities, and the royal mint was noted for
the purity and elegance of its coin. [27]

The sovereigns of Granada were for the most part distinguished by liberal
tastes. They freely dispensed their revenues in the protection of letters,
the construction of sumptuous public works, and, above all, in the display
of a courtly pomp, unrivalled by any of the princes of that period. Each
day presented a succession of _fetes_ and tourneys, in which the
knight seemed less ambitious of the hardy prowess of Christian chivalry,
than of displaying his inimitable horsemanship, and his dexterity in the
elegant pastimes peculiar to his nation. The people of Granada, like those
of ancient Rome, seem to have demanded a perpetual spectacle. Life was
with them one long carnival, and the season of revelry was prolonged until
the enemy was at the gate.

During the interval which had elapsed since the decay of the Omeyades, the
Spaniards had been gradually rising in civilization to the level of their
Saracen enemies; and, while their increased consequence secured them from
the contempt with which they had formerly been regarded by the Mussulmans,
the latter, in their turn, had not so far sunk in the scale, as to have
become the objects of the bigoted aversion, which was, in after days, so
heartily visited on them by the Spaniards. At this period, therefore, the
two nations viewed each other with more liberality, probably, than at any
previous or succeeding time. Their respective monarchs conducted their
mutual negotiations on a footing of perfect equality. We find several
examples of Arabian sovereigns visiting in person the court of Castile.
These civilities were reciprocated by the Christian princes. As late as
1463, Henry the Fourth had a personal interview with the king of Granada,
in the dominions of the latter. The two monarchs held their conference
under a splendid pavilion erected in the vega, before the gates of the
city; and, after an exchange of presents, the Spanish sovereign was
escorted to the frontiers by a body of Moorish cavaliers. These acts of
courtesy relieve in some measure the ruder features of an almost
uninterrupted warfare, that was necessarily kept up between the rival
nations. [28]

The Moorish and Christian knights were also in the habit of exchanging
visits at the courts of their respective masters. The latter were wont to
repair to Granada to settle their affairs of honor, by personal
rencounter, in the presence of its sovereign. The disaffected nobles of
Castile, among whom Mariana especially notices the Velas and the Castros,
often sought an asylum there, and served under the Moslem banner. With
this interchange of social courtesy between the two nations, it could not
but happen that each should contract somewhat of the peculiarities natural
to the other. The Spaniard acquired something of the gravity and
magnificence of demeanor proper to the Arabian; and the latter relaxed his
habitual reserve, and, above all, the jealousy and gross sensuality, which
characterize the nations of the east. [29]

Indeed, if we were to rely on the pictures presented to us in the Spanish
ballads or _romances_, we should admit as unreserved an intercourse
between the sexes to have existed among the Spanish Arabs, as with any
other people of Europe. The Moorish lady is represented there as an
undisguised spectator of the public festivals; while her knight, bearing
an embroidered mantle or scarf, or some other token of her favor, contends
openly in her presence for the prize of valor, mingles with her in the
graceful dance of the Zambra, or sighs away his soul in moonlight
serenades under her balcony. [30]

Other circumstances, especially the frescoes still extant on the walls of
the Alhambra, may be cited as corroborative of the conclusions afforded by
the _romances_, implying a latitude in the privileges accorded to the
sex, similar to that in Christian countries, and altogether alien from the
genius of Mahometanism. [31] The chivalrous character ascribed to the
Spanish Moslems appears, moreover, in perfect conformity to this. Thus
some of their sovereigns, we are told, after the fatigues of the
tournament, were wont to recreate their spirits with "elegant poetry, and
florid discourses of amorous and knightly history." The ten qualities,
enumerated as essential to a true knight, were "piety, valor, courtesy,
prowess, the gifts of poetry and eloquence, and dexterity in the
management of the horse, the sword, lance, and bow." [32] The history of
the Spanish Arabs, especially in the latter wars of Granada, furnishes
repeated examples not merely of the heroism, which distinguished the
European chivalry of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, but
occasionally of a polished courtesy, that might have graced a Bayard or a
Sidney. This combination of Oriental magnificence and knightly prowess
shed a ray of glory over the closing days of the Arabian empire in Spain,
and served to conceal, though it could not correct, the vices which it
possessed in common with all Mahometan institutions.

The government of Granada was not administered with the same tranquillity
as that of Cordova. Revolutions were perpetually occurring, which may be
traced sometimes to the tyranny of the prince, but more frequently to the
factions of the seraglio, the soldiery, or the licentious populace of the
capital. The latter, indeed, more volatile than the sands of the deserts
from which they originally sprung, were driven by every gust of passion
into the most frightful excesses, deposing and even assassinating their
monarchs, violating their palaces, and scattering abroad their beautiful
collections and libraries; while the kingdom, unlike that of Cordova, was
so contracted in its extent, that every convulsion of the capital was felt
to its farthest extremities. Still, however, it held out, almost
miraculously, against the Christian arms, and the storms that beat upon it
incessantly, for more than two centuries, scarcely wore away anything from
its original limits.

Several circumstances may be pointed out as enabling Granada to maintain
this protracted resistance. Its concentrated population furnished such
abundant supplies of soldiers, that its sovereigns could bring into the
field an army of a hundred thousand men. [33] Many of these were drawn
from the regions of the Alpuxarras, whose rugged inhabitants had not been
corrupted by the soft effeminacy of the plains. The ranks were
occasionally recruited, moreover, from the warlike tribes of Africa. The
Moors of Granada are praised by their enemies for their skill with the
cross-bow, to the use of which they were trained from childhood. [34] But
their strength lay chiefly in their cavalry. Their spacious vegas afforded
an ample field for the display of their matchless horsemanship; while the
face of the country, intersected by mountains and intricate defiles, gave
a manifest advantage to the Arabian light-horse over the steel-clad
cavalry of the Christians, and was particularly suited to the wild
_guerilla_ warfare, in which the Moors so much excelled. During the
long hostilities of the country, almost every city had been converted into
a fortress. The number of these fortified places in the territory of
Granada was ten times as great as is now to be found throughout the whole
Peninsula. [35] Lastly, in addition to these means of defence, may be
mentioned their early acquaintance with gunpowder, which, like the Greek
fire of Constantinople, contributed perhaps in some degree to prolong
their precarious existence beyond its natural term.

But, after all, the strength of Granada, like that of Constantinople, lay
less in its own resources than in the weakness of its enemies, who,
distracted by the feuds of a turbulent aristocracy, especially during the
long minorities with which Castile was afflicted, perhaps, more than any
other nation in Europe, seemed to be more remote from the conquest of
Granada at the death of Henry the Fourth, than at that of St. Ferdinand in
the thirteenth century. Before entering on the achievement of this
conquest by Ferdinand and Isabella, it may not be amiss to notice the
probable influence exerted by the Spanish Arabs on European civilization.

Notwithstanding the high advances made by the Arabians in almost every
branch of learning, and the liberal import of certain sayings ascribed to
Mahomet, the spirit of his religion was eminently unfavorable to letters.
The Koran, whatever be the merit of its literary execution, does not, we
believe, contain a single precept in favor of general science. [36]
Indeed, during the first century after its promulgation, almost as little
attention was bestowed upon this by the Saracens, as in their "days of
ignorance," as the period is stigmatized which preceded the advent of
their apostle. [37] But, after the nation had reposed from its tumultuous
military career, the taste for elegant pleasures, which naturally results
from opulence and leisure, began to flow in upon it. It entered upon this
new field with all its characteristic enthusiasm, and seemed ambitious of
attaining the same pre-eminence in science, that it had already reached in
arms.

It was at the commencement of this period of intellectual fermentation,
that the last of the Omeyades, escaping into Spain, established there the
kingdom of Cordova, and imported along with him the fondness for luxury
and letters that had begun to display itself in the capitals of the east.
His munificent spirit descended upon his successors; and, on the breaking
up of the empire, the various capitals, Seville, Murcia, Malaga, Granada,
and others, which rose upon its ruins, became the centres of so many
intellectual systems, that continued to emit a steady lustre through the
clouds and darkness of succeeding centuries. The period of this literary
civilization reached far into the fourteenth century, and thus, embracing
an interval of six hundred years, may be said to have exceeded in duration
that of any other literature, ancient or modern.

There were several auspicious circumstances in the condition of the
Spanish Arabs, which distinguished them from their Mahometan brethren. The
temperate climate of Spain was far more propitious to robustness and
elasticity of intellect than the sultry regions of Arabia and Africa. Its
long line of coast and convenient havens opened to it an enlarged
commerce. Its number of rival states encouraged a generous emulation, like
that which glowed in ancient Greece and modern Italy; and was infinitely
more favorable to the development of the mental powers than the far-
extended and sluggish empires of Asia. Lastly, a familiar intercourse with
the Europeans served to mitigate in the Spanish Arabs some of the more
degrading superstitions incident to their religion, and to impart to them
nobler ideas of the independence and moral dignity of man, than are to be
found in the slaves of eastern despotism.

Under these favorable circumstances, provisions for education were
liberally multiplied, colleges, academies, and gymnasiums springing up
spontaneously, as it were, not merely in the principal cities, but in the
most obscure villages of the country. No less than fifty of these colleges
or schools could be discerned scattered over the suburbs and populous
plain of Granada. Seventy public libraries, if we may credit the report,
were counted within the narrow limits of the Moslem territory. Every place
of note seems to have furnished materials for a literary history. The
copious catalogues of writers, still extant in the Escurial, show how
extensively the cultivation of science was pursued, even through its
minutest subdivisions; while a biographical notice of blind men, eminent
for their scholarship in Spain, proves how far the general avidity for
knowledge triumphed over the most discouraging obstacles of nature. [38]

The Spanish Arabs emulated their countrymen of the east in their devotion
to natural and mathematical science. They penetrated into the remotest
regions of Africa and Asia, transmitting an exact account of their
proceedings to the national academies. They contributed to astronomical
knowledge by the number and accuracy of their observations, and by the
improvement of instruments and the erection of observatories, of which the
noble tower of Seville is one of the earliest examples. They furnished
their full proportion in the department of history, which, according to an
Arabian author cited by D'Herbelot, could boast of thirteen hundred
writers. The treatises on logic and metaphysics amount to one-ninth of the
surviving treasures of the Escurial; and, to conclude this summary of
naked details, some of their scholars appear to have entered upon as
various a field of philosophical inquiry, as would be crowded into a
modern encyclopaedia. [39]

The results, it must be confessed, do not appear to have corresponded with
this magnificent apparatus and unrivalled activity of research. The mind
of the Arabians was distinguished by the most opposite characteristics,
which sometimes, indeed, served to neutralize each other. An acute and
subtile perception was often clouded by mysticism and abstraction. They
combined a habit of classification and generalization, with a marvellous
fondness for detail; a vivacious fancy with a patience of application,
that a German of our day might envy; and, while in fiction they launched
boldly into originality, indeed extravagance, they were content in
philosophy to tread servilely in the track of their ancient masters. They
derived their science from versions of the Greek philosophers; but, as
their previous discipline had not prepared them for its reception, they
were oppressed rather than stimulated by the weight of the inheritance.
They possessed an indefinite power of accumulation, but they rarely
ascended to general principles, or struck out new and important truths; at
least, this is certain in regard to their metaphysical labors.

Hence Aristotle, who taught them to arrange what they had already
acquired, rather than to advance to new discoveries, became the god of
their idolatry. They piled commentary on commentary, and, in their blind
admiration of his system, may be almost said to have been more of
Peripatetics than the Stagirite himself. The Cordovan Averroes was the
most eminent of his Arabian commentators, and undoubtedly contributed more
than any other individual to establish the authority of Aristotle over the
reason of mankind for so many ages. Yet his various illustrations have
served, in the opinion of European critics, to darken rather than
dissipate the ambiguities of his original, and have even led to the
confident assertion that he was wholly unacquainted with the Greek
language. [40]

The Saracens gave an entirely new face to pharmacy and chemistry. They
introduced a great variety of salutary medicaments into Europe. The
Spanish Arabs, in particular, are commended by Sprengel above their
brethren for their observations on the practice of medicine. [41] But
whatever real knowledge they possessed was corrupted by their inveterate
propensity for mystical and occult science. They too often exhausted both
health and fortune in fruitless researches after the elixir of life and
the philosopher's stone. Their medical prescriptions were regulated by the
aspect of the stars. Their physics were debased by magic, their chemistry
degenerated into alchemy, their astronomy into astrology.

In the fruitful field of history, their success was even more equivocal.
They seem to have been wholly destitute of the philosophical spirit, which
gives life to this kind of composition. They were the disciples of
fatalism and the subjects of a despotic government. Man appeared to them
only in the contrasted aspects of slave and master. What could they know
of the finer moral relations, or of the higher energies of the soul, which
are developed only under free and beneficent institutions? Even could they
have formed conceptions of these, how would they have dared to express
them? Hence their histories are too often mere barren chronological
details, or fulsome panegyrics on their princes, unenlivened by a single
spark of philosophy or criticism.

Although the Spanish Arabs are not entitled to the credit of having
wrought any important revolution in intellectual or moral science, they
are commended by a severe critic, as exhibiting in their writings "the
germs of many theories, which have been reproduced as discoveries in later
ages," [42] and they silently perfected several of those useful arts,
which have had a sensible influence on the happiness and improvement of
mankind. Algebra and the higher mathematics were taught in their schools,
and thence diffused over Europe. The manufacture of paper, which, since
the invention of printing, has contributed so essentially to the rapid
circulation of knowledge, was derived through them. Casiri has discovered
several manuscripts of cotton paper in the Escurial as early as 1009, and
of linen paper of the date of 1106; [43] the origin of which latter fabric
Tiraboschi has ascribed to an Italian of Trevigi, in the middle of the
fourteenth century. [44] Lastly, the application of gunpowder to military
science, which has wrought an equally important revolution, though of a
more doubtful complexion, in the condition of society, was derived through
the same channel. [45]

The influence of the Spanish Arabs, however, is discernible not so much in
the amount of knowledge, as in the impulse, which they communicated to the
long-dormant energies of Europe. Their invasion was coeval with the
commencement of that night of darkness, which divides the modern from the
ancient world. The soil had been impoverished by long, assiduous
cultivation. The Arabians came like a torrent, sweeping down and
obliterating even the land-marks of former civilization, but bringing with
it a fertilizing principle, which, as the waters receded, gave new life
and loveliness to the landscape. The writings of the Saracens were
translated and diffused throughout Europe. Their schools were visited by
disciples, who, roused from their lethargy, caught somewhat of the
generous enthusiasm of their masters; and a healthful action was given to
the European intellect, which, however ill-directed at first, was thus
prepared for the more judicious and successful efforts of later times.

It is comparatively easy to determine the value of the scientific labors
of a people, for truth is the same in all languages; but the laws of taste
differ so widely in different nations, that it requires a nicer
discrimination to pronounce fairly upon such works as are regulated by
them. Nothing is more common than to see the poetry of the east condemned
as tumid, over-refined, infected with meretricious ornament and conceits,
and, in short, as every way contravening the principles of good taste. Few
of the critics, who thus peremptorily condemn, are capable of reading a
line of the original. The merit of poetry, however, consists so much in
its literary execution, that a person, to pronounce upon it, should be
intimately acquainted with the whole import of the idiom in which it is
written. The style of poetry, indeed of all ornamental writing, whether
prose or verse, in order to produce a proper effect, must be raised or
relieved, as it were, upon the prevailing style of social intercourse.
Even where this is highly figurative and impassioned, as with the
Arabians, whose ordinary language is made up of metaphor, that of the poet
must be still more so. Hence the tone of elegant literature varies so
widely in different countries, even in those of Europe, which approach the
nearest to each other in their principles of taste, that it would be found
extremely difficult to effect a close translation of the most admired
specimens of eloquence from the language of one nation into that of any
other. A page of Boccaccio or Bembo, for instance, done into literal
English, would have an air of intolerable artifice and verbiage. The
choicest morsels of Massillon, Bossuet, or the rhetorical Thomas, would
savor marvellously of bombast; and how could we in any degree keep pace
with the magnificent march of the Castilian! Yet surely we are not to
impugn the taste of all these nations, who attach much more importance,
and have paid (at least this is true of the French and Italian) much
greater attention to the mere beauties of literary finish, than English
writers.

Whatever may be the sins of the Arabians on this head, they are certainly
not those of negligence. The Spanish Arabs, in particular, were noted for
the purity and elegance of their idiom; insomuch that Casiri affects to
determine the locality of an author by the superior refinement of his
style. Their copious philological and rhetorical treatises, their arts of
poetry, grammars, and rhyming dictionaries, show to what an excessive
refinement they elaborated the art of composition. Academies, far more
numerous than those of Italy, to which they subsequently served for a
model, invited by their premiums frequent competitions in poetry and
eloquence. To poetry, indeed, especially of the tender kind, the Spanish
Arabs seem to have been as indiscriminately addicted as the Italians in
the time of Petrarch; and there was scarcely a doctor in church or state,
but at some time or other offered up his amorous incense on the altar of
the muse. [46]

With all this poetic feeling, however, the Arabs never availed themselves
of the treasures of Grecian eloquence, which lay open before them. Not a
poet or orator of any eminence in that language seems to have been
translated by them. [47] The temperate tone of Attic composition appeared
tame to the fervid conceptions of the east. Neither did they venture upon
what in Europe are considered the higher walks of the art, the drama and
the epic. [48] None of their writers in prose or verse show much attention
to the development or dissection of character. Their inspiration exhaled
in lyrical effusions, in elegies, epigrams, and idyls. They sometimes,
moreover, like the Italians, employed verse as the vehicle of instruction
in the grave and recondite sciences. The general character of their poetry
is bold, florid, impassioned, richly colored with imagery, sparkling with
conceits and metaphors, and occasionally breathing a deep tone of moral
sensibility, as in some of the plaintive effusions ascribed by Conde to
the royal poets of Cordova. The compositions of the golden age of the
Abassides, and of the preceding period, do not seem to have been infected
with the taint of exaggeration, so offensive to a European, which
distinguishes the later productions in the decay of the empire.

Whatever be thought of the influence of the Arabic on European literature
in general, there can be no reasonable doubt that it has been considerable
on the Provencal and the Castilian. In the latter especially, so far from
being confined to the vocabulary, or to external forms of composition, it
seems to have penetrated deep into its spirit, and is plainly discernible
in that affectation of stateliness and Oriental hyberbole, which
characterizes Spanish writers even at the present day; in the subtilties
and conceits with which the ancient Castilian verse is so liberally
bespangled; and in the relish for proverbs and prudential maxims, which is
so general that it may be considered national. [49]

A decided effect has been produced on the romantic literature of Europe by
those tales of fairy enchantment, so characteristic of Oriental genius,
and in which it seems to have revelled with uncontrolled delight. These
tales, which furnished the principal diversion of the East, were imported
by the Saracens into Spain; and we find the monarchs of Cordova solacing
their leisure hours with listening to their _rawis_, or novelists, who
sang to them.

  "Of ladye-love and war, romance, and knightly worth." [50]

The same spirit, penetrating into France, stimulated the more sluggish
inventions of the _trouvere_, and, at a later and more polished period,
called forth the imperishable creations of the Italian muse. [51]

It is unfortunate for the Arabians, that their literature should be locked
up in a character and idiom so difficult of access to European scholars.
Their wild, imaginative poetry, scarcely capable of transfusion into a
foreign tongue, is made known to us only through the medium of bald prose
translation, while their scientific treatises have been done into Latin
with an inaccuracy, which, to make use of a pun of Casiri's, merits the
name of perversions rather than versions of the originals. [52] How
obviously inadequate, then, are our means of forming any just estimate of
their literary merits! It is unfortunate for them, moreover, that the
Turks, the only nation, which, from an identity of religion and government
with the Arabs, as well as from its political consequence, would seem to
represent them on the theatre of modern Europe, should be a race so
degraded; one which, during the five centuries that it has been in
possession of the finest climate and monuments of antiquity, has so seldom
been quickened into a display of genius, or added so little of positive
value to the literary treasures descended from its ancient masters. Yet
this people, so sensual and sluggish, we are apt to confound in
imagination with the sprightly, intellectual Arab. Both indeed have been
subjected to the influence of the same degrading political and religious
institutions, which on the Turks have produced the results naturally to
have been expected; while the Arabians, on the other hand, exhibit the
extraordinary phenomenon of a nation, under all these embarrassments,
rising to a high degree of elegance and intellectual culture.

The empire, which once embraced more than half of the ancient world, has
now shrunk within its original limits; and the Bedouin wanders over his
native desert as free, and almost as uncivilized, as before the coming of
his apostle. The language, which was once spoken along the southern shores
of the Mediterranean and the whole extent of the Indian Ocean, is broken
up into a variety of discordant dialects. Darkness has again settled over
those regions of Africa, which were illumined by the light of learning.
The elegant dialect of the Koran is studied as a dead language, even in
the birth-place of the prophet. Not a printing-press at this day is to be
found throughout the whole Arabian Peninsula. Even in Spain, in Christian
Spain, alas! the contrast is scarcely less degrading. A death-like torpor
has succeeded to her former intellectual activity. Her cities are emptied
of the population with which they teemed in the days of the Saracens. Her
climate is as fair, but her fields no longer bloom with the same rich and
variegated husbandry. Her most interesting monuments are those constructed
by the Arabs; and the traveller, as he wanders amid their desolate, but
beautiful ruins, ponders on the destinies of a people, whose very
existence seems now to have been almost as fanciful as the magical
creations in one of their own fairy tales.

       *       *       *       *

Notwithstanding the history of the Arabs is so intimately connected with
that of the Spaniards, that it may be justly said to form the reverse side
of it, and notwithstanding the amplitude of authentic documents in the
Arabic tongue to be found in the public libraries, the Castilian writers,
even the most eminent, until the latter half of the last century, with an
insensibility which can be imputed to nothing else but a spirit of
religious bigotry, have been content to derive their narratives
exclusively from national authorities. A fire, which, occurred in the
Escurial in 1671, having consumed more than three-quarters of the
magnificent collection of eastern manuscripts which it contained, the
Spanish government, taking some shame to itself, as it would appear, for
its past supineness, caused a copious catalogue of the surviving volumes,
to the number of 1850, to be compiled by the learned Casiri; and the
result was his celebrated work, "Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana
Escurialensis," which appeared in the years 1760-70, and which would
reflect credit from the splendor of its typographical execution on any
press of the present day. This work, although censured by some later
Orientalists as hasty and superficial, must ever be highly valued as
affording the only complete index to the rich repertory of Arabian
manuscripts in the Escurial, and for the ample evidence which it exhibits
of the science and mental culture of the Spanish Arabs. Several other
native scholars, among whom Andres and Masdeu may be particularly noticed,
have made extensive researches into the literary history of this people.
Still, their political history, so essential to a correct knowledge of the
Spanish, was comparatively neglected, until Senor Conde, the late learned
librarian of the Academy, who had given ample evidence of his Oriental
learning in his version and illustrations of the Nubian Geographer, and a
Dissertation on Arabic Coins published in the fifth volume of the Memoirs
of the Royal Academy of History, compiled his work entitled "Historia de
la Dominacion de los Arabes en Espana." The first volume appeared in 1820.
Bat unhappily the death of its author, occurring in the autumn of the same
year, prevented the completion of his design. The two remaining volumes,
however, were printed in the course of that and the following year from
his own manuscripts; and although their comparative meagreness and
confused chronology betray the want of the same paternal hand, they
contain much interesting information. The relation of the conquest of
Granada, especially, with which the work concludes, exhibits some
important particulars in a totally different point of view from that in
which they had been presented by the principal Spanish historians.

The first volume, which may be considered as having received the last
touches of its author, embraces a circumstantial narrative of the great
Saracen invasion, of the subsequent condition of Spain under the viceroys,
and of the empire of the Omeyades; undoubtedly the most splendid portion
of Arabian annals, but the one, unluckily, which has been most copiously
illustrated in the popular work compiled by Cardonne from the Oriental
manuscripts in the Royal Library at Paris. But as this author has followed
the Spanish and the Oriental authorities, indiscriminately, no part of his
book can be cited as a genuine Arabic version, except indeed the last
sixty pages, comprising the conquest of Granada, which Cardonne professes
in his Preface to have drawn exclusively from an Arabian manuscript.
Conde, on the other hand, professes to have adhered to his originals with
such scrupulous fidelity, that "the European reader may feel that he is
perusing an Arabian author;" and certainly very strong internal evidence
is afforded of the truth of this assertion, in the peculiar national and
religious spirit which pervades the work, and in a certain florid
gasconade of style, common with the Oriental writers. It is this fidelity
that constitutes the peculiar value of Conde's narrative. It is the first
time that the Arabians, at least those of Spain, the part of the nation
which reached the highest degree of refinement, have been allowed to speak
for themselves. The history, or rather tissue of histories, embodied in
the translation, is certainly conceived in no very philosophical spirit,
and contains, as might be expected from an Asiatic pen, little for the
edification of a European reader on subjects of policy and government. The
narrative is, moreover, encumbered with frivolous details and a barren
muster-roll of names and titles, which would better become a genealogical
table than a history. But, with every deduction, it must be allowed to
exhibit a sufficiently clear view of the intricate conflicting relations
of the petty principalities, which swarmed over the Peninsula; and to
furnish abundant evidence of a wide-spread intellectual improvement amid
all the horrors of anarchy and a ferocious despotism. The work has already
been translated, or rather paraphrased, into French. The necessity of an
English version will doubtless be in a great degree superseded by the
History of the Spanish Arabs, preparing for the Cabinet Cyclopaedia, by
Mr. Southey,--a writer, with whom few Castilian scholars will be willing
to compete, even on their own ground; and who is, happily, not exposed to
the national or religious prejudices, which can interfere with his
rendering perfect justice to his subject.


FOOTNOTES

[1] See Introduction, Section I. Note 2, of this History.

[2] The Koran, in addition to the repeated assurances of Paradise to the
martyr who falls in battle, contains the regulations of a precise military
code. Military service in some shape or other is exacted from all. The
terms to be prescribed to the enemy and the vanquished, the division of
the spoil, the seasons of lawful truce, the conditions on which the
comparatively small number of exempts are permitted to remain at home, are
accurately defined. (Sale's Koran, chap. 2, 8, 9, et alibi.) When the
_algihed_, or Mahometan crusade, which, in its general design and
immunities, bore a close resemblance to the Christian, was preached in the
mosque, every true believer was bound to repair to the standard of his
chief. "The holy war," says one of the early Saracen generals, "is the
ladder of Paradise. The Apostle of God styled himself the son of the
sword. He loved to repose in the shadow of banners and on the field of
battle."

[3] The successors, caliphs or vicars, as they were styled, of Mahomet,
represented both his spiritual and temporal authority. Their office
involved almost equally ecclesiastical and military functions. It was
their duty to lead the army in battle, and on the pilgrimage to Mecca.
They were to preach a sermon, and offer up public prayers in the mosques
every Friday. Many of their prerogatives resemble those assumed anciently
by the popes. They conferred investitures on the Moslem princes by the
symbol of a ring, a sword, or a standard. They complimented them with the
titles of "defender of the faith," "column of religion," and the like. The
proudest potentate held the bridle of their mules, and paid his homage by
touching their threshold with his forehead. The authority of the caliphs
was in this manner founded on opinion no less than on power; and their
ordinances, however frivolous or iniquitous in themselves, being enforced,
as it were, by a divine sanction, became laws which it was sacrilege to
disobey. See D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, (La Haye, 1777-9,) voce
_Khalifah_.

[4] The character of the Arabs before the introduction of Islam, like that
of most rude nations, is to be gathered from their national songs and
romances. The poems suspended at Mecca, familiar to us in the elegant
version of Sir William Jones, and still more, the recent translation of
"Antar," a composition indeed of the age of Al Raschid, but wholly devoted
to the primitive Bedouins, present us with a lively picture of their
peculiar habits, which, notwithstanding the influence of a temporary
civilization, may be thought to bear great resemblance to those of their
descendants at the present day.

[5] Startling as it may be, there is scarcely a vestige of any of the
particulars, circumstantially narrated by the national historians
(Mariana, Zurita, Abarca, Moret, etc.) as the immediate causes of the
subversion of Spain, to be found in the chronicles of the period. No
intimation of the persecution, or of the treason, of the two sons of
Witiza is to be met with in any Spanish writer, as far as I know, until
nearly two centuries after the conquest; none earlier than this, of the
defection of Archbishop Oppas, during the fatal conflict near Xerez; and
none of the tragical amours of Roderic and the revenge of count Julian,
before the writers of the thirteenth century. Nothing indeed can be more
jejune than the original narratives of the invasion. The continuation of
the Chronicon del Biclarense, and the Chronicon de Isidoro Pacense or de
Beja, which are contained in the voluminous collection of Florez, (Espana
Sagrada, tom. vi. and viii.) afford the only histories contemporary with
the event. Conde is mistaken in his assertion (Dominacion de los Arabes,
Prol. p. vii.), that the work of Isidoro de Beja was the only narrative
written during that period. Spain had not the pen of a Bede or an Eginhart
to describe the memorable catastrophe. But the few and meagre touches of
the contemporary chroniclers have left ample scope for conjectural
history, which has been most industriously improved.

The reports, according to Conde, (Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. p.
36,) greedily circulated among the Saracens, of the magnificence and
general prosperity of the Gothic monarchy, may sufficiently account for
its invasion by an enemy flushed with uninterrupted conquests, and whose
fanatical ambition was well illustrated by one of their own generals, who,
on reaching the western extremity of Africa, plunged his horse into the
Atlantic, and sighed for other shores on which to plant the banners of
Islam. See Cardonne, Histoire de l'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous la
Domination des Arabes, (Paris, 1765,) tom. i. p. 37.

[6] The laborious diligence of Masdeu may be thought to have settled the
epoch, about which so much learned dust has been raised. The fourteenth
volume of his Historia Critica de Espana y de la Cultura Espanola (Madrid,
1783-1805) contains an accurate table, by which the minutest dates of the
Mahometan lunar year are adjusted by those of the Christian era. The fall
of Roderic on the field of battle is attested by both the domestic
chroniclers of that period, as well as by the Saracens. (Incerti Auctoris
Additio ad Joannem Biclarensem, apud Florez, Espana Sagrada, tom. vi. p.
430.--Isidori Pacensis Episcopi Chronicon, apud Florez, Espana Sagrada,
tom. viii. p. 290.) The tales of the ivory and marble chariot, of the
gallant steed Orelia and magnificent vestments of Roderic, discovered
after the fight on the banks of the Guadalete, of his probable escape and
subsequent seclusion among the mountains of Portugal, which have been
thought worthy of Spanish history, have found a much more appropriate
place in their romantic national ballads, as well as in the more elaborate
productions of Scott and Southey.

[7] "Whatever curses," says an eye-witness, whose meagre diction is
quickened on this occasion into something like sublimity, "whatever curses
were denounced by the prophets of old against Jerusalem, whatever fell
upon ancient Babylon, whatever miseries Rome inflicted upon the glorious
company of the martyrs, all these were visited upon the once happy and
prosperous, but now desolated Spain." Pacensis Chronicon, apud Florez,
Espana Sagrada, tom. viii. p. 292.

[8] The frequency of this alliance may be inferred from an extraordinary,
though, doubtless, extravagant statement cited by Zurita. The ambassadors
of James II., of Aragon, in 1311, represented to the sovereign pontiff,
Clement V., that, of the 200,000 souls, which then composed the population
of Granada, there were not more than 500 of pure Moorish descent. Anales,
tom. iv. fol. 314.

[9] The famous persecutions of Cordova under the reigns of Abderrahman II.
and his son, which, to judge from the tone of Castilian writers, might vie
with those of Nero and Diocletian, are admitted by Morales (Obras, tom. x.
p. 74) to have occasioned the destruction of only forty individuals. Most
of these unhappy fanatics solicited the crown of martyrdom by an open
violation of the Mahometan laws and usages. The details are given by
Florez, in the tenth volume of his collection.

[10] Bleda, Coronica de los Moros de Espana, (Valencia, 1618,) lib. 2,
cap. 16, 17.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. i. pp. 83 et
seq. 179.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, Prol., p. vii. and tom. i. pp.
29-54, 75, 87.--Morales, Obras, tom. vi. pp. 407-417; tom. vii. pp. 262-
264.--Florez, Espana Sagrada, tom. x. pp. 237-270.--Fuero Juzgo, Int. p.
40.

[11] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, part. 2, cap. 1-46.

[12] Ibid., ubi supra.--Masdeu, Historia Critica, tom. xiii. pp. 178, 187.

[13] The same taste is noticed at the present day, by a traveller, whose
pictures glow with the warm colors of the east. "Aussi des que vous
approchez, en Europe ou en Asie, d'une terre possedee par les Musulmans,
vous la reconnaissez de loin au riche et sombre voile de verdure qui
flotte gracieusement sur elle:--des arbres pour s'asseoir a leur ombre,
des fontaines jaillissantes pour rever a leur bruit, du silence et des
mosquees aux legers minarets, s'elevant a chaque pas du sein d'une terre
pieuse." Lamartine, Voyage en Orient, tome i. p. 172.

[14] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. pp. 199, 265, 284, 285, 417,
446, 447, et alibi.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. i. pp.
227-230 et seq.

[15] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. pp. 211, 212, 226.--
Swinburne, Travels through Spain, (London, 1787,) let. 35.--Xerif Aledris,
conocido por El Nubiense, Descripcion de Espana, con Traduccion y Notas de
Conde, (Madrid, 1799,) pp. 161, 162.--Morales, Obras, tom. x. p. 61.--
Chenier, Recherches Historiques sur les Maures, et Histoire de l'Empire de
Maroc, (Paris, 1787,) tom. ii. p. 312.--Laborde, Itineraire, tome iii. p.
226.

[16] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. pp 214, 228, 270, 611.--
Masdeu, Historia Critica, tom. xiii. p. 118.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et
d'Espagne, tom. i. pp. 338-343.--Casiri quotes from an Arabic historian
the conditions on which Abderrahman I. proffered his alliance to the
Christian princes of Spain, viz. the annual tribute of 10,000 ounces of
gold, 10,000 pounds of silver, 10,000 horses, etc., etc. The absurdity of
this story, inconsiderately repeated by historians, if any argument were
necessary to prove it, becomes sufficiently manifest from the fact, that
the instrument is dated in the 142d year of the Hegira, being a little
more than fifty years after the conquest. See Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana
Escurialensis, (Matriti, 1760,) tom. ii. p. 104.

[17] Hist. Naturalis, lib. 33, cap. 4.

[18] Introduction a l'Histoire Naturelle de l'Espagne, traduite par
Flavigny, (Paris, 1776,) p. 411.

[19] See a sensible essay by the Abbe Correa da Serra on the husbandry of
the Spanish Arabs, contained in tom. i. of Archives Litteraires de
l'Europe, (Paris, 1804.)--Masdeu, Historia Critica, tom. xiii. pp. 115,
117, 127, 131.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. cap. 44.--Casiri,
Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. i. p. 338.

An absurd story has been transcribed from Cardonne, with little
hesitation, by almost every succeeding writer upon this subject. According
to him, (Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. i. p. 338,) "the banks of the
Guadalquivir were lined with no less than twelve thousand villages and
hamlets." The length of the river, not exceeding three hundred miles,
would scarcely afford room for the same number of farm-houses. Conde's
version of the Arabic passage represents twelve thousand hamlets, farms,
and castles, to have "been scattered over the regions watered by the
Gaudalquivir;" indicating by this indefinite statement nothing more than
the extreme populousness of the province of Andalusia.

[20] Casiri, Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. pp. 38, 202.--Conde,
Dominacion de los Arabes, part. 2, cap. 88.

[21] Storia della Letteratura Italiana, (Roma, 1782-97,) tom. iii. p.
231.--Turner, History of the Anglo-Saxons, (London, 1820,) vol. iii. p.
137.--Andres, Dell' Origine, de' Progressi e dello Stato Attuale d'Ogni
Letteratura, (Venezia, 1783,) part. 1, cap. 8, 9.--Casiri, Bibliotheca
Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 149.--Masdeu, Historia Critica, tom. xiii. pp.
165, 171.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, part. 2, cap. 93.--Among the
accomplished women of this period, Valadata, the daughter of the caliph
Mahomet, is celebrated as having frequently carried away the palm of
eloquence in her discussions with the most learned academicians. Others
again, with an intrepidity that might shame the degeneracy of a modern
_blue_, plunged boldly into the studies of philosophy, history, and
jurisprudence.

[22] Garibay, Compendio, lib. 39, cap. 3.

[23] Zurita, Anales, lib. 20, cap. 42.

[24] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 169.

[25] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. ii. p. 147.--Casiri,
Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. pp. 248 et seq.--Pedraza, Antiguedad y
Excelencias de Granada, (Madrid, 1608,) lib. 1.--Pedraza has collected the
various etymologies of the term _Granada_, which some writers have
traced to the fact of the city having been the spot where the
_pomegranate_ was first introduced from Africa; others to the large
quantity of _grain_ in which its vega abounded; others again to the
resemblance which the city, divided into two hills thickly sprinkled with
houses, bore to a half-opened pomegranate. (Lib. 2, cap. 17.) The arms of
the city, which were in part composed of a pomegranate, would seem to
favor the derivation of its name from that of the fruit.

[26] Pedraza, Antiguedad de Granada, fol. 101.--Denina, Delle Rivoluzioni
d'Italia, (Venezia, 1816,) Capmany y Montpalau, Memorias Historicas sobre
la Marina, Comercio, y Artes de Barcelona, (Madrid, 1779-92,) tom. iii. p.
218; tom. iv. pp. 67 et seq.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii.
cap. 26.--The ambassador of the emperor Frederic III., on his passage to
the court of Lisbon in the middle of the fifteenth century, contrasts the
superior cultivation, as well as general civilization, of Granada at this
period with that of the other countries of Europe through which he had
travelled. Sismondi, Histoire des Republiques Italiennes du Moyen-Age,
(Paris, 1818,) tom. ix. p. 405.

[27] Casiri, Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. pp. 250-258.--The fifth
volume of the royal Spanish Academy of History contains an erudite essay
by Conde on Arabic money, principally with reference to that coined in
Spain, pp. 225-315.

[28] A specification of a royal donative in that day may serve to show the
martial spirit of the age. In one of these, made by the king of Granada to
the Castilian sovereign, we find twenty noble steeds of the royal stud,
reared on the banks of the Xenil, with superb caparisons, and the same
number of scimitars richly garnished with gold and jewels; and, in
another, mixed up with perfumes and cloth of gold, we meet with a litter
of tame lions. (Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. pp. 163, 183.)
This latter symbol of royalty appears to have been deemed peculiarly
appropriate to the kings of Leon. Ferreras informs us that the ambassadors
from France at the Castilian court, in 1434, were received by John II.
with a full-grown domesticated lion crouching at his feet. (Hist.
d'Espagne, tom. vi. p. 401.) The same taste appears still to exist in
Turkey. Dr. Clarke, in his visit to Constantinople, met with one of these
terrific pets, who used to follow his master, Hassan Pacha, about like a
dog.

[29] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 28.--Henriquez del
Castillo (Cronica, cap. 138,) gives an account of an intended duel between
two Castilian nobles, in the presence of the king of Granada, as late as
1470. One of the parties, Don Alfonso de Aguilar, failing to keep his
engagement, the other rode round the lists in triumph, with his
adversary's portrait contemptuously fastened to the tail of his horse.

[30] It must be admitted, that these ballads, as far as facts are
concerned, are too inexact to furnish other than a very slippery
foundation for history. The most beautiful portion perhaps of the Moorish
ballads, for example, is taken up with the feuds of the Abencerrages in
the latter days of Granada. Yet this family, whose romantic story is still
repeated to the traveller amid the ruins of the Alhambra, is scarcely
noticed, as far as I am aware, by contemporary writers, foreign or
domestic, and would seem to owe its chief celebrity to the apocryphal
version of Cines Perez de Hyta, whose "Milesian tales," according to the
severe sentence of Nic. Antonio, "are fit only to amuse the lazy and the
listless." (Bibliotheca Nova, tom. i. p. 536.)

But, although the Spanish ballads are not entitled to the credit of strict
historical documents, they may yet perhaps be received in evidence of the
prevailing character of the social relations of the age; a remark indeed
predicable of most works of fiction, written by authors contemporary with
the events they describe, and more especially so of that popular
minstrelsy, which, emanating from a simple, uncorrupted class, is less
likely to swerve from truth, than more ostentatious works of art. The long
cohabitation of the Saracens with the Christians, (full evidence of which
is afforded by Capmany, (Mem. de Barcelona, tom. iv. Apend. no. 11,) who
quotes a document from the public archives of Catalonia, showing the great
number of Saracens residing in Aragon even in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries, the most flourishing period of the Granadian
empire,) had enabled many of them confessedly to speak and write the
Spanish language with purity and elegance. Some of the graceful little
songs, which are still chanted by the peasantry of Spain in their dances,
to the accompaniment of the castanet, are referred by a competent critic
(Conde, De la Poesia Oriental, MS.) to an Arabian origin. There can be
little hazard, therefore, in imputing much of this peculiar minstrelsy to
the Arabians themselves, the contemporaries, and perhaps the eye-
witnesses, of the events they celebrate.

[31] Casiri (Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 259) has transcribed a
passage from an Arabian author of the fourteenth century, inveighing
bitterly against the luxury of the Moorish ladies, their gorgeous apparel
and habits of expense, "amounting almost to insanity," in a tone which may
remind one of the similar philippic by his contemporary Dante, against his
fair countrywomen of Florence.--Two ordinances of a king of Granada, cited
by Conde in his History, prescribed the separation of the women from the
men in the mosques; and prohibit their attendance on certain festivals,
without the protection of their husbands or some near relative.--Their
_femmes savantes_, as we have seen, were in the habit of conferring
freely with men of letters, and of assisting in person at the academical
_seances_.--And lastly, the frescoes alluded to in the text represent
the presence of females at the tournaments, and the fortunate knight
receiving the palm of victory from their hands.

[32] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. p. 340; tom. iii. p. 119.

[33] Casiri, on Arabian authority, computes it at 200,000 men. Bibliotheca
Escurialensis, tom. i. p. 338.

[34] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 250.

[35] Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. p. 169.--These ruined
fortifications still thickly stud the border territories of Granada; and
many an Andalusian mill, along the banks of the Guadayra and Guadalquivir,
retains its battlemented tower, which served for the defence of its
inmates against the forays of the enemy.

[36] D'Herbelot, (Bib. Orientale, tom. i. p. 630,) among other authentic
traditions of Mahomet, quotes one as indicating his encouragement of
letters, viz. "That the ink of the doctors and the blood of the martyrs
are of equal price." M. OElsner (Des Effets de la Religion de Mohammed,
Paris, 1810) has cited several others of the same liberal import. But such
traditions cannot be received in evidence of the original doctrine of the
prophet. They are rejected as apocryphal by the Persians and the whole
sect of the Shiites, and are entitled to little weight with a European.

[37] When the caliph Al Mamon encouraged, by his example as well as
patronage, a more enlightened policy, he was accused by the more orthodox
Mussulmans of attempting to subvert the principles of their religion. See
Pococke, Spec. Hist. Arabum, (Oxon. 1650,) p. 166.

[38] Andres, Letteratura, part. 1, cap. 8, 10.--Casiri, Bibliotheca
Escurialensis, tom. ii. pp. 71, 251, et passim.

[39] Casiri mentions one of these universal geniuses, who published no
less than a thousand and fifty treatises on the various topics of Ethics,
History, Law, Medicine, etc.! Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 107.
--See also tom. i. p. 370; tom. ii. p. 71 et alibi.--Zuniga, Annales de
Sevilla, p. 22.--D'Herbelot, Bib. Orientale, voce _Tarikh_.--Masdeu,
Historia Critica, tom. xiii. pp. 203, 205.--Andres, Letteratura, part. 1,
cap. 8.

[40] Consult the sensible, though perhaps severe, remarks of Degerando on
Arabian science. (Hist. de la Philosophie, tom. iv. cap. 24.)--The reader
may also peruse with advantage a disquisition on Arabian metaphysics in
Turner's History of England, (vol. iv. pp. 405-449.--Brucker, Hist.
Philosophiae, tom. in. p. 105.)--Ludovicus Vives seems to have been the
author of the imputation in the text. (Nic. Antonio, Bibliotheca Vetus,
tom. ii. p. 394.) Averroes translated some of the philosophical works of
Aristotle from the Greek into Arabic; a Latin version of which translation
was afterwards made. Though D'Herbelot is mistaken (Bib. Orientale, art.
_Roschd_) in saying that Averroes was the first who translated Aristotle
into Arabic; as this had been done two centuries before, at least, by
Honain and others in the ninth century, (see Casiri, Bibliotheca
Escurialensis, tom. i. p. 304,) and Bayle has shown that a Latin version
of the Stagirite was used by the Europeans before the alleged period. See
art. _Averroes_.

[41] Sprengel, Histoire de la Medecine, traduite par Jourdan, (Paris,
1815,) tom. ii. pp. 263 et seq.

[42] Degerando, Hist. de la Philosophie, tom. iv. ubi supra.

[43] Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 9.--Andres, Letteratura, part.
1, cap. 10.

[44] Letteratura Italiana, tom. v. p. 87.

[45] The battle of Crecy furnishes the earliest instance on record of the
use of artillery by the European Christians; although Du Cange, among
several examples which he enumerates, has traced a distinct notice of its
existence as far back as 1338. (Glossarium ad Scriptores Mediae et Infimae
Latinitatis, (Paris, 1739,) and Supplement, (Paris, 1766,) voce
_Bombarda_.) The history of the Spanish Arabs carries it to a much
earlier period. It was employed by the Moorish king of Granada at the
siege of Baza, in 1312 and 1325. (Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom.
iii. cap. 18.--Casiri, Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 7.) It is
distinctly noticed in an Arabian treatise as ancient as 1249; and,
finally, Casiri quotes a passage from a Spanish author at the close of the
eleventh Century, (whose MS., according to Nic. Antonio, though familiar
to scholars, lies still entombed in the dust of libraries,) which
describes the use of artillery in a naval engagement of that period
between the Moors of Tunis and of Seville. Casiri, Bibliotheca
Escurialensis, tom. ii. p. 8.--Nic, Antonio, Bibliotheca Vetus, tom. ii.
p. 12.

[46] Petrarch complains, in one of his letters from the country, that
"jurisconsults and divines, nay his own valet, had taken to rhyming; and
he was afraid the very cattle might begin to low in verse;" apud De Sade,
Memoires pour la Vie de Petrarque, tom. iii. p. 243.

[47] Andres, Letteratura, part. 1, cap. 11.--Yet this popular assertion is
contradicted by Reinesius, who states, that both Homer and Pindar were
translated into Arabic by the middle of the eighth century. See Fabricius,
Bibliotheca Graeca, (Hamb. 1712-38,) tom. xii. p. 753.

[48] Sir William Jones, Traite sur la Poesie Orientale, sec. 2.--Sismondi
says that Sir W. Jones is mistaken in citing the history of Timour by Ebn.
Arabschah, as an Arabic epic. (Litterature du Midi, tom. i. p. 57.) It is
Sismondi who is mistaken, since the English critic states that the Arabs
have no heroic poem, and that this poetical prose history is not accounted
such even by the Arabs themselves.

[49] It would require much more learning than I am fortified with, to
enter into the merits of the question, which has been raised respecting
the probable influence of the Arabian on the literature of Europe. A. V.
Schlegel, in a work of little bulk, but much value, in refuting with his
usual vivacity the extravagant theory of Andres, has been led to
conclusions of an opposite nature, which may be thought perhaps scarcely
less extravagant. (Observations sur la Langue et la Litterature
Provencales, p. 64.) It must indeed seem highly improbable that the
Saracens, who, during the Middle Ages, were so far superior in science and
literary culture to the Europeans, could have resided so long in immediate
contact with them, and in those very countries indeed which gave birth to
the most cultivated poetry of that period, without exerting some
perceptible influence upon it. Be this as it may, its influence on the
Castilian cannot reasonably be disputed. This has been briefly traced by
Conde in an "Essay on Oriental Poetry," _Poesia Oriental_, whose
publication he anticipates in the Preface to his "History of the Spanish
Arabs," but which still remains in manuscript. (The copy I have used is in
the library of Mr. George Ticknor.) He professes in this work to discern
in the earlier Castilian poetry, in the Cid, the Alexander, in Berceo's,
the arch-priest of Hita's, and others of similar antiquity, most of the
peculiarities and varieties of Arabian verse; the same cadences and number
of syllables, the same intermixture of assonances and consonances, the
double hemistich and prolonged repetition of the final rhyme. From the
same source he derives much of the earlier rural minstrelsy of Spain, as
well as the measures of its romances and seguidillas; and in the Preface
to his History, he has ventured on the bold assertion, that the Castilian
owes so much of its vocabulary to the Arabic, that it may be almost
accounted a dialect of the latter. Conde's criticisms, however, must be
quoted with reserve. His habitual studies had given him such a keen relish
for Oriental literature, that he was, in a manner, _denaturalized_ from
his own.

[50] Byron's beautiful line may seem almost a version of Conde's Spanish
text, "sucesos de armas y de amores con muy estranos lances y en elegante
estilo."--Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. i. p. 457.

[51] Sismondi, in his Litterature du Midi, (tom. i. pp. 267 et seq.), and
more fully in his Republiques Italiennes, (tom. xvi. pp. 448 et seq.),
derives the jealousy of the sex, the ideas of honor, and the deadly spirit
of revenge, which distinguished the southern nations of Europe in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, from the Arabians. Whatever be thought
of the jealousy of the sex, it might have been supposed that the
principles of honor and the spirit of revenge might, without seeking
further, find abundant precedent in the feudal habits and institutions of
our European ancestors.

[52] "Quas _perversivnes_ potius, quam _versiones_ merito dixeris."
Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. i. p. 266.




CHAPTER IX.

WAR OF GRANADA.--SURPRISE OF ZAHARA.--CAPTURE OF ALHAMA.

1481-1482.

Zahara Surprised by the Moors.--Marquis of Cadiz.--His Expedition against
Alhama.--Valor of the Citizens.--Desperate Struggle.--Fall of Alhama.--
Consternation of the Moors.--Vigorous Measures of the Queen.


No sooner had Ferdinand and Isabella restored internal tranquillity to
their dominions, and made the strength effective which had been acquired
by their union under one government, than they turned their eyes to those
fair regions of the Peninsula, over which the Moslem crescent had reigned
triumphant for nearly eight centuries. Fortunately, an act of aggression
on the part of the Moors furnished a pretext for entering on their plan of
conquest, at the moment when it was ripe for execution. Aben Ismael, who
had ruled in Granada during the latter part of John the Second's reign,
and the commencement of Henry the Fourth's, had been partly indebted for
his throne to the former monarch; and sentiments of gratitude, combined
with a naturally amiable disposition, had led him to foster as amicable
relations with the Christian princes, as the jealousy of two nations, that
might be considered the natural enemies of each other, would permit; so
that, notwithstanding an occasional border foray, or the capture of a
frontier fortress, such a correspondence was maintained between the two
kingdoms, that the nobles of Castile frequently resorted to the court of
Granada, where, forgetting their ancient feuds, they mingled with the
Moorish cavaliers in the generous pastimes of chivalry.

Muley Abul Hacen, who succeeded his father in 1466, was of a very
different temperament. His fiery character prompted him, when very young,
to violate the truce by an unprovoked inroad into Andalusia; and, although
after his accession domestic troubles occupied him too closely to allow
leisure for foreign war, he still cherished in secret the same feelings of
animosity against the Christians. When, in 1476, the Spanish sovereigns
required as the condition of a renewal of the truce, which he solicited,
the payment of the annual tribute imposed on his predecessors, he proudly
replied that "the mints of Granada coined no longer gold, but steel." His
subsequent conduct did not belie the spirit of this Spartan answer.
[1]

At length, towards the close of the year 1481, the storm which had been so
long gathering burst upon Zahara, a small fortified town on the frontier
of Andalusia, crowning a lofty eminence, washed at its base by the river
Guadalete, which from its position seemed almost inaccessible. The
garrison, trusting to these natural defences, suffered itself to be
surprised on the night of the 20th of December, by the Moorish monarch;
who, scaling the walls under favor of a furious tempest, which prevented
his approach from being readily heard, put to the sword such of the guard
as offered resistance, and swept away the whole population of the place,
men, women, and children, in slavery to Granada.

The intelligence of this disaster caused deep mortification to the Spanish
sovereigns, especially to Ferdinand, by whose grandfather Zahara had been
recovered from the Moors. Measures were accordingly taken for
strengthening the whole line of frontier, and the utmost vigilance was
exerted to detect some vulnerable point of the enemy, on which retaliation
might be successfully inflicted. Neither were the tidings of their own
successes welcomed, with the joy that might have been expected, by the
people of Granada. The prognostics, it was said, afforded by the
appearance of the heavens, boded no good. More sure prognostics were
afforded in the judgments of thinking men, who deprecated the temerity of
awakening the wrath of a vindictive and powerful enemy, "Woe is me!"
exclaimed an ancient Alfaki, on quitting the hall of audience, "the ruins
of Zahara will fall on our own heads; the days of the Moslem empire in
Spain are now numbered!" [2]

It was not long before the desired opportunity for retaliation presented
itself to the Spaniards. One Juan de Ortega, a captain of
_escaladores_, or sealers, so denominated from the peculiar service
in which they were employed in besieging cities, who had acquired some
reputation under John the Second, in the wars of Roussillon, reported to
Diego de Merlo, assistant of Seville, that the fortress of Albania,
situated in the heart of the Moorish territories, was so negligently
guarded, that it might be easily carried by an enemy, who had skill enough
to approach it. The fortress, as well as the city of the same name, which
it commanded, was built, like many others in that turbulent period, along
the crest of a rocky eminence, encompassed by a river at its base, and,
from its natural advantages, might be deemed impregnable. This strength of
position, by rendering all other precautions apparently superfluous,
lulled its defenders into a security like that which had proved so fatal
to Zahara. Alhama, as this Arabic name implies, was famous for its baths,
whose annual rents are said to have amounted to five hundred thousand
ducats. The monarchs of Granada, indulging the taste common to the people
of the east, used to frequent this place, with their court, to refresh
themselves with its delicious waters, so that Alhama became embellished
with all the magnificence of a royal residence. The place was still
further enriched by its being the _depot_ of the public taxes on land,
which constituted a principal branch of the revenue, and by its various
manufactures of cloth, for which its inhabitants were celebrated
throughout the kingdom of Granada. [3]

Diego de Merlo, although struck with the advantages of this conquest, was
not insensible to the difficulties with which it would be attended; since
Alhama was sheltered under the very wings of Granada, from which it lay
scarcely eight leagues distant, and could be reached only by traversing
the most populous portion of the Moorish territory, or by surmounting a
precipitous sierra, or chain of mountains, which screened it on the north.
Without delay, however, he communicated the information which he had
received to Don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, marquis of Cadiz, as the person
best fitted by his capacity and courage for such an enterprise. This
nobleman, who had succeeded his father, the count of Arcos, in 1469, as
head of the great house of Ponce de Leon, was at this period about thirty-
nine years of age. Although a younger and illegitimate son, he had been
preferred to the succession in consequence of the extraordinary promise
which his early youth exhibited. When scarcely seventeen years old, he
achieved a victory over the Moors, accompanied with a signal display of
personal prowess. [4] Later in life, he formed a connection with the
daughter of the marquis of Villena, the factious minister of Henry the
Fourth, through whose influence he was raised to the dignity of marquis of
Cadiz. This alliance attached him to the fortunes of Henry, in his
disputes with his brother Alfonso, and subsequently with Isabella, on
whose accession, of course, Don Rodrigo looked with no friendly eye. He
did not, however, engage in any overt act of resistance, but occupied
himself with prosecuting an hereditary feud which he had revived with the
duke of Medina Sidonia, the head of the Guzmans; a family, which from
ancient times had divided with his own the great interests of Andalusia.
The pertinacity with which this feud was conducted, and the desolation
which it carried not only into Seville, but into every quarter of the
province, have been noticed in the preceding pages. The vigorous
administration of Isabella repressed these disorders, and after abridging
the overgrown power of the two nobles, effected an apparent (it was only
apparent) reconciliation between them. The fiery spirit of the marquis of
Cadiz, no longer allowed to escape in domestic broil, urged him to seek
distinction in more honorable warfare; and at this moment he lay in his
castle at Arcos, looking with a watchful eye over the borders, and
waiting, like a lion in ambush, the moment when he could spring upon his
victim.

Without hesitation, therefore, he assumed the enterprise proposed by Diego
de Merlo, imparting his purpose to Don Pedro Henriquez, _adelantado_
of Andalusia, a relative of Ferdinand, and to the alcaydes of two or three
neighboring fortresses. With the assistance of these friends he assembled
a force which, including those who marched under the banner of Seville,
amounted to two thousand five hundred horse and three thousand foot. His
own town of Marchena was appointed as the place of rendezvous. The
proposed route lay by the way of Antequera, across the wild sierras of
Alzerifa. The mountain passes, sufficiently difficult at a season when
their numerous ravines were choked up by the winter torrents, were
rendered still more formidable by being traversed in the darkness of
night; for the party, in order to conceal their movements, lay by during
the day. Leaving their baggage on the banks of the Yeguas, that they might
move forward with greater celerity, the whole body at length arrived,
after a rapid and most painful inarch, on the third night from their
departure, in a deep valley about half a league from Alhama. Here the
marquis first revealed the real object of the expedition to his soldiers,
who, little dreaming of anything beyond a mere border inroad, were
transported with joy at the prospect of the rich booty so nearly within
their grasp. [5]

The next morning, being the 28th of February, a small party was detached,
about two hours before dawn, under the command of John de Ortega, for the
purpose of scaling the citadel, while the main body moved forward more
leisurely under the marquis of Cadiz, in order to support them. The night
was dark and tempestuous, circumstances which favored their approach in
the same manner as with the Moors at Zahara. After ascending the rocky
heights which were crowned by the citadel, the ladders were silently
placed against the walls, and Ortega, followed by about thirty others,
succeeded in gaining the battlements unobserved. A sentinel, who was found
sleeping on his post, they at once despatched, and, proceeding cautiously
forward to the guard-room, put the whole of the little garrison to the
sword, after the short and ineffectual resistance that could be opposed by
men suddenly roused from slumber. The city in the mean time was alarmed,
but it was too late; the citadel was taken; and the outer gates, which
opened into the country, being thrown open, the marquis of Cadiz entered
with trumpet sounding and banner flying, at the head of his army, and took
possession of the fortress. [6]

After allowing the refreshment necessary to the exhausted spirits of his
soldiers, the marquis resolved to sally forth at once upon the town,
before its inhabitants cpuld muster in sufficient force to oppose him. But
the citizens of Alhama, showing a resolution rather to have been expected
from men trained in a camp, than from peaceful burghers of a manufacturing
town, had sprung to arms at the first alarm, and, gathering in the narrow
street on which the portal of the castle opened, so completely commanded
it with their arquebuses and crossbows, that the Spaniards, after an
ineffectual attempt to force a passage, were compelled to recoil upon
their defences, amid showers of bolts and balls which occasioned the loss,
among others, of two of their principal alcaydes.

A council of war was then called, in which it was even advised by some,
that the fortress, after having been dismantled, should be abandoned as
incapable of defence against the citizens on the one hand, and the succors
which might be expected speedily to arrive from Granada, on the other. But
this counsel was rejected with indignation by the marquis of Cadiz, whose
fiery spirit rose with the occasion; indeed, it was not very palatable to
most of his followers, whose cupidity was more than ever inflamed by the
sight of the rich spoil, which, after so many fatigues, now lay at their
feet. It was accordingly resolved to demolish part of the fortifications
which looked towards the town, and at all hazards to force a passage into
it. This resolution was at once put into execution; and the marquis,
throwing himself into the breach thus made, at the head of his men-at-
arms, and shouting his war-cry of "St. James and the Virgin," precipitated
himself into the thickest of the enemy. Others of the Spaniards, running
along the out-works contiguous to the buildings of the city, leaped into
the street, and joined their companions there, while others again sallied
from the gates, now opened for the second time. [7]

The Moors, unshaken by the fury of this assault, received the assailants
with brisk and well-directed volleys of shot and arrows; while the women
and children, thronging the roofs and balconies of the houses, discharged
on their heads boiling oil, pitch, and missiles of every description. But
the weapons of the Moors glanced comparatively harmless from the mailed
armor of the Spaniards, while their own bodies, loosely arrayed in such
habiliments as they could throw over them in the confusion of the night,
presented a fatal mark to their enemies. Still they continued to maintain
a stout resistance, checking the progress of the Spaniards by barricades
of timber hastily thrown across the streets; and, as their intrenchments
were forced one after another, they disputed every inch of ground with the
desperation of men who fought for life, fortune, liberty, all that was
most dear to them. The contest hardly slackened till the close of day,
while the kennels literally ran with blood, and every avenue was choked up
with the bodies of the slain. At length, however, Spanish valor proved
triumphant in every quarter, except where a small and desperate remnant of
the Moors, having gathered their wives and children around them, retreated
as a last resort into a large mosque near the walls of the city, from
which they kept up a galling fire on the close ranks of the Christians.
The latter, after enduring some loss, succeeded in sheltering themselves
so effectually under a roof or canopy constructed of their own shields, in
the manner practised in war previous to the exclusive use of fire-arms,
that they were enabled to approach so near the mosque, as to set fire to
its doors; when its tenants, menaced with suffocation, made a desperate
sally, in which many perished, and the remainder surrendered at
discretion. The prisoners thus made were all massacred on the spot,
without distinction, of sex or age, according to the Saracen accounts. But
the Castilian writers make no mention of this; and, as the appetites of
the Spaniards were not yet stimulated by that love of carnage, which they
afterwards displayed in their American wars, and which was repugnant to
the chivalrous spirit with which their contests with the Moslems were
usually conducted, we may be justified in regarding it as an invention of
the enemy. [8]

Alhama was now delivered up to the sack of the soldiery, and rich indeed
was the booty which fell into their hands,--gold and silver plate, pearls,
jewels, fine silks and cloths, curious and costly furniture, and all the
various appurtenances of a thriving, luxurious city. In addition to which,
the magazines were found well stored with the more substantial and, at the
present juncture, more serviceable supplies of grain, oil, and other
provisions. Nearly a quarter of the population is said to have perished in
the various conflicts of the day, and the remainder, according to the
usage of the time, became the prize of the victors. A considerable number
of Christian captives, who were found immured in the public prisons, were
restored to freedom, and swelled the general jubilee with their grateful
acclamations. The contemporary Castilian chroniclers record also, with no
less satisfaction, the detection of a Christian renegade, notorious for
his depredations on his countrymen, whose misdeeds the marquis of Cadiz
requited by causing him to be hung up over the battlements of the castle,
in the face of the whole city. Thus fell the ancient city of Alhama, the
first conquest, and achieved with a gallantry and daring unsurpassed by
any other during this memorable war. [9]

The report of this disaster fell like the knell of their own doom on the
ears of the inhabitants of Granada. It seemed as if the hand of Providence
itself must have been stretched forth to smite the stately city, which,
reposing as it were under the shadow of their own walls, and in the bosom
of a peaceful and populous country, was thus suddenly laid low in blood
and ashes. Men now read the fulfilment of the disastrous omens and
predictions which ushered in the capture of Zahara. The melancholy
_romance_ or ballad, with the burden of _Ay de mi Alhama_, "Woe is me,
Alhama," composed probably by some one of the nation not long after this
event, shows how deep was the dejection which settled on the spirits
of the people. The old king, Abul Hacen, however, far from resigning
himself to useless lamentation, sought to retrieve his loss by the most
vigorous measures. A body of a thousand horse was sent forward to
reconnoitre the city, while he prepared to follow with as powerful levies,
as he could enforce, of the militia of Granada. [10]

The intelligence of the conquest of Alhama diffused general satisfaction
throughout Castile, and was especially grateful to the sovereigns, who
welcomed it as an auspicious omen of the ultimate success of their designs
upon the Moors. They were attending mass in their royal palace of Medina
del Campo, when they received despatches from the marquis of Cadiz,
informing them of the issue of his enterprise. "During all the while he
sat at dinner," says a precise chronicler of the period, "the prudent
Ferdinand was revolving in his mind the course best to be adopted." He
reflected that the Castilians would soon be beleaguered by an overwhelming
force from Granada, and he determined at all hazards to support them. He
accordingly gave orders to make instant preparation for departure; but,
first, accompanied the queen, attended by a solemn procession of the court
and clergy, to the cathedral church of St. James; where Te Deum was
chanted, and a humble thanksgiving offered up to the Lord of hosts for the
success with which he had crowned their arms. Towards evening, the king
set forward on his journey to the south, escorted by such nobles and
cavaliers as were in attendance on his person, leaving the queen to follow
more leisurely, after having provided reinforcements and supplies
requisite for the prosecution of the war. [11]

On the 5th of March, the king of Granada appeared before the walls of
Alhama, with an army which amounted to three thousand horse and fifty
thousand foot. The first object which encountered his eyes was the mangled
remains of his unfortunate subjects, which the Christians, who would have
been scandalized by an attempt to give them the rites of sepulture, had
from dread of infection thrown over the walls, where they now lay half
devoured by birds of prey and the ravenous dogs of the city. The Moslem
troops, transported with horror and indignation at this hideous spectacle,
called loudly to be led to the attack. They had marched from Granada with
so much precipitation, that they were wholly unprovided with artillery, in
the use of which they were expert for that period; and which was now the
more necessary, as the Spaniards had diligently employed the few days
which intervened since their occupation of the place, in repairing the
breaches in the fortifications, and in putting them in a posture of
defence. But the Moorish ranks were filled with the flower of their
chivalry; and their immense superiority of numbers enabled them to make
their attacks simultaneously on the most distant quarters of the town,
with such unintermitted vivacity, that the little garrison, scarcely
allowed a moment for repose, was wellnigh exhausted with fatigue. [12]

At length, however, Abul Hacen, after the loss of more than two thousand
of his bravest troops in these precipitate assaults, became convinced of
the impracticability of forcing a position, whose natural strength was so
ably seconded by the valor of its defenders, and he determined to reduce
the place by the more tardy but certain method of blockade. In this he was
favored by one or two circumstances. The town, having but a single well
within its walls, was almost wholly indebted for its supplies of water to
the river which flowed at its base. The Moors, by dint of great labor,
succeeded in diverting the stream so effectually, that the only
communication with it, which remained open to the besieged, was by a
subterraneous gallery or mine, that had probably been contrived with
reference to some such emergency by the original inhabitants. The mouth of
this passage was commanded in such a manner by the Moorish archers, that
no egress could be obtained without a regular skirmish, so that every drop
of water might be said to be purchased with the blood of Christians; who,
"if they had not possessed the courage of Spaniards," says a Castilian
writer, "would have been reduced to the last extremity." In addition to
this calamity, the garrison began to be menaced with scarcity of
provisions, owing to the improvident waste of the soldiers, who supposed
that the city, after being plundered, was to be razed to the ground and
abandoned. [13]

At this crisis they received the unwelcome tidings of the failure of an
expedition destined for their relief by Alonso de Aguilar. This cavalier,
the chief of an illustrious house since rendered immortal by the renown of
his younger brother, Gonsalvo de Cordova, had assembled a considerable
body of troops, on learning the capture of Alhama, for the purpose of
supporting his friend and companion in arms, the marquis of Cadiz. On
reaching the shores of the Yeguas, he received, for the first time,
advices of the formidable host which lay between him and the city,
rendering hopeless any attempt to penetrate into the latter with his
inadequate force. Contenting himself, therefore, with recovering the
baggage, which the marquis's army in its rapid march, as has been already
noticed, had left on the banks of the river, he returned to Antequera.
[14]

Under these depressing circumstances, the indomitable spirit of the
marquis of Cadiz seemed to infuse itself into the hearts of his soldiers.
He was ever in the front of danger, and shared the privations of the
meanest of his followers; encouraging them to rely with undoubting
confidence on the sympathies which their cause must awaken in the breasts
of their countrymen. The event proved that he did not miscalculate. Soon
after the occupation of Alhama, the marquis, foreseeing the difficulties
of his situation, had despatched missives, requesting the support of the
principal lords and cities of Andalusia. In this summons he had omitted
the duke of Medina Sidonia, as one who had good reason to take umbrage at
being excluded from a share in the original enterprise. Henrique de
Guzman, duke of Medina Sidonia, possessed a degree of power more
considerable than any other chieftain in the south. His yearly rents
amounted to nearly sixty thousand ducats, and he could bring into the
field, it was said, from his own resources an army little inferior to what
might be raised by a sovereign prince. He had succeeded to his inheritance
in 1468, and had very early given his support to the pretensions of
Isabella. Notwithstanding his deadly feud with the marquis of Cadiz, he
had the generosity, on the breaking out of the present war, to march to
the relief of the marchioness when beleaguered, during her husband's
absence, by a party of Moors from Ronda, in her own castle of Arcos. He
now showed a similar alacrity in sacrificing all personal jealousy at the
call of patriotism. [15]

No sooner did he learn the perilous condition of his countrymen in Alhama,
than he mustered the whole array of his household troops and retainers,
which, when combined with those of the marquis de Villena, of the count de
Cabra, and those from Seville, in which city the family of the Guzmans had
long exercised a sort of hereditary influence, swelled to the number of
five thousand horse and forty thousand foot. The duke of Medina Sidonia,
putting himself at the head of this powerful body, set forward without
delay on his expedition.

When King Ferdinand in his progress to the south had reached the little
town of Adamuz, about five leagues from Cordova, he was informed of the
advance of the Andalusian chivalry, and instantly sent instructions to the
duke to delay his march, as he intended to come in person and assume the
command. But the latter, returning a respectful apology for his
disobedience, represented to his master the extremities to which the
besieged were already reduced, and without waiting for a reply pushed on
with the utmost vigor for Alhama. The Moorish monarch, alarmed at the
approach of so powerful a reinforcement, saw himself in danger of being
hemmed in between the garrison on the one side, and these new enemies on
the other. Without waiting their appearance on the crest of the eminence
which separated him from them, he hastily broke up his encampment, on the
29th of March, after a siege of more than three weeks, and retreated on
his capital. [16]

The garrison of Alhama viewed with astonishment the sudden departure of
their enemies; but their wonder was converted into joy, when they beheld
the bright arms and banners of their countrymen, gleaming along the
declivities of the mountains. They rushed out with tumultuous transport to
receive them and pour forth their grateful acknowledgments, while the two
commanders, embracing each other in the presence of their united armies,
pledged themselves to a mutual oblivion of all past grievances; thus
affording to the nation the best possible earnest of future successes, in
the voluntary extinction of a feud, which had desolated it for so many
generations.

Notwithstanding the kindly feelings excited between the two armies, a
dispute had wellnigh arisen respecting the division of the spoil, in which
the duke's army claimed a share, as having contributed to secure the
conquest which their more fortunate countrymen had effected. But these
discontents were appeased, though with some difficulty, by their noble
leader, who besought his men not to tarnish the laurels already won, by
mingling a sordid avarice with the generous motives which had promoted
them to the expedition. After the necessary time devoted to repose and
refreshment, the combined armies proceeded to evacuate Alhama, and having
left in garrison Don Diego Merlo, with a corps of troops of the hermandad,
returned into their own territories. [17]

King Ferdinand, after receiving the reply of the duke of Medina Sidonia,
had pressed forward his march by the way of Cordova, as far as Lucena,
with the intention of throwing himself at all hazards into Alhama. He was
not without much difficulty dissuaded from this by his nobles, who
represented the temerity of the enterprise, and its incompetency to any
good result, even should he succeed, with the small force of which he was
master. On receiving intelligence that the siege was raised, he returned
to Cordova, where he was joined by the queen towards the latter part of
April. Isabella had been employed in making vigorous preparation for
carrying on the war, by enforcing the requisite supplies, and summoning
the crown vassals, and the principal nobility of the north, to hold
themselves in readiness to join the royal standard in Andalusia. After
this, she proceeded by rapid stages to Cordova, notwithstanding the state
of pregnancy, in which she was then far advanced.

Here the sovereigns received the unwelcome information, that the king of
Granada, on the retreat of the Spaniards, had again sat down before
Alhama; having brought with him artillery, from the want of which he had
suffered so much in the preceding siege. This news struck a damp into the
hearts of the Castilians, many of whom recommended the total evacuation of
a place, "which" they said, "was so near the capital that it must be
perpetually exposed to sudden and dangerous assaults; while, from the
difficulty of reaching it, it would cost the Castilians an incalculable
waste of blood and treasure in its defence. It was experience of these
evils, which had led to its abandonment in former days, when it had been
recovered by the Spanish arms from the Saracens."

Isabella was far from being shaken by these arguments. "Glory," she said,
"was not to be won without danger. The present war was one of peculiar
difficulties and danger, and these had been well calculated before
entering upon it. The strong and central position of Alhama made it of the
last importance, since it might be regarded as the key of the enemy's
country. This was the first blow struck during the war, and honor and
policy alike forbade them to adopt a measure, which could not fail to damp
the ardor of the nation." This opinion of the queen, thus decisively
expressed, determined the question, and kindled a spark of her own
enthusiasm in the breasts of the most desponding. [18]

It was settled that the king should march to the relief of the besieged,
taking with him the most ample supplies of forage and provisions, at the
head of a force strong enough to compel the retreat of the Moorish
monarch. This was effected without delay; and, Abul Hacen once more
breaking up his camp on the rumor of Ferdinand's approach, the latter took
possession of the city without opposition, on the 14th of May. The king
was attended by a splendid train of his prelates and principal nobility;
and he prepared with their aid to dedicate his new conquest to the service
of the cross, with all the formalities of the Romish church. After the
ceremony of purification, the three principal mosques of the city were
consecrated by the cardinal of Spain, as temples of Christian worship.
Bells, crosses, a sumptuous service of plate, and other sacred utensils,
were liberally furnished by the queen; and the principal church of Santa
Maria de la Encarnacion long exhibited a covering of the altar, richly
embroidered by her own hands. Isabella lost no opportunity of manifesting,
that she had entered into the war, less from motives of ambition, than of
zeal for the exaltation of the true faith. After the completion of these
ceremonies, Ferdinand, having strengthened the garrison with new recruits
under the command of Portocarrero, lord of Palma, and victualled it with
three months' provisions, prepared for a foray into the vega of Granada.
This he executed in the true spirit of that merciless warfare, so
repugnant to the more civilized usage of later times, not only by sweeping
away the green, unripened crops, but by cutting down the trees, and
eradicating the vines; and then, without so much as having broken a lance
in the expedition, returned in triumph to Cordova. [19]

Isabella in the mean while was engaged in active measures for prosecuting
the war. She issued orders to the various cities of Castile and Leon, as
far as the borders of Biscay and Guipuscoa, prescribing the
_repartimiento_, or subsidy of provisions, and the quota of troops,
to be furnished by each district respectively, together with an adequate
supply of ammunition and artillery. The whole were to be in readiness
before Loja, by the 1st of July; when Ferdinand was to take the field in
person at the head of his chivalry, and besiege that strong post. As
advices were received, that the Moors of Granada were making efforts to
obtain the co-operation of their African brethren in support of the
Mahometan empire in Spain, the queen caused a fleet to be manned under the
command of her two best admirals, with instructions to sweep the
Mediterranean as far as the Straits of Gibraltar, and thus effectually cut
off all communication with the Barbary coast. [20]


FOOTNOTES

[1] Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 467-469.--Conde,
Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 32, 34.

[2] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 51.--Conde, Dominacion de los
Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 34.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 180.--L. Marineo,
Cosas Memorables, fol. 171.--Marmol, Historia del Rebelion y Castigo de
los Moriscos, (Madrid, 1797,) lib. 1, cap. 12.

Lebrija states, that the revenues of Granada, at the commencement of this
war, amounted to a million of gold ducats, and that it kept in pay 7000
horsemen on its peace establishment, and could send forth 21,000 warriors
from its gates. The last of these estimates would not seem to be
exaggerated. Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 1, cap. 1.

[3] Estrada, Poblacion de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 247, 248.--El Nubiense,
Descripcion de Espana, p. 222, nota.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 181.--
Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

[4] Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla, pp. 349, 362. This occurred in the fight
of Madrono, when Don Rodrigo, stooping to adjust his buckler, which had
been unlaced, was suddenly surrounded by a party of Moors. He snatched a
sling from one of them, and made such brisk use of it, that, after
disabling several, he succeeded in putting them to flight; for which feat,
says Zuniga, the king complimented him with the title of "the youthful
David."

Don Juan, count of Arcos, had no children born in wedlock, but a numerous
progeny by his concubines. Among these latter, was Dona Leonora Nunez de
Prado, the mother of Don Rodrigo. The brilliant and attractive qualities
of this youth so far won the affections of his father, that the latter
obtained the royal sanction (a circumstance not infrequent in an age when
the laws of descent were very unsettled) to bequeath him his titles and
estates, to the prejudice of more legitimate heirs.

[5] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 171.--Pulgar computes the marquis's army at 3000 horse
and 4000 foot.--Reyes Catolicos, p. 181.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes,
tom. iii. cap. 34.

[6] Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 1, cap. 2.--Carbajal,
Anales, MS., ano 1482.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.--Zurita,
Anales, tom. iv. fol. 315.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom.
iii. pp. 252, 253.

[7] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., ubi supra.--Conde, Dominacion de los
Arabes, cap. 34.--L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 172.

[8] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, ubi supra.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
pp. 182, 183.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 545, 546.

[9] Bernaldez, Reyes. Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
ubi supra.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. p. 254.

[10]
  "Passeavase el Key Moro
  For la ciudad de Granada,
  Desde las puertas de Elvira
  Hasta las de Bivarambla.
    Ay de mi Alhama!

  "Cartas le fueron venidas
  Que Alhama era ganada.
  Las cartas echo en el fuego,
  Y al mensagero matava.
    Ay de mi Alhama!

  "Hombres, ninos y mugeres,
  Lloran tan grande perdida.
  Lloravan todas las damas
  Quantas en Granada avia.
    Ay de mi Alhama!

  "Por las calles y ventanas
  Mucho luto parecia;
  Llora el Rey como fembra,
  Qu' es mucho lo que perdia.
    Ay de mi Alhama!"

The _romance_, according to Hyta, (not the best voucher for a fact,)
caused such general lamentation, that it was not allowed to be sung by the
Moors after the conquest. (Guerras Civiles de Granada, tom. i. p. 350.)
Lord Byron, as the reader recollects, has done this ballad into English.
The version has the merit of fidelity. It is not his fault if his Muse
appears to little advantage in the plebeian dress of the Moorish
minstrel.

[11] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 172.--Conde, Dominacion de los
Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 34.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1482.--Mariana,
Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 545, 546.

[12] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.--Bernaldez swells the
Moslem army to 5500 horse, and 80,000 foot, but I have preferred the more
moderate and probable estimate of the Arabian authors. Conde, Dominacion
de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 34.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, loc. cit.

[13] Garibay, Compendio, tom. ii. lib. 18, cap. 23.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, pp. 183, 184.

[14] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.

[15] Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla, p. 360.--L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables,
fol. 24, 172.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, lib. 1, cap. 3.

[16] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, pp. 183, 184. Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., cap. 53.--Ferreras, Hist. d'Espagne, tom. vii. p. 572.--Zuniga,
Annales de Sevilla, pp. 392, 393.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne,
tom. iii. p. 257.

[17] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, pp. 183-186.--Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS.,
bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 28.

[18] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 53, 54.--Pulgar states that
Ferdinand took the more southern route of Antequera, where he received the
tidings of the Moorish king's retreat. The discrepancy is of no great
consequence; but as Bernaldez, whom I have followed, lived in Andalusia,
the theatre of action, he may be supposed to have had more accurate means
of information.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, pp. 187, 188.

[19] Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 28.--Bernaldez,
Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 54, 55.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, lib.
1, cap. 6.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, cap. 34.--Salazar de Mendoza,
Cron. del Gran Cardenal, pp. 180, 181.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib.
1, cap. 12.

During this second siege, a body of Moorish knights to the number of forty
succeeded in scaling the walls of the city in the night, and had nearly
reached the gates, with the intention of throwing them open to their
countrymen, when they were overpowered, after a desperate resistance, by
the Christians, who acquired a rich booty, as many of them were persons of
rank. There is considerable variation in the authorities, in regard to the
date of Ferdinand's occupation of Alhama. I have been guided, as before,
by Bernaldez.

[20] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, pp. 188, 189.




CHAPTER X.

WAR OF GRANADA.--UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPT ON LOJA.--DEFEAT IN THE AXARQUIA.

1482-1483.

Unsuccessful Attempt on Loja.--Revolution in Granada.--Expedition to the
Axarquia.--Military Array.--Moorish Preparations.--Bloody Conflict among
the Mountains.--The Spaniards force a Passage.--The Marquis of Cadiz
Escapes.


Loja stands not many leagues from Albania, on the banks of the Xenil,
which rolls its clear current through a valley luxuriant with vineyards
and olive-gardens; but the city is deeply intrenched among hills of so
rugged an aspect, that it has been led not inappropriately to assume as
the motto on its arms, "A flower among thorns." Under the Moors, it was
defended by a strong fortress, while the Xenil, circumscribing it like a
deep moat upon the south, formed an excellent protection against the
approaches of a besieging army; since the river was fordable only in one
place, and traversed by a single bridge, which might be easily commanded
by the city. In addition to these advantages, the king of Granada, taking
warning from the fate of Alhama, had strengthened its garrison with three
thousand of his choicest troops, under the command of a skilful and
experienced warrior, named Ali Atar. [1]

In the mean while, the efforts of the Spanish sovereigns to procure
supplies adequate to the undertaking against Loja had not been crowned
with success. The cities and districts, of which the requisitions had been
made, had discovered the tardiness usual in such unwieldy bodies, and
their interest, moreover, was considerably impaired by their distance from
the theatre of action. Ferdinand on mustering his army, towards the latter
part of June, found that it did not exceed four thousand horse and twelve
thousand, or indeed, according to some accounts, eight thousand foot; most
of them raw militia, who, poorly provided with military stores and
artillery, formed a force obviously inadequate to the magnitude of his
enterprise. Some of his counsellors would have persuaded him, from these
considerations, to turn his arms against some weaker and more assailable
point than Loja. But Ferdinand burned with a desire for distinction in the
new war, and suffered his ardor for once to get the better of his
prudence. The distrust felt by the leaders seems to have infected the
lower ranks, who drew the most unfavorable prognostics from the dejected
mien of those who bore the royal standard to the cathedral of Cordova, in
order to receive the benediction of the church before entering on the
expedition. [2]

Ferdinand, crossing the Xenil at Ecija, arrived again on its banks before
Loja, on the 1st of July. The army encamped among the hills, whose deep
ravines obstructed communication between its different quarters; while the
level plains below were intersected by numerous canals, equally
unfavorable to the manoeuvres of the men-at-arms. The duke of Villa
Hermosa, the king's brother, and captain-general of the hermandad, an
officer of large experience, would have persuaded Ferdinand to attempt, by
throwing bridges across the river lower down the stream, to approach the
city on the other side. But his counsel was overruled by the Castilian
officers, to whom the location of the camp had been intrusted, and who
neglected, according to Zurita, to advise with the Andalusian chiefs,
although far better instructed than themselves in Moorish warfare. [3]

A large detachment of the army was ordered to occupy a lofty eminence, at
some distance, called the Heights of Albohacen, and to fortify it with
such few pieces of ordnance as they had, with the view of annoying the
city. This commission was intrusted to the marquises of Cadiz and Villena,
and the grand-master of Calatrava; which last nobleman had brought to the
field about four hundred horse and a large body of infantry from the
places belonging to his order in Andalusia. Before the intrenchment could
be fully completed, Ali Atar, discerning the importance of this commanding
station, made a sortie from the town, for the purpose of dislodging his
enemies. The latter poured out from their works to encounter him; but the
Moslem general, scarcely waiting to receive the shock, wheeled his
squadrons round, and began a precipitate retreat. The Spaniards eagerly
pursued; but, when they had been drawn to a sufficient distance from the
redoubt, a party of Moorish _ginetes_, or light cavalry, who had crossed
the river unobserved during the night and lain in ambush, after the wily
fashion of Arabian tactics, darted from their place of concealment, and,
galloping into the deserted camp, plundered it of its contents, including
the lombards, or small pieces of artillery, with which it was garnished.
The Castilians, too late perceiving their error, halted from the pursuit,
and returned with as much speed as possible to the defence of their camp.
Ali Atar, turning also, hung close on their rear, so that, when the
Christians arrived at the summit of the hill, they found themselves hemmed
in between the two divisions of the Moorish army. A brisk action now
ensued, and lasted nearly an hour; when the advance of reinforcements from
the main body of the Spanish army, which had been delayed by distance and
impediments on the road, compelled the Moors to a prompt but orderly
retreat into their own city. The Christians sustained a heavy loss,
particularly in the death of Rodrigo Tellez Giron, grand-master of
Calatrava. He was hit by two arrows, the last of which, penetrating the
joints of his harness beneath his sword-arm, as he was in the act of
raising it, inflicted on him a mortal wound, of which he expired in a few
hours, says an old cronicler, after having confessed, and performed the
last duties of a good and faithful Christian. Although scarcely twenty-
four years of age, this cavalier had given proofs of such signal prowess,
that he was esteemed one of the best knights of Castile; and his death
threw a general gloom over the army. [4]

Ferdinand now became convinced of the unsuitableness of a position, which
neither admitted of easy communication between the different quarters of
his own camp, nor enabled him to intercept the supplies daily passing into
that of his enemy. Other inconveniences also pressed on him. His men were
so badly provided with the necessary utensils for dressing their food,
that they were obliged either to devour it raw, or only half cooked. Most
of them being new recruits, unaccustomed to the privations of war, and
many exhausted by a wearisome length of march before joining the army,
they began openly to murmur, and even to desert in great numbers.
Ferdinand therefore resolved to fall back as far as Rio Frio, and await
there patiently the arrival of such fresh reinforcements as might put him
in condition to enforce a more rigorous blockade.

Orders were accordingly issued to the cavaliers occupying the Heights of
Albohacen to break up their camp, and fall back on the main body of the
army. This was executed on the following morning before dawn, being the
4th of July. No sooner did the Moors of Loja perceive their enemy
abandoning his strong position, than they sallied forth in considerable
force to take possession of it. Ferdinand's men, who had not been advised
of the proposed manoeuvre, no sooner beheld the Moorish array brightening
the crest of the mountain, and their own countrymen rapidly descending,
than they imagined that these latter had been surprised in their
intrenchments during the night, and were now flying before the enemy. An
alarm instantly spread through the whole camp. Instead of standing to
their defence, each one thought only of saving himself by as speedy a
flight as possible. In vain did Ferdinand, riding along their broken
files, endeavor to reanimate their spirits and restore order. He might as
easily have calmed the winds, as the disorder of a panic-struck mob,
unschooled by discipline or experience. Ali Atar's practised eye speedily
discerned the confusion which prevailed through the Christian camp.
Without delay, he rushed forth impetuously at the head of his whole array
from the gates of Loja, and converted into a real danger what had before
been only an imaginary one. [5]

At this perilous moment, nothing but Ferdinand's coolness could have saved
the army from total destruction. Putting himself at the head of the royal
guard, and accompanied by a gallant band of cavaliers, who held honor
dearer than life, he made such a determined stand against the Moorish
advance, that Ali Atar was compelled to pause in his career. A furious
struggle ensued betwixt this devoted little band and the whole strength of
the Moslem army. Ferdinand was repeatedly exposed to imminent peril. On
one occasion he was indebted for his safety to the marquis of Cadiz, who,
charging at the head of about sixty lances, broke the deep ranks of the
Moorish column, and, compelling it to recoil, succeeded in rescuing his
sovereign. In this adventure, he narrowly escaped with his own life, his
horse being shot under him, at the very moment when he had lost his lance
in the body of a Moor. Never did the Spanish chivalry shed its blood more
freely. The constable, count de Haro, received three wounds in the face.
The duke of Medina Celi was unhorsed and brought to the ground, and saved
with difficulty by his own men; and the count of Tendilla, whose
encampment lay nearest the city, received several severe blows, and would
have fallen into the hands of the enemy, had it not been for the timely
aid of his friend, the young count of Zuniga.

The Moors, finding it so difficult to make an impression on this iron band
of warriors, began at length to slacken their efforts, and finally allowed
Ferdinand to draw off the remnant of his forces without further
opposition. The king continued his retreat without halting, as far as the
romantic site of the Pena de los Enamorados, about seven leagues distant
from Loja; and, abandoning all thoughts of offensive operations for the
present, soon after returned to Cordova. Muley Abul Hacen arrived the
following day with a powerful reinforcement from Granada, and swept the
country as far as Rio Frio. Had he come but a few hours sooner, there
would have been few Spaniards left to tell the tale of the rout of Loja.
[6]

The loss of the Christians must have been very considerable, including the
greater part of the baggage and the artillery. It occasioned deep
mortification to the queen; but, though a severe, it proved a salutary
lesson. It showed the importance of more extensive preparations for a war,
which must of necessity be a war of posts; and it taught the nation to
entertain greater respect for an enemy, who, whatever might be his natural
strength, must become formidable when armed with the energy of despair.

At this juncture, a division among the Moors themselves did more for the
Christians, than any successes of their own. This division grew out of the
vicious system of polygamy, which sows the seeds of discord among those,
whom nature and our own happier institutions unite most closely. The old
king of Granada had become so deeply enamored of a Greek slave, that the
Sultana Zoraya, jealous lest the offspring of her rival should supplant
her own in the succession, secretly contrived to stir up a spirit of
discontent with her husband's government. The king, becoming acquainted
with her intrigues, caused her to be imprisoned in the fortress of the
Alhambra. But the sultana, binding together the scarfs and veils belonging
to herself and attendants, succeeded, by means of this perilous
conveyance, in making her escape, together with her children, from the
upper apartments of the tower in which she was lodged. She was received
with joy by her own faction. The insurrection soon spread among the
populace, who, yielding to the impulses of nature, are readily roused by a
tale of oppression; and the number was still further swelled by many of
higher rank, who had various causes of disgust with the oppressive
government of Abul Hacen. [7] The strong fortress of the Alhambra,
however, remained faithful to him. A war now burst forth in the capital
which deluged its streets with the blood of its citizens. At length the
sultana triumphed; Abul Hacen was expelled from Granada, and sought a
refuge in Malaga, which, with Baza, Guadix, and some other places of
importance, still adhered to him; while Granada, and by far the larger
portion of the kingdom, proclaimed the authority of his elder son, Abu
Abdallah, or Boabdil, as he is usually called by the Castilian writers.
The Spanish sovereigns viewed with no small interest these proceedings of
the Moors, who were thus wantonly fighting the battles of their enemies.
All proffers of assistance on their part, however, being warily rejected
by both factions, notwithstanding the mutual hatred of each other, they
could only await with patience the termination of a struggle, which,
whatever might be its results in other respects, could not fail to open
the way for the success of their own arms. [8]

No military operations worthy of notice occurred during the remainder of
the campaign, except occasional _cavalgadas_ or inroads, on both
sides, which, after the usual unsparing devastation, swept away whole
herds of cattle, and human beings, the wretched cultivators of the soil.
The quantity of booty frequently carried off on such occasions, amounting,
according to the testimony of both Christian and Moorish writers, to
twenty, thirty, and even fifty thousand head of cattle, shows the
fruitfulness and abundant pasturage in the southern regions of the
Peninsula. The loss inflicted by these terrible forays fell, eventually,
most heavily on Granada, in consequence of her scanty territory and
insulated position, which cut her off from all foreign resources.

Towards the latter end of October, the court passed from Cordova to
Madrid, with the intention of remaining there the ensuing winter. Madrid,
it may be observed, however, was so far from being recognized as the
capital of the monarchy at this time, that it was inferior to several
other cities in wealth and population, and was even less frequented than
some others, as Valladolid for example as a royal residence.

On the 1st of July, while the court was at Cordova, died Alfonso de
Carillo, the factious archbishop of Toledo, who contributed more than any
other to raise Isabella to the throne, and who, with the same arm, had
wellnigh hurled her from it. He passed the close of his life in retirement
and disgrace at his town of Alcala de Henares, where he devoted himself to
science, especially to alchymy; in which illusory pursuit he is said to
have squandered his princely revenues with such prodigality, as to leave
them encumbered with a heavy debt. He was succeeded in the primacy by his
ancient rival, Don Pedro Gonzalez de Mendoza, cardinal of Spain; a prelate
whose enlarged and sagacious views gained him deserved ascendency in the
councils of his sovereigns. [9]

The importance of their domestic concerns did not prevent Ferdinand and
Isabella from giving a vigilant attention to what was passing abroad. The
conflicting relations growing out of the feudal system occupied most
princes, till the close of the fifteenth century, too closely at home to
allow them often to turn their eyes beyond the borders of their own
territories. This system was indeed now rapidly melting away. But Louis
the Eleventh may perhaps be regarded as the first monarch, who showed
anything like an extended interest in European politics. He informed
himself of the interior proceedings of most of the neighboring courts, by
means of secret agents whom he pensioned there. Ferdinand obtained a
similar result by the more honorable expedient of resident embassies, a
practice which he is said to have introduced, [10] and which, while it has
greatly facilitated commercial intercourse, has served to perpetuate
friendly relations between different countries, by accustoming them to
settle their differences by negotiation rather than the sword.

The position of the Italian states, at this period, whose petty feuds
seemed to blind them to the invasion which menaced them from the Ottoman
empire, was such as to excite a lively interest throughout Christendom,
and especially in Ferdinand, as sovereign of Sicily. He succeeded, by
means of his ambassadors at the papal court, in opening a negotiation
between the belligerents, and in finally adjusting the terms of a general
pacification, signed December 12th, 1482. The Spanish court, in
consequence of its friendly mediation on this occasion, received three
several embassies with suitable acknowledgments, on the part of the pope
Sixtus the Fourth, the college of cardinals, and the city of Rome; and
certain marks of distinction were conferred by his Holiness on the
Castilian envoys, not enjoyed by those of any other potentate. This event
is worthy of notice as the first instance of Ferdinand's interference in
the politics of Italy, in which at a later period he was destined to act
so prominent a part. [11]

The affairs of Navarre at this time were such as to engage still more
deeply the attention of the Spanish sovereigns. The crown of that kingdom
had devolved, on the death of Leonora, the guilty sister of Ferdinand, on
her grandchild, Francis Phoebus, whose mother, Magdeleine of France, held
the reins of government during her son's minority. [12] The near
relationship of this princess to Louis the Eleventh, gave that monarch an
absolute influence in the councils of Navarre. He made use of this to
bring about a marriage between the young king, Francis Phoebus, and Joanna
Beltraneja, Isabella's former competitor for the crown of Castile,
notwithstanding this princess had long since taken the veil in the convent
of Santa Clara at Coimbra. It is not easy to unravel the tortuous politics
of King Louis. The Spanish writers impute to him the design of enabling
Joanna by this alliance to establish her pretensions to the Castilian
throne, or at least to give such employment to its present proprietors, as
should effectually prevent them from disturbing him in the possession of
Roussillon. However this may be, his intrigues with Portugal were
disclosed to Ferdinand by certain nobles of that court, with whom he was
in secret correspondence. The Spanish sovereigns, in order to counteract
this scheme, offered the hand of their own daughter Joanna, afterwards
mother of Charles the Fifth, to the king of Navarre. But all negotiations
relative to this matter were eventually defeated by the sudden death of
this young prince, not without strong suspicions of poison. He was
succeeded on the throne by his sister Catharine. Propositions were then
made by Ferdinand and Isabella, for the marriage of this princess, then
thirteen years of age, with their infant son John, heir apparent of their
united monarchies. [13] Such an alliance, which would bring under one
government nations corresponding in origin, language, general habits, and
local interests, presented great and obvious advantages. It was however
evaded by the queen dowager, who still acted as regent, on the pretext of
disparity of age in the parties. Information being soon after received
that Louis the Eleventh was taking measures to make himself master of the
strong places in Navarre, Isabella transferred her residence to the
frontier town of Logrono, prepared to resist by arms, if necessary, the
occupation of that country by her insidious and powerful neighbor. The
death of the king of France, which occurred not long after, fortunately
relieved the sovereigns from apprehensions of any immediate annoyance on
that quarter. [14]

Amid their manifold concerns, Ferdinand and Isabella kept their thoughts
anxiously bent on their great enterprise, the conquest of Granada. At a
congress general of the deputies of the hermandad, held at Pinto, at the
commencement of the present year, 1483, with the view of reforming certain
abuses in that institution, a liberal grant was made of eight thousand
men, and sixteen thousand beasts of burden, for the purpose of conveying
supplies to the garrison in Alhama. But the sovereigns experienced great
embarrassment from the want of funds. There is probably no period in which
the princes of Europe felt so sensibly their own penury, as at the close
of the fifteenth century; when, the demesnes of the crown having been very
generally wasted by the lavishness or imbecility of its proprietors, no
substitute had as yet been found in that searching and well-arranged
system of taxation which prevails at the present day. The Spanish
sovereigns, notwithstanding the economy which they had introduced into the
finances, felt the pressure of these embarrassments, peculiarly, at the
present juncture. The maintenance of the royal guard and of the vast
national police of the hermandad, the incessant military operations of the
late campaign, together with the equipment of a navy, not merely for war,
but for maritime discovery, were so many copious drains of the exchequer.
[15] Under these circumstances, they obtained from the pope a grant of
one hundred thousand ducats, to be raised out of the ecclesiastical
revenues in Castile and Aragon. A bull of crusade was also published by
his Holiness, containing numerous indulgences for such as should bear arms
against the infidel, as well as those who should prefer to commute their
military service for the payment of a sum of money. In addition to these
resources, the government was enabled on its own credit, justified by the
punctuality with which it had redeemed its past engagements, to negotiate
considerable loans with several wealthy individuals. [16]

With these funds the sovereigns entered into extensive arrangements for
the ensuing campaign; causing cannon, after the rude construction of that
age, to be fabricated at Huesca, and a large quantity of stone balls, then
principally used, to be manufactured in the Sierra de Constantina; while
the magazines were carefully provided with ammunition and military stores.

An event not unworthy of notice is recorded by Pulgar, as happening about
this time. A common soldier, named John de Corral, contrived, under false
pretences, to obtain from the king of Granada a number of Christian
captives, together with a large sum of money, with which he escaped into
Andalusia. The man was apprehended by the warden of the frontier of Jaen;
and, the transaction being reported to the sovereigns, they compelled an
entire restitution of the money, and consented to such a ransom for the
liberated Christians as the king of Granada should demand. This act of
justice, it should be remembered, occurred in an age when the church
itself stood ready to sanction any breach of faith, however glaring,
towards heretics and infidels. [17]

While the court was detained in the north, tidings were received of a
reverse sustained by the Spanish arms, which plunged the nation in sorrow
far deeper than that occasioned by the rout at Loja. Don Alonso de
Cardenas, grand-master of St. James, an old and confidential servant of
the crown, had been intrusted with the defence of the frontier of Ecija.
While on this station, he was strongly urged to make a descent on the
environs of Malaga, by his _adalides_ or scouts, men who, being for
the most part Moorish deserters or renegadoes, were employed by the border
chiefs to reconnoitre the enemy's country, or to guide them in their
marauding expeditions. [18] The district around Malaga was famous under
the Saracens for its silk manufactures, of which it annually made large
exports to other parts of Europe. It was to be approached by traversing a
savage sierra, or chain of mountains, called the Axarquia, whose margin
occasionally afforded good pasturage, and was sprinkled over with Moorish
villages. After threading its defiles, it was proposed to return by an
open road that turned the southern extremity of the sierra along the sea-
shore. There was little to be apprehended, it was stated, from pursuit,
since Malaga was almost wholly unprovided with cavalry. [19]

The grand-master, falling in with the proposition, communicated it to the
principal chiefs on the borders; among others, to Don Pedro Henriquez,
adelantado of Andalusia, Don Juan de Silva, count of Cifuentes, Don Alonso
de Aguilar, and the marquis of Cadiz. These nobleman, collecting their
retainers, repaired to Antequera, where the ranks were quickly swelled by
recruits from Cordova, Seville, Xerez, and other cities of Andalusia,
whose chivalry always readily answered the summons to an expedition over
the border. [20]

In the mean while, however, the marquis of Cadiz had received such
intelligence from his own _adalides_, as led him to doubt the expediency
of a march through intricate defiles, inhabited by a poor and hardy
peasantry; and he strongly advised to direct the expedition against
the neighboring town of Almojia. But in this he was overruled by the
grand-master and the other partners of his enterprise; many of whom, with
the rash confidence of youth, were excited rather than intimidated by the
prospect of danger.

On Wednesday, the 19th of March, this gallant little army marched forth
from the gates of Antequera. The van was intrusted to the adelantado
Henriquez and Don Alonso de Aguilar. The centre divisions were led by the
marquis of Cadiz and the count of Cifuentes, and the rear-guard by the
grand-master of St. James. The number of foot, which is uncertain, appears
to have been considerably less than that of the horse, which amounted to
about three thousand, containing the flower of Andalusian knighthood,
together with the array of St. James, the most opulent and powerful of the
Spanish military orders. Never, says an Aragonese historian, had there
been seen in these times a more splendid body of chivalry; and such was
their confidence, he adds, that they deemed themselves invincible by any
force which the Moslems could bring against them. The leaders took care
not to encumber the movements of the army with artillery, camp equipage,
or even much forage and provisions, for which they trusted to the invaded
territory. A number of persons, however, followed in the train, who,
influenced by desire rather of gain than of glory, had come provided with
money, as well as commissions from their friends, for the purchase of rich
spoil, whether of slaves, stuffs, or jewels, which they expected would be
won by the good swords of their comrades, as in Alhama. [21]

After travelling with little intermission through the night, the army
entered the winding defiles of the Axarquia; where their progress was
necessarily so much impeded by the character of the ground, that most of
the inhabitants of the villages, through which they passed, had
opportunity to escape with the greater part of their effects to the
inaccessible fastnesses of the mountains. The Spaniards, after plundering
the deserted hamlets of whatever remained, as well as of the few
stragglers, whether men or cattle, found still lingering about them, set
them on fire. In this way they advanced, marking their line of march with
the usual devastation that accompanied these ferocious forays, until the
columns of smoke and fire, which rose above the hill-tops, announced to
the people of Malaga the near approach of an enemy.

The old king Muley Abul Hacen, who lay at this time in the city, with a
numerous and well-appointed body of horse, contrary to the reports of the
adalides, would have rushed forth at once at their head, had he not been
dissuaded from it by his younger brother Abdallah, who is better known in
history by the name of El Zagal, or "the Valiant;" an Arabic epithet,
given him by his countrymen to distinguish him from his nephew, the ruling
king of Granada. To this prince Abul Hacen intrusted the command of the
corps of picked cavalry, with instructions to penetrate at once into the
lower level of the sierra, and encounter the Christians entangled in its
passes; while another division, consisting chiefly of arquebusiers and
archers, should turn the enemy's flank by gaining the heights under which
he was defiling. This last corps was placed under the direction of Reduan
Benegas, a chief of Christian lineage, according to Bernaldez, and who may
perhaps be identified with the Reduan that, in the later Moorish ballads,
seems to be shadowed forth as the personification of love and heroism.
[22]

The Castilian army in the mean time went forward with a buoyant and
reckless confidence, and with very little subordination. The divisions
occupying the advance and centre, disappointed in their expectations of
booty, had quitted the line of march, and dispersed in small parties in
search of plunder over the adjacent country; and some of the high-mettled
young cavaliers had the audacity to ride up in defiance to the very walls
of Malaga. The grand master of St. James was the only leader who kept his
columns unbroken, and marched forward in order of battle. Things were in
this state, when the Moorish cavalry under El Zagal, suddenly emerging
from one of the mountain passes, appeared before the astonished rear-guard
of the Christians. The Moors spurred on to the assault, but the well-
disciplined chivalry of St. James remained unshaken. In the fierce
struggle which ensued, the Andalusians became embarrassed by the
narrowness of the ground on which they were engaged, which afforded no
scope for the manoeuvres of cavalry; while the Moors, trained to the wild
tactics of mountain warfare, went through their usual evolutions,
retreating and returning to the charge with a celerity that sorely
distressed their opponents and at length threw them into some disorder.
The grand master, in consequence, despatched a message to the marquis of
Cadiz, requesting his support. The latter, putting himself at the head of
such of his scattered forces as he could hastily muster, readily obeyed
the summons. Discerning on his approach the real source of the grand
master's embarrassment, he succeeded in changing the field of action by
drawing off the Moors to an open reach of the valley, which allowed free
play to the movements of the Andalusian horse, when the combined squadrons
pressed so hard on the Moslems, that they were soon compelled to take
refuge within the depths of their own mountains. [23]

In the mean while, the scattered troops of the advance, alarmed by the
report of the action, gradually assembled under their respective banners,
and fell back upon the rear. A council of war was then called. All further
progress seemed to be effectually intercepted. The country was everywhere
in arms. The most that now could be hoped, was, that they might be
suffered to retire unmolested with such plunder as they had already
acquired. Two routes lay open for this purpose. The one winding along the
sea-shore, wide and level, but circuitous, and swept through the whole
range of its narrow entrance by the fortress of Malaga. This determined
them unhappily to prefer the other route, being that by which they had
penetrated the Axarquia, or rather a shorter cut, by which the adalides
undertook to conduct them through its mazes. [24]

The little army commenced its retrograde movement with undiminished
spirit. But it was now embarrassed with the transportation of its plunder,
and by the increasing difficulties of the sierra, which, as they ascended
its sides, was matted over with impenetrable thickets, and broken up by
formidable ravines or channels, cut deep into the soil by the mountain
torrents. The Moors were now seen mustering in considerable numbers along
the heights, and, as they were expert marksmen, being trained by early and
assiduous practice, the shots from their arquebuses and cross-bows
frequently found some assailable point in the harness of the Spanish men-
at-arms. At length, the army, through the treachery or ignorance of the
guides, was suddenly brought to a halt by arriving in a deep glen or
enclosure, whose rocky sides rose with such boldness as to be scarcely
practicable for infantry, much less for horse. To add to their distresses,
daylight, without which they could scarcely hope to extricate themselves,
was fast fading away. [25]

In this extremity no other alternative seemed to remain, than to attempt
to regain the route from which they had departed. As all other
considerations were now subordinate to those of personal safety, it was
agreed to abandon the spoil acquired at so much hazard, which greatly
retarded their movements. As they painfully retraced their steps, the
darkness of the night was partially dispelled by numerous fires, which
blazed along the hill-tops, and which showed the figures of their enemies
flitting to and fro like so many spectres. It seemed, says Bernaldez, as
if ten thousand torches were glancing along the mountains. At length, the
whole body, faint with fatigue and hunger, reached the borders of a little
stream, which flowed through a valley, whose avenues, as well as the
rugged heights by which it was commanded, were already occupied by the
enemy, who poured down mingled volleys of shot, stones, and arrows on the
heads of the Christians. The compact mass presented by the latter afforded
a sure mark to the artillery of the Moors; while they, from their
scattered position, as well as from the defences afforded by the nature of
the ground, were exposed to little annoyance in return. In addition to
lighter missiles, the Moors occasionally dislodged large fragments of
rock, which, rolling with tremendous violence down the declivities of the
hills, spread frightful desolation through the Christian ranks. [26]

The dismay occasioned by these scenes, occurring amidst the darkness of
night, and heightened by the shrill war-cries of the Moors, which rose
around them on every quarter, seems to have completely bewildered the
Spaniards, even their leaders. It was the misfortune of the expedition,
that there was but little concert between the several commanders, or, at
least, that there was no one so pre-eminent above the rest as to assume
authority at this awful moment. So far, it would seem, from attempting
escape, they continued in their perilous position, uncertain what course
to take, until midnight; when at length, after having seen their best and
bravest followers fall thick around them, they determined at all hazards
to force a passage across the sierra in the face of the enemy. "Better
lose our lives," said the grand master of St. James, addressing his men,
"in cutting a way through the foe, than be butchered without resistance,
like cattle in the shambles." [27]

The marquis of Cadiz, guided by a trusty adalid, and accompanied by sixty
or seventy lances, was fortunate enough to gain a circuitous route less
vigilantly guarded by the enemy, whose attention was drawn to the
movements of the main body of the Castilian army. By means of this path,
the marquis, with his little band, succeeded, after a painful march, in
which his good steed sunk under him oppressed with wounds and fatigue, in
reaching a valley at some distance from the scene of action, where he
determined to wait the coming up of his friends, who he confidently
expected would follow on his track. [28]

But the grand master and his associates, missing this track in the
darkness of the night, or perhaps preferring another, breasted the sierra
in a part where it proved extremely difficult of ascent. At every step the
loosened earth gave way under the pressure of the foot, and, the infantry
endeavoring to support themselves by clinging to the tails and manes of
the horses, the jaded animals, borne down with the weight, rolled headlong
with their riders on the ranks below, or were precipitated down the sides
of the numerous ravines. The Moors, all the while, avoiding a close
encounter, contented themselves with discharging on the heads of their
opponents an uninterrupted shower of missiles of every description.
[29]

It was not until the following morning, that the Castilians, having
surmounted the crest of the eminence, began the descent into the opposite
valley, which they had the mortification to observe was commanded on every
point by their vigilant adversary, who seemed now in their eyes to possess
the powers of ubiquity. As the light broke upon the troops, it revealed
the whole extent of their melancholy condition. How different from the
magnificent array which, but two days previous, marched forth with such
high and confident hopes from the gates of Antequera! their ranks thinned,
their bright arms defaced and broken, their banners rent in pieces, or
lost,--as had been that of St. James, together with its gallant
_alferez_, Diego Becerra, in the terrible passage of the preceding
night,--their countenances aghast with terror, fatigue, and famine.
Despair now was in every eye, all subordination was at an end. No one,
says Pulgar, heeded any longer the call of the trumpet, or the wave of the
banner. Each sought only his own safety, without regard to his comrade.
Some threw away their arms; hoping by this means to facilitate their
escape, while in fact it only left them more defenceless against the
shafts of their enemies. Some, oppressed with fatigue and terror, fell
down and died without so much as receiving a wound. The panic was such
that, in more than one instance, two or three Moorish soldiers were known
to capture thrice their own number of Spaniards. Some, losing their way,
strayed back to Malaga and were made prisoners by females of the city, who
overtook them in the fields. Others escaped to Alhama or other distant
places, after wandering seven or eight days among the mountains,
sustaining life on such wild herbs and berries as they could find, and
lying close during the day. A greater number succeeded in reaching
Antequera, and, among these, most of the leaders of the expedition. The
grand master of St. James, the adelantado Henriquez, and Don Alonso de
Aguilar effected their escape by scaling so perilous a part of the sierra
that their pursuers cared not to follow. The count de Cifuentes was less
fortunate. [30] That nobleman's division was said to have suffered more
severely than any other. On the morning after the bloody passage of the
mountain, he found himself suddenly cut off from his followers, and
surrounded by six Moorish cavaliers, against whom he was defending himself
with desperate courage, when their leader, Reduan Benegas, struck with the
inequality of the combat, broke in, exclaiming, "Hold, this is unworthy of
good knights." The assailants sunk back abashed by the rebuke, and left
the count to their commander. A close encounter then took place between
the two chiefs; but the strength of the Spaniard was no longer equal to
his spirit, and, after a brief resistance, he was forced to surrender to
his generous enemy. [31]

The marquis of Cadiz had better fortune. After waiting till dawn for the
coming up of his friends, he concluded that they had extricated themselves
by a different route. He resolved to provide for his own safety and that
of his followers, and, being supplied with a fresh horse, accomplished his
escape, after traversing the wildest passages of the Axarquia for the
distance of four leagues, and got into Antequera with but little
interruption from the enemy. But, although he secured his personal safety,
the misfortunes of the day fell heavily on his house; for two of his
brothers were cut down by his side, and a third brother, with a nephew,
fell into the hands of the enemy. [32]

The amount of slain in the two days' actions is admitted by the Spanish
writers to have exceeded eight hundred, with double that number of
prisoners. The Moorish force is said to have been small, and its loss
comparatively trifling. The numerical estimates of the Spanish historians,
as usual, appear extremely loose; and the narrative of their enemies is
too meagre in this portion of their annals to allow any opportunity of
verification. There is no reason, however, to believe them in any degree
exaggerated.

The best blood of Andalusia was shed on this occasion. Among the slain,
Bernaldez reckons two hundred and fifty, and Pulgar four hundred persons
of quality, with thirty commanders of the military fraternity of St.
James. There was scarcely a family in the south, but had to mourn the loss
of some one of its members by death or captivity; and the distress was not
a little aggravated by the uncertainty which hung over the fate of the
absent, as to whether they had fallen in the field, or were still
wandering in the wilderness, or were pining away existence in the dungeons
of Malaga and Granada. [33]

Some imputed the failure of the expedition to treachery in the adalides,
some to want of concert among the commanders. The worthy Curate of Los
Palacios concludes his narrative of the disaster in the following manner.
"The number of the Moors was small, who inflicted this grievous defeat on
the Christians. It was, indeed, clearly miraculous, and we may discern in
it the special interposition of Providence, justly offended with the
greater part of those that engaged in the expedition; who, instead of
confessing, partaking the sacrament, and making their testaments, as
becomes good Christians, and men that are to bear arms in defence of the
Holy Catholic faith, acknowledged that they did not bring with them
suitable dispositions, but, with little regard to God's service, were
influenced by covetousness and love of ungodly gain." [34]


FOOTNOTES

[1] Estrada, Poblacion de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 242, 243.--Zurita, Anales,
tom. iv. fol. 317.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. p.
261.

[2] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 58.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana,
tom. ii, pp. 249, 250.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii.
pp. 259, 260.

[3] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 173.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p.
187.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 316, 317.

[4] Rades y Andrada, Las Tres Ordenes, fol. 80, 81.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 173.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 1, cap.
7.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. p. 214.--Carbajal, Anales,
MS., ano 1482.

[5] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, pp. 189-191.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., cap. 58.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. pp. 214-217.--
Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 260, 261.

[6] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 58.--Conde, Dominacion de los
Arabes, tom. iii. pp. 214-217.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--
Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 1, cap. 7.--The _Pena de los
Enamorados_ received its name from a tragical incident in Moorish
history. A Christian slave succeeded in inspiring the daughter of his
master, a wealthy Mussulman of Granada, with a passion for himself. The
two lovers, after some time, fearful of the detection of their intrigue,
resolved to mate their escape into the Spanish territory. Before they
could effect their purpose, however, they were hotly pursued by the
damsel's father at the head of a party of Moorish horsemen, and overtaken
near a precipice which rises between Archidona and Antequera. The
unfortunate fugitives, who had scrambled to the summit of the rocks,
finding all further escape impracticable, after tenderly embracing each
other threw themselves headlong from the dizzy heights, preferring this
dreadful death to falling into the hands of their vindictive pursuers. The
spot consecrated as the scene of this tragic incident has received the
name of _Rock of the Lovers_. The legend is prettily told by Mariana,
(Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 253, 254,) who concludes with the pithy
reflection, that "such constancy would have been truly admirable, had it
been shown in defence of the true faith, rather than in the gratification
of lawless appetite."

[7] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. pp. 214-217.--Cardonne,
Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 262, 263.--Marmol, Rebelion de
Moriscos, lib, 1, cap. 12.--Bernaldez states that great umbrage was taken
at the influence which the king of Granada allowed a person of Christian
lineage, named Venegas, to exercise over him. Pulgar hints at the bloody
massacre of the Abencerrages, which, without any better authority that I
know of, forms the burden of many an ancient ballad, and has lost nothing
of its romantic coloring under the hand of Cines Perez de Hyta.

[8] Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, ubi supra.--Conde, Dominacion
de los Arabes, ubi supra.

Boabdil was surnamed "el Chico," _the Little_, by the Spanish writers, to
distinguish him from an uncle of the same name; and "el Zogoybi," _the
Unfortunate_, by the Moors, indicating that he was the last of his race
destined to wear the diadem of Granada. The Arabs, with great felicity,
frequently select names significant of some quality in the objects they
represent. Examples of this may be readily found in the southern regions
of the Peninsula, where the Moors lingered the longest. The etymology of
Gibraltar, Gebal Tarik, _Mount of Tarik_, is well known. Thus, Algeziras
comes from an Arabic word which signifies _an island_: Alpuxarras comes
from a term signifying _herbage_ or _pasturage_: Arrecife from another,
signifying _causeway_ or _high road_, etc. The Arabic word _wad_ stands
for _river_. This without much violence has been changed into _guad_, and
enters into the names of many of the southern streams; for example,
Guadalquivir, _great river_, Guadiana, _narrow_ or _little river_,
Guadalete, etc. In the same manner the term Medina, _Arabice_ "city,"
has been retained as a prefix to the names of many of the Spanish towns,
as Medina Celi, Medina del Campo, etc. See Conde's notes to El Nubiense,
Description de Espana, passim.

[9] Salazar de Mendoza, Cron. del Gran Cardenal, p. 181.--Pulgar, Claros
Varones, tit. 20.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1483.--Aleson, Annales de
Navarra, tom. v. p. 11, ed. 1766.--Peter Martyr, Opus Epist., epist. 158.

[10] Fred. Marslaar, De Leg. 2, 11.--M. de Wicquefort derives the word
_ambassadeur_ (anciently in English _ambassador_) from the Spanish word
_embiar_, "to send." See Rights of Embassadors, translated by Digby
(London, 1740,) book 1, chap. 1.

[11] Sismondi, Republiques Italiennes, tom. xi. cap. 88.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, pp. 195-198.--Zurita, Anales, tom iv. fol. 218.

[12] Aleson, Annales de Navarra, lib. 34, cap. 1.--Histoire du Royaume de
Navarre, p. 558. Leonora's son, Gaston de Foix, prince of Viana, was slain
by an accidental wound from a lance, at a tourney at Lisbon, in 1469. By
the princess Magdeleine, his wife, sister of Louis XI, he left two
children, a son and daughter, each of whom in turn succeeded to the crown
of Navarre. Francis Phoebus ascended the throne on the demise of his
grandmother Leonora, in 1479. He was distinguished by his personal graces
and beauty, and especially by the golden lustre of his hair, from which,
according to Aleson, he derived his cognomen of Phoebus. As it was an
ancestral name, however, such an etymology may be thought somewhat
fanciful.

[13] Ferdinand and Isabella had at this time four children; the infant Don
John, four years and a half old, but who did not live to come to the
succession, and the infantas Isabella, Joanna, and Maria; the last, born
at Cordova during the summer of 1482.

[14] Aleson, Annales de Navarra, lib. 34, cap. 2; lib. 35, cap. 1.--
Histoire du Royaume de Navarre, pp. 578, 579.--La Clede, Hist. de
Portugal, tom. iii. pp. 438-441.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 199.--
Mariana, Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. p. 551.

[15] Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 2, cap. 1.

Besides the armada in the Mediterranean, a fleet under Pedro de Vera was
prosecuting a voyage of discovery and conquest to the Canaries at this
time.

[16] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 199.--Mariana, tom. ii. p. 551.--
Coleccion de Cedulas y Otros Documentos, (Madrid, 1829,) tom. iii. no. 25.

For this important collection, a few copies of which, only, were printed
for distribution, at the expense of the Spanish government, I am indebted
to the politeness of Don A. Calderon de la Barca.

[17] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 58.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
p. 202.

Juan de Corral imposed on the king of Granada by means of certain
credentials, which he had obtained from the Spanish sovereigns without any
privity on their part to his fraudulent intentions. The story is told in a
very blind manner by Pulgar.

It may not be amiss to mention here a doughty feat performed by another
Castilian envoy, of much higher rank, Don Juan de Vera. This knight, while
conversing with certain Moorish cavaliers in the Alhambra, was so much
scandalized by the freedom with which one of them treated the immaculate
conception, that he gave the circumcised dog the lie, and smote him a
sharp blow on the head with his sword. Ferdinand, say Bernaldez, who tells
the story, was much gratified with the exploit, and recompensed the good
knight with many honors.

[18] The _adalid_ was a guide, or scout, whose business it was to
make himself acquainted with the enemy's country, and to guide the
invaders into it. Much dispute has arisen respecting the authority and
functions of this officer. Some writers regard him as an independent
leader, or commander; and the Dictionary of the Academy defines the term
_adalid_ by these very words. The Siete Partidas, however, explains
at length the peculiar duties of this officer, conformably to the account
I have given. (Ed. de la Real Acad. (Madrid, 1807,) part. 2, tit. 2, leyes
1-4.) Bernaldez, Pulgar, and the other chroniclers of the Granadine war,
repeatedly notice him in this connection. When he is spoken of as a
captain, or leader, as he sometimes is in these and other ancient records,
his authority, I suspect, is intended to be limited to the persons who
aided him in the execution of his peculiar office.--It was common for the
great chiefs, who lived on the borders, to maintain in their pay a number
of these _adalides_, to inform them of the fitting time and place for
making a foray. The post, as may well be believed, was one of great trust
and personal hazard.

[19] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 203.--L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol.
173.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 320.

[20] Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 36.--Lebrija,
Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 2, cap. 2.

The title of _adelantado_ implies in its etymology one preferred or
placed before others. The office is of great antiquity; some have derived
it from the reign of St. Ferdinand in the thirteenth century, but Mendoza
proves its existence at a far earlier period. The adelantado was possessed
of very extensive judicial authority in the province or district in which
he presided, and in war was invested with supreme military command. His
functions, however, as well as the territories over which he ruled, have
varied at different periods. An adelantado seems to have been generally
established over a border province, as Andalusia for example. Marina
discusses the civil authority of this officer, in his Teoria, tom. ii.
cap. 23. See also Salazar de Mendoza, Dignidades, lib. 2, cap. 15.

[21] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.--Rades y Andrada, Las Tres
Ordenes, fol. 71.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 320.--Zuniga, Annales de
Sevilla, fol. 395.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 2, cap. 2.--
Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 36.

[22] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. p. 217.--Cardonne, Hist.
d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 264-267.--Bernaldez, Reyes
Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.

[23] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. p. 217.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, p. 204.--Rades y Andrada, Las Tres Ordenes, fol. 71, 72.

[24] Mariana, Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. pp. 552, 553.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, p. 205.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 321.

[25] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 205.--Garibay, Compendio, tom. ii. p.
636.

[26] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
ubi supra.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 264-267.

[27] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 206.--Rades y Andrada, Las Tres Ordenes,
fol. 71, 72.

[28] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, loc. cit.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
cap. 60.

[29] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 206. Mr. Irving, in his "Conquest of
Granada," states that the scene of the greatest slaughter in this rout is
still known to the inhabitants of the Axarquia by the name of _La Cuesta
de la Matanza_, or "The Hill of the Massacre."

[30] Oviedo, who devotes one of his dialogues to this nobleman, says of
him, "Fue una de las buenas lanzos de nuestra Espana en su tiempo; y muy
sabio y prudente caballero. Hallose en grandes cargos y negocios de paz y
de guerra." Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 36.

[31] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii, p. 218.--Zurita, Anales,
tom. iv. fol. 321.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1483.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, ubi supra.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.--
Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 266, 267.--The
count, according to Oviedo, remained a long while a prisoner in Granada,
until he was ransomed by the payment of several thousand doblas of gold.
Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial 36.

[32] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.--Marmol says that three
brothers and two nephews of the marquis, whose names he gives, were all
slain. Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

[33] Zuniga, Annales de Sevilla, fol. 395.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., ubi supra.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, p. 206.--Oviedo, Quincuagenas,
MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 38.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1,
cap. 12.

[34] Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 60. Pulgar has devoted a large space to
the unfortunate expedition to the Axarquia. His intimacy with the
principal persons of the court enabled him, no doubt, to verify most of
the particulars which he records. The Curate of Los Palacios, from the
proximity of his residence to the theatre of action, may be supposed also
to have had ample means for obtaining the requisite information. Yet their
several accounts, although not strictly contradictory, it is not always
easy to reconcile with one another. The narratives of complex military
operations are not likely to be simplified under the hands of monkish
bookmen. I have endeavored to make out a connected tissue from a
comparison of the Moslem with the Castilian authorities. But here the
meagreness of the Moslem annals compels us to lament the premature death
of Conde. It can hardly be expected, indeed, that the Moors should have
dwelt with much amplification on this humiliating period. But there can be
little doubt, that far more copious memorials of theirs than any now
published, exist in the Spanish libraries; and it were much to be wished
that some Oriental scholar would supply Conde's deficiency, by exploring
these authentic records of what may be deemed, as far as Christian Spain
is concerned, the most glorious portion of her history.




CHAPTER XI.

WAR OF GRANADA.--GENERAL VIEW OF THE POLICY PURSUED IN THE CONDUCT OF THIS
WAR

1483-1487.

Defeat and Capture of Abdallah.--Policy of the Sovereigns.--Large Trains
of Artillery.--Description of the Pieces.--Stupendous Roads.--Isabella's
Care of the Troops.--Her Perseverance.--Discipline of the Army.--Swiss
Mercenaries.--English Lord Scales.--Magnificence of the Nobles.--Isabella
Visits the Camp.--Ceremonies on the Occupation of a City.


The young monarch, Abu Abdallah, was probably the only person in Granada
who did not receive with unmingled satisfaction the tidings of the rout in
the Axarquia. He beheld with secret uneasiness the laurels thus acquired
by the old king his father, or rather by his ambitious uncle El Zagal,
whose name now resounded from every quarter as the successful champion of
the Moslems. He saw the necessity of some dazzling enterprise, if he would
maintain an ascendency even over the faction which had seated him on the
throne. He accordingly projected an excursion, which, instead of
terminating in a mere border foray, should lead to the achievement of some
permanent conquest.

He found no difficulty, while the spirits of his people were roused, in
raising a force of nine thousand foot, and seven hundred horse, the flower
of Granada's chivalry. He strengthened his army still further by the
presence of Ali Atar, the defender of Loja, the veteran of a hundred
battles, whose military prowess had raised him from the common file up to
the highest post in the army; and whose plebeian blood had been permitted
to mingle with that of royalty, by the marriage of his daughter with the
young king Abdallah.

With this gallant array, the Moorish monarch sallied forth from Granada.
As he led the way through the avenue which still bears the name of the
gate of Elvira, [1] the point of his lance came in contact with the arch
and was broken. This sinister omen was followed by another more alarming.
A fox, which crossed the path of the army, was seen to run through the
ranks, and, notwithstanding the showers of missiles discharged at him, to
make his escape unhurt. Abdallah's counsellors would have persuaded him to
abandon, or at least postpone, an enterprise of such ill augury. But the
king, less superstitious, or from the obstinacy with which feeble minds,
when once resolved, frequently persist in their projects, rejected their
advice, and pressed forward on his march. [2]

The advance of the party was not conducted so cautiously but that it
reached the ear of Don Diego Fernandez de Cordova, _alcayde de los
donzeles_, or captain of the royal pages, who commanded in the town of
Lucena, which he rightly judged was to be the principal object of attack.
He transmitted the intelligence to his uncle the count of Cabra, a
nobleman of the same name with himself, who was posted at his own town of
Baena, requesting his support. He used all diligence in repairing the
fortifications of the city, which, although extensive and originally
strong, had fallen somewhat into decay; and, having caused such of the
population as were rendered helpless by age or infirmity to withdraw into
the interior defences of the place, he coolly waited the approach of the
enemy. [3]

The Moorish army, after crossing the borders, began to mark its career
through the Christian territory with the usual traces of devastation, and,
sweeping across the environs of Lucena, poured a marauding foray into the
rich _campina_ of Cordova, as far as the walls of Aguilar; whence it
returned, glutted with spoil, to lay siege to Lucena about the 21st of
April.

The count of Cabra, in the mean while, who had lost no time in mustering
his levies, set forward at the head of a small but well-appointed force,
consisting of both horse and foot, to the relief of his nephew. He
advanced with such celerity that he had wellnigh surprised the
beleaguering army. As he traversed the sierra, which covered the Moorish
flank, his numbers were partially concealed by the inequalities of the
ground; while the clash of arms and the shrill music, reverberating among
the hills, exaggerated their real magnitude in the apprehension of the
enemy. At the same time the _alcayde de los donzeles_ supported his
uncle's advance by a vigorous sally from the city. The Granadine infantry,
anxious only for the preservation of their valuable booty, scarcely waited
for the encounter, before they began a dastardly retreat, and left the
battle to the cavalry. The latter, composed, as has been said, of the
strength of the Moorish chivalry, men accustomed in many a border foray to
cross lances with the best knights of Andalusia, kept their ground with
their wonted gallantry. The conflict, so well disputed, remained doubtful
for some time, until it was determined by the death of the veteran
chieftain Ali Atar, "the best lance," as a Castilian writer has styled
him, "of all Morisma," who was brought to the ground after receiving two
wounds, and thus escaped by an honorable death the melancholy spectacle of
his country's humiliation. [4]

The enemy, disheartened by this loss, soon began to give ground. But,
though hard pressed by the Spaniards, they retreated in some order, until
they reached the borders of the Xenil, which were thronged with the
infantry, vainly attempting a passage across the stream, swollen by
excessive rains to a height much above its ordinary level. The confusion
now became universal, horse and foot mingling together; each one, heedful
only of life, no longer thought of his booty. Many, attempting to swim the
stream, were borne down, steed and rider, promiscuously in its waters.
Many more, scarcely making show of resistance, were cut down on the banks
by the pitiless Spaniards. The young king Abdallah, who had been
conspicuous during that day in the hottest of the fight, mounted on a
milk-white charger richly caparisoned, saw fifty of his loyal guard fall
around him. Finding his steed too much jaded to stem the current of the
river, he quietly dismounted and sought a shelter among the reedy thickets
that fringed its margin, until the storm of battle should have passed
over. In this lurking-place, however, he was discovered by a common
soldier named Martin Hurtado, who, without recognizing his person,
instantly attacked him. The prince defended himself with his scimitar,
until Hurtado, being joined by two of his countrymen, succeeded in making
him prisoner. The men, overjoyed at their prize (for Abdallah had revealed
his rank, in order to secure his person from violence), conducted him to
their general, the count of Cabra. The latter received the royal captive
with a generous courtesy, the best sign of noble breeding, and which,
recognized as a feature of chivalry, affords a pleasing contrast to the
ferocious spirit of ancient warfare. The good count administered to the
unfortunate prince all the consolations which his state would admit; and
subsequently lodged him in his castle of Baena, where he was entertained
with the most delicate and courtly hospitality. [5]

Nearly the whole of the Moslem cavalry were cut up, or captured, in this
fatal action. Many of them were persons of rank, commanding high ransoms.
The loss inflicted on the infantry was also severe, including the whole of
their dear-bought plunder. Nine, or indeed, according to some accounts,
two and twenty banners fell into the hands of the Christians in this
action; in commemoration of which the Spanish sovereigns granted to the
count of Cabra, and his nephew, the alcayde de los donzeles, the privilege
of bearing the same number of banners on their escutcheon, together with
the head of a Moorish king, encircled by a golden coronet, with a chain of
the same metal around the neck. [6]

Great was the consternation occasioned by the return of the Moorish
fugitives to Granada, and loud was the lament through its populous
streets; for the pride of many a noble house was laid low on that day, and
their king (a thing unprecedented in the annals of the monarchy) was a
prisoner in the land of the Christians. "The hostile star of Islam,"
exclaims an Arabian writer, "now scattered its malignant influences over
Spain, and the downfall of the Mussulman empire was decreed."

The sultana Zoraya, however, was not of a temper to waste time in useless
lamentation. She was aware that a captive king, who held his title by so
precarious a tenure as did her son Abdallah, must soon cease to be a king
even in name. She accordingly despatched a numerous embassy to Cordova,
with proffers of such a ransom for the prince's liberation, as a despot
only could offer, and few despots could have the authority to enforce.
[7]

King Ferdinand, who was at Vitoria with the queen, when he received
tidings of the victory of Lucena, hastened to the south to determine on
the destination of his royal captive. With some show of magnanimity, he
declined an interview with Abdallah, until he should have consented to his
liberation. A debate of some warmth occurred in the royal council at
Cordova, respecting the policy to be pursued; some contending that the
Moorish monarch was too valuable a prize to be so readily relinquished,
and that the enemy, broken by the loss of their natural leader, would find
it difficult to rally under one common head, or to concert any effective
movement. Others, and especially the marquis of Cadiz, urged his release,
and even the support of his pretensions against his competitor, the old
king of Granada; insisting that the Moorish empire would be more
effectually shaken by internal divisions, than by any pressure of its
enemies from without. The various arguments were submitted to the queen,
who still held her court in the north, and who decided for the release of
Abdallah, as a measure best reconciling sound policy with generosity to
the vanquished. [8]

The terms of the treaty, although sufficiently humiliating to the Moslem
prince, were not materially different from those proposed by the sultana
Zoraya. It was agreed that a truce, of two years should be extended to
Abdallah, and to such places in Granada as acknowledged his authority. In
consideration of which, he stipulated to surrender four hundred Christian
captives without ransom, to pay twelve thousand doblas of gold annually to
the Spanish sovereigns, and to permit a free passage, as well as furnish
supplies, to their troops passing through his territories, for the purpose
of carrying on the war against that portion of the kingdom which still
adhered to his father. Abdallah moreover bound himself to appear when
summoned by Ferdinand, and to surrender his own son, with the children of
his principal nobility, as sureties for his fulfilment of the treaty. Thus
did the unhappy prince barter away his honor and his country's freedom for
the possession of immediate, but most precarious sovereignty; a
sovereignty, which could scarcely be expected to survive the period when
he could be useful to the master whose breath had made him. [9]

The terms of the treaty being thus definitively settled, an interview was
arranged to take place between the two monarchs at Cordova. The Castilian
courtiers would have persuaded their master to offer his hand for Abdallah
to salute, in token of his feudal supremacy; but Ferdinand replied, "Were
the king of Granada in his own dominions, I might do this; but not while
he is a prisoner in mine." The Moorish prince entered Cordova with an
escort of his own knights, and a splendid throng of Spanish chivalry, who
had marched out of the city to receive him. When Abdallah entered the
royal presence, he would have prostrated himself on his knees; but
Ferdinand, hastening to prevent him, embraced him with every demonstration
of respect. An Arabic interpreter, who acted as orator, then, expatiated,
in florid hyperbole, on the magnanimity and princely qualities of the
Spanish king, and the loyalty and good faith of his own master. But
Ferdinand interrupted his eloquence, with the assurance that "his
panegyric was superfluous, and that he had perfect confidence that the
sovereign of Granada would keep his faith as became a true knight and a
king." After ceremonies so humiliating to the Moorish prince,
notwithstanding the veil of decorum studiously thrown over them, he set
out with his attendants for his capital, escorted by a body of Andalusian
horse to the frontier, and loaded with costly presents by the Spanish
king, and the general contempt of his court. [10]

Notwithstanding the importance of the results in the war of Granada, a
detail of the successive steps by which they were achieved would be most
tedious and trifling. No siege or single military achievement of great
moment occurred until nearly four years from this period, in 1487;
although, in the intervening time, a large number of fortresses and petty
towns, together with a very extensive tract of territory, were recovered
from the enemy. Without pursuing the chronological order of events, it is
probable that the end of history will be best attained by presenting a
concise view of the general policy pursued by the sovereigns in the
conduct of the war.

The Moorish wars under preceding monarchs had consisted of little else
than _cavalgadas_, or inroads into the enemy's territory, [11] which,
pouring like a torrent over the land, swept away whatever was upon the
surface, but left it in its essential resources wholly unimpaired. The
bounty of nature soon repaired the ravages of man, and the ensuing harvest
seemed to shoot up more abundantly from the soil, enriched by the blood of
the husbandman. A more vigorous system of spoliation was now introduced.
Instead of one campaign, the army took the field in spring and autumn,
intermitting its efforts only during the intolerable heats of summer, so
that the green crop had no time to ripen, ere it was trodden down under
the iron heel of war.

The apparatus for devastation was also on a much greater scale than had
ever before been witnessed. From the second year of the war, thirty
thousand foragers were reserved for this service, which they effected by
demolishing farmhouses, granaries, and mills, (which last were exceedingly
numerous in a land watered by many small streams,) by eradicating the
vines, and laying waste the olive-gardens and plantations of oranges,
almonds, mulberries, and all the rich varieties that grew luxuriant in
this highly-favored region. This merciless devastation extended for more
than two leagues on either side of the line of march. At the same time,
the Mediterranean fleet cut off all supplies from the Barbary coast, so
that the whole kingdom might be said to be in a state of perpetual
blockade. Such and so general was the scarcity occasioned by this system,
that the Moors were glad to exchange their Christian captives for
provisions, until such ransom was interdicted by the sovereigns, as
tending to defeat their own measures. [12]

Still there was many a green and sheltered valley in Granada, which
yielded its returns unmolested to the Moorish husbandman; while his
granaries were occasionally enriched with the produce of a border foray.
The Moors too, although naturally a luxurious people, were patient of
suffering, and capable of enduring great privation. Other measures,
therefore, of a still more formidable character, became necessary in
conjunction with this rigorous system of blockade.

The Moorish towns were for the most part strongly defended, presenting
within the limits of Granada, as has been said, more than ten times the
number of fortified places that are now scattered over the whole extent of
the Peninsula. They stood along the crest of some precipice, or bold
sierra, whose natural strength was augmented by the solid masonry with
which they were surrounded, and which, however insufficient to hold out
against modern artillery, bade defiance to all the enginery of battering
warfare known previously to the fifteenth century. It was this strength of
fortification, combined with that of their local position, which
frequently enabled a slender garrison in these places to laugh to scorn
all the efforts of the proudest Castilian armies.

The Spanish sovereigns were convinced that they must look to their
artillery as the only effectual means for the reduction of these strong-
holds. In this, they as well as the Moors were extremely deficient,
although Spain appears to have furnished earlier examples of its use than
any other country in Europe. Isabella, who seems to have had the
particular control of this department, caused the most skilful engineers
and artisans to be invited into the kingdom from France, Germany, and
Italy. Forges were constructed in the camp, and all the requisite
materials prepared for the manufacture of cannon, balls, and powder. Large
quantities of the last were also imported from Sicily, Flanders, and
Portugal. Commissaries were established over the various departments, with
instructions to provide whatever might be necessary for the operatives;
and the whole was intrusted to the supervision of Don Francisco Ramirez,
an hidalgo of Madrid, a person of much experience, and extensive military
science, for that day. By these efforts, unremittingly pursued during the
whole of the war, Isabella assembled a train of artillery, such as was
probably not possessed at that time by any other European potentate.
[13]

Still, the clumsy construction of the ordnance betrayed the infancy of the
art. More than twenty pieces of artillery used at the siege of Baza,
during this war, are still to be seen in that city, where they long served
as columns in the public market-place. The largest of the lombards, as the
heavy ordnance was called, are about twelve feet in length, consisting of
iron bars two inches in breadth, held together by bolts and rings of the
same metal. These were firmly attached to their carriages, incapable
either of horizontal or vertical movement. It was this clumsiness of
construction which led Machiavelli, some thirty years after, to doubt the
expediency of bringing cannon into field engagements; and he particularly
recommends in his treatise on the Art of War, that the enemy's fire should
be evaded by intervals in the ranks being left open opposite to his
cannon. [14]

The balls thrown from these engines were sometimes of iron, but more
usually of marble. Several hundred of the latter have been picked up in
the fields around Baza, many of which are fourteen inches in diameter, and
weigh a hundred and seventy-five pounds. Yet this bulk, enormous as it
appears, shows a considerable advance in the art since the beginning of
the century, when the stone balls discharged, according to Zurita, at the
siege of Balaguer, weighed not less than five hundred and fifty pounds. It
was very long before the exact proportions requisite for obtaining the
greatest effective force could be ascertained. [15]

The awkwardness with which their artillery was served, corresponded with
the rudeness of its manufacture. It is noticed as a remarkable
circumstance by the chronicler, that two batteries, at the siege of
Albahar, discharged one hundred and forty balls in the course of a day.
[16] Besides this more usual kind of ammunition, the Spaniards threw from
their engines large globular masses, composed of certain inflammable
ingredients mixed with gunpowder, "which, scattering long trains of
light," says an eye-witness, "in their passage through the air, filled the
beholders with dismay, and, descending on the roofs of the edifices,
frequently occasioned extensive conflagration." [17]

The transportation of their bulky engines was not the least of the
difficulties which the Spaniards had to encounter in this war. The Moorish
fortresses were frequently intrenched in the depths of some mountain
labyrinth, whose rugged passes were scarcely accessible to cavalry. An
immense body of pioneers, therefore, was constantly employed in
constructing roads for the artillery across these sierras, by levelling
the mountains, filling up the intervening valleys with rocks, or with cork
trees and other timber that grew prolific in the wilderness, and throwing
bridges across the torrents and precipitous _barrancos_. Pulgar had
the curiosity to examine one of the causeways thus constructed preparatory
to the siege of Cambil, which, although six thousand pioneers were
constantly employed in the work, was attended with such difficulty, that
it advanced only three leagues in twelve days. It required, says the
historian, the entire demolition of one of the most rugged parts of the
sierra, which no one could have believed practicable by human industry.
[18]

The Moorish garrisons, perched on their mountain fastnesses, which, like
the eyry of some bird of prey, seemed almost inaccessible to man, beheld
with astonishment the heavy trains of artillery, emerging from the passes,
where the foot of the hunter had scarcely been known to venture. The walls
which encompassed their cities, although lofty, were not of sufficient
thickness to withstand long the assaults of these formidable engines. The
Moors were deficient in heavy ordnance. The weapons on which they chiefly
relied for annoying the enemy at a distance were the arquebus and cross-
bow, with the last of which they were unerring marksmen, being trained to
it from infancy. They adopted a custom, rarely met with in civilized
nations of any age, of poisoning their arrows; distilling for this purpose
the juice of aconite, or wolfsbane, which they found in the _Sierra
Nevada_, or Snowy Mountains, near Granada. A piece of linen or cotton
cloth steeped in this decoction was wrapped round the point of the weapon,
and the wound inflicted by it, however trivial in appearance, was sure to
be mortal. Indeed, a Spanish writer, not content with this, imputes such
malignity to the virus that a drop of it, as he asserts, mingling with the
blood oozing from a wound, would ascend the stream into the vein, and
diffuse its fatal influence over the whole system! [19]

Ferdinand, who appeared at the head of his armies throughout the whole of
this war, pursued a sagacious policy in reference to the beleaguered
cities. He was ever ready to meet the first overtures to surrender, in the
most liberal spirit; granting protection of person, and such property as
the besieged could transport with them, and assigning them a residence, if
they preferred it, in his own dominions. Many, in consequence of this,
migrated to Seville and other cities of Andalusia, where they were settled
on estates which had been confiscated by the inquisitors; who looked
forward, no doubt, with satisfaction to the time, when they should be
permitted to thrust their sickle into the new crop of heresy, whose seeds
were thus sown amid the ashes of the old one. Those who preferred to
remain in the conquered Moorish territory, as Castilian subjects, were
permitted the free enjoyment of personal rights and property, as well as
of their religion; and, such was the fidelity with which Ferdinand
redeemed his engagements during the war, by the punishment of the least
infraction of them by his own people, that many, particularly of the
Moorish peasantry, preferred abiding in their early homes to removing to
Granada, or other places of the Moslem dominion. It was perhaps a
counterpart of the same policy, which led Ferdinand to chastise any
attempt at revolt, on the part of his new Moorish subjects, the Mudejares,
as they were called, with an unsparing rigor, which merits the reproach of
cruelty. Such was the military execution inflicted on the rebellious town
of Benemaquez, where he commanded one hundred and ten of the principal
inhabitants to be hung above the walls, and, after consigning the rest of
the population, men, women, and children, to slavery, caused the place to
be razed to the ground. The humane policy, usually pursued by Ferdinand,
seems to have had a more favorable effect on his enemies, who were
exasperated, rather than intimidated, by this ferocious act of vengeance.
[20]

The magnitude of the other preparations corresponded with those for the
ordnance department. The amount of forces assembled at Cordova, we find
variously stated at ten or twelve thousand horse, and twenty, and even
forty thousand foot, exclusive of foragers. On one occasion, the whole
number, including men for the artillery service and the followers of the
camp, is reckoned at eighty thousand. The same number of beasts of burden
were employed in transporting the supplies required for this immense host,
as well as for provisioning the conquered cities standing in the midst of
a desolated country. The queen, who took this department under her special
cognizance, moved along the frontier, stationing herself at points most
contiguous to the scene of operations. There, by means of posts regularly
established, she received hourly intelligence of the war. At the same time
she transmitted the requisite munitions for the troops, by means of
convoys sufficiently strong to secure them against the irruptions of the
wily enemy. [21]

Isabella, solicitous for everything that concerned the welfare of her
people, sometimes visited the camp in person, encouraging the soldiers to
endure the hardships of war, and relieving their necessities by liberal
donations of clothes and money. She caused also a number of large tents,
known as "the queen's hospitals," to be always reserved for the sick and
wounded, and furnished them with the requisite attendants and medicines,
at her own charge. This is considered the earliest attempt at the
formation of a regular camp hospital, on record. [22]

Isabella may be regarded as the soul of this war. She engaged in it with
the most exalted views, less to acquire territory than to re-establish the
empire of the Cross over the ancient domain of Christendom. On this point,
she concentrated all the energies of her powerful mind, never suffering
herself to be diverted by any subordinate interest from this one great and
glorious object. When the king, in 1484, would have paused a while from
the Granadine war, in order to prosecute his claims to Roussillon against
the French, on the demise of Louis the Eleventh, Isabella strongly
objected to it; but, finding her remonstrance ineffectual, she left her
husband in Aragon, and repaired to Cordova, where she placed the cardinal
of Spain at the head of the army, and prepared to open the campaign in the
usual vigorous manner. Here, however, she was soon joined by Ferdinand,
who, on a cooler revision of the subject, deemed it prudent to postpone
his projected enterprise.

On another occasion, in the same year, when the nobles, fatigued with the
service, had persuaded the king to retire earlier than usual, the queen,
dissatisfied with the proceeding, addressed a letter to her husband, in
which, after representing the disproportion of the results to the
preparations, she besought him to keep the field as long as the season
should serve. The grandees, says Lebrija, mortified at being surpassed in
zeal for the holy war by a woman, eagerly collected their forces, which
had been partly disbanded, and returned across the borders to renew
hostilities. [23]

A circumstance, which had frequently frustrated the most magnificent
military enterprises under former reigns, was the factions of these potent
vassals, who, independent of each other, and almost of the crown, could
rarely be brought to act in efficient concert for a length of time, and
broke up the camp on the slightest personal jealousy, Ferdinand
experienced something of this temper in the duke of Medina Celi, who, when
he had received orders to detach a corps of his troops to the support of
the count of Benavente, refused, replying to the messenger, "Tell your
master, that I came here to serve him at the head of my household troops,
and they go nowhere without me as their leader." The sovereigns managed
this fiery spirit with the greatest address, and, instead of curbing it,
endeavored to direct it in the path of honorable emulation. The queen, who
as their hereditary sovereign received a more deferential homage from her
Castilian subjects than Ferdinand, frequently wrote to her nobles in the
camp, complimenting some on their achievements, and others less fortunate
on their intentions, thus cheering the hearts of all, says the chronicler,
and stimulating them to deeds of heroism. On the most deserving she freely
lavished those honors which cost little to the sovereign, but are most
grateful to the subject. The marquis of Cadiz, who was pre-eminent above
every other captain in this war for sagacity and conduct, was rewarded,
after his brilliant surprise of Zahara, with the gift of that city, and
the titles of Marquis of Zahara and Duke of Cadiz. The warrior, however,
was unwilling to resign the ancient title under which he had won his
laurels, and ever after subscribed himself, Marquis Duke of Cadiz.
[24] Still more emphatic honors were conferred on the count de Cabra,
after the capture of the king of Granada. When he presented himself before
the sovereigns, who were at Vitoria, the clergy and cavaliers of the city
marched out to receive him, and he entered in solemn procession on the
right hand of the grand cardinal of Spain. As he advanced up the hall of
audience in the royal palace, the king and queen came forward to welcome
him, and then seated him by themselves at table, declaring that "the
conqueror of kings should sit with kings." These honors were followed by
the more substantial gratuity of a hundred thousand maravedies annual
rent; "a fat donative," says an old chronicler, "for so lean a treasury."
The young alcayde de los donzeles experienced a similar reception on the
ensuing day. Such acts of royal condescension were especially grateful to
the nobility of a court, circumscribed beyond every other in Europe by
stately and ceremonious etiquette. [25]

The duration of the war of Granada was such as to raise the militia
throughout the kingdom nearly to a level with regular troops. Many of
these levies, indeed, at the breaking out of the war, might pretend to
this character. Such were those furnished by the Andalusian cities, which
had been long accustomed to skirmishes with their Moslem neighbors. Such
too was the well-appointed chivalry of the military orders, and the
organized militia of the hermandad, which we find sometimes supplying a
body of ten thousand men for the service. To these may be added the
splendid throng of cavaliers and hidalgos, who swelled the retinues of the
sovereigns and the great nobility. The king was attended in battle by a
body-guard of a thousand knights, one-half light, and the other half heavy
armed, all superbly equipped and mounted, and trained to arms from
childhood, under the royal eye.

Although the burden of the war bore most heavily on Andalusia, from its
contiguity to the scene of action, yet recruits were drawn in abundance
from the most remote provinces, as Galicia, Biscay, and the Asturias, from
Aragon, and even the transmarine dominions of Sicily. The sovereigns did
not disdain to swell their ranks with levies of a humbler description, by
promising an entire amnesty to those malefactors, who had left the country
in great numbers of late years to escape justice, on condition of their
serving in the Moorish war. Throughout this motley host the strictest
discipline and decorum were maintained. The Spaniards have never been
disposed to intemperance; but the passion for gaming, especially with
dice, to which they seem to have been immoderately addicted at that day,
was restrained by the severest penalties. [26]

The brilliant successes of the Spanish sovereigns diffused general
satisfaction throughout Christendom, and volunteers flocked to the camp
from France, England, and other parts of Europe, eager to participate in
the glorious triumphs of the Cross. Among these was a corps of Swiss
mercenaries, who are thus simply described by Pulgar. "There joined the
royal standard a body of men from Switzerland, a country in upper Germany.
These men were bold of heart, and fought on foot. As they were resolved
never to turn their backs upon the enemy, they wore no defensive armor,
except in front; by which means they were less encumbered in fight. They
made a trade of war, letting themselves out as mercenaries; but they
espoused only a just quarrel, for they were devout and loyal Christians,
and above all abhorred rapine as a great sin." [27] The Swiss had recently
established their military renown by the discomfiture of Charles the Bold,
when they first proved the superiority of infantry over the best-appointed
chivalry of Europe. Their example no doubt contributed to the formation of
that invincible Spanish infantry, which, under the Great Captain and his
successors, may be said to have decided the fate of Europe for more than
half a century.

Among the foreigners was one from the distant isle of Britain, the earl of
Rivers, or conde de Escalas, as he is called from his patronymic, Scales,
by the Spanish writers. "There came from Britain," says Peter Martyr, "a
cavalier, young, wealthy, and high-born. He was allied to the blood royal
of England. He was attended by a beautiful train of household troops three
hundred in number, armed after the fashion of their land with long-bow and
battle-axe." This nobleman particularly distinguished himself by his
gallantry in the second siege of Loja, in 1486. Having asked leave to
fight after the manner of his country, says the Andalusian chronicler, he
dismounted from his good steed, and putting himself at the head of his
followers, armed like himself _en blanco_, with their swords at their
thighs, and battle-axes in their hands, he dealt such terrible blows
around him as filled even the hardy mountaineers of the north with
astonishment. Unfortunately, just as the suburbs were carried, the good
knight, as he was mounting a scaling-ladder, received a blow from a stone,
which dashed out two of his teeth, and stretched him senseless on the
ground. He was removed to his tent, where he lay some time under medical
treatment; and, when he had sufficiently recovered, he received a visit
from the king and queen, who complimented him on his prowess, and
testified their sympathy for his misfortune. "It is little," replied he,
"to lose a few teeth in the service of him, who has given me all. Our
Lord," he added, "who reared this fabric, has only opened a window, in
order to discern the more readily what passes within." A facetious
response, says Peter Martyr, which gave uncommon satisfaction to the
sovereigns. [28]

The queen, not long after, testified her sense of the earl's services by a
magnificent largess, consisting, among other things, of twelve Andalusian
horses, two couches with richly wrought hangings and coverings of cloth of
gold, with a quantity of fine linen, and sumptuous pavilions for himself
and suite. The brave knight seems to have been satisfied with this state
of the Moorish wars; for he soon after returned to England, and in 1488
passed over to France, where his hot spirit prompted him to take part in
the feudal factions of that country, in which he lost his life, fighting
for the duke of Brittany. [29]

The pomp with which the military movements were conducted in these
campaigns, gave the scene rather the air of a court pageant, than that of
the stern array of war. The war was one, which, appealing both to
principles of religion and patriotism, was well calculated to inflame the
imaginations of the young Spanish cavaliers; and they poured into the
field, eager to display themselves under the eye of their illustrious
queen, who, as she rode through the ranks mounted on her war-horse, and
clad in complete mail, afforded no bad personification of the genius of
chivalry. The potent and wealthy barons exhibited in the camp all the
magnificence of princes. The pavilions decorated with various-colored
pennons, and emblazoned with the armorial bearings of their ancient
houses, shone with a splendor, which a Castilian writer likens to that of
the city of Seville. [30] They always appeared surrounded by a throng of
pages in gorgeous liveries, and at night were preceded by a multitude of
torches, which shed a radiance like that of day. They vied with each other
in the costliness of their apparel, equipage, and plate, and in the
variety and delicacy of the dainties with which their tables were covered.
[31]

Ferdinand and Isabella saw with regret this lavish ostentation, and
privately remonstrated with some of the principal grandees on its evil
tendency, especially in seducing the inferior and poorer nobility into
expenditures beyond their means. This Sybarite indulgence, however, does
not seem to have impaired the martial spirit of the nobles. On all
occasions, they contended with each other for the post of danger. The duke
del Infantado, the head of the powerful house of Mendoza, was conspicuous
above all for the magnificence of his train. At the siege of Illora, 1486,
he obtained permission to lead the storming party. As his followers
pressed onwards to the breach, they were received with such a shower of
missiles as made them falter for a moment. "What, my men," cried he, "do
you fail me at this hour? Shall we be taunted with bearing more finery on
our backs than courage in our hearts? Let us not, in God's name, be
laughed at as mere holyday soldiers!" His vassals, stung by this rebuke,
rallied, and, penetrating the breach, carried the place by the fury of
their assault. [32]

Notwithstanding the remonstrances of the sovereigns against this
ostentation of luxury, they were not wanting in the display of royal state
and magnificence on all suitable occasions. The Curate of Los Palacios has
expatiated with elaborate minuteness on the circumstances of an interview
between Ferdinand and Isabella in the camp before Moclin, in 1486, where
the queen's presence was solicited for the purpose of devising a plan of
future operations. A few of the particulars may be transcribed, though at
the hazard of appearing trivial to readers, who take little interest in
such details.

On the borders of the Yeguas, the queen was met by an advanced corps,
under the command of the marquis-duke of Cadiz, and, at the distance of a
league and a half from Moclin, by the duke del Infantado, with the
principal nobility and their vassals, splendidly accoutred. On the left of
the road was drawn up in battle array the militia of Seville, and the
queen, making her obeisance to the banner of that illustrious city,
ordered it to pass to her right. The successive battalions saluted the
queen as she advanced, by lowering their standards, and the joyous
multitude announced with tumultuous acclamations her approach to the
conquered city.

The queen was accompanied by her daughter, the infanta Isabella, and a
courtly train of damsels, mounted on mules richly caparisoned. The queen
herself rode a chestnut mule, seated on a saddle-chair embossed with gold
and silver. The housings were of a crimson color, and the bridle was of
satin, curiously wrought with letters of gold. The infanta wore a skirt of
fine velvet, over others of brocade; a scarlet mantilla of the Moorish
fashion; and a black hat trimmed with gold embroidery. The king rode
forward at the head of his nobles to receive her. He was dressed in a
crimson doublet, with _chausses_, or breeches, of yellow satin. Over
his shoulders was thrown a cassock or mantle of rich brocade, and a
sopravest of the same materials concealed his cuirass. By his side, close
girt, he wore a Moorish scimitar, and beneath his bonnet his hair was
confined by a cap or headdress of the finest stuff.

Ferdinand was mounted on a noble war-horse of a bright chestnut color. In
the splendid train of chivalry which attended him, Bernaldez dwells with
much satisfaction on the English lord Scales. He was followed by a retinue
of five pages arrayed in costly liveries. He was sheathed in complete
mail, over which was thrown a French surcoat of dark silk brocade. A
buckler was attached by golden, clasps to his arm, and on his head he wore
a white French hat with plumes. The caparisons of his steed were azure
silk, lined with violet and sprinkled over with stars of gold, and swept
the ground, as he managed his fiery courser with an easy horsemanship that
excited general admiration.

The king and queen, as they drew near, bowed thrice with formal reverence
to each other. The queen at the same time raising her hat, remained in her
coif or headdress, with her face uncovered; Ferdinand, riding up, kissed
her affectionately on the cheek, and then, according to the precise
chronicler, bestowed a similar mark of tenderness on his daughter
Isabella, after giving her his paternal benediction. The royal party were
then escorted to the camp, where suitable accommodations had been provided
for the queen and her fair retinue. [33]

It may readily be believed that the sovereigns did not neglect, in a war
like the present, an appeal to the religious principle so deeply seated in
the Spanish character. All their public acts ostentatiously proclaimed the
pious nature of the work in which they were engaged. They were attended in
their expeditions by churchmen of the highest rank, who not only mingled
in the councils of the camp, but, like the bold bishop of Jaen, or the
grand cardinal Mendoza, buckled on harness over rochet and hood, and led
their squadrons to the field. [34] The queen at Cordova celebrated the
tidings of every new success over the infidel, by solemn procession and
thanksgiving, with her whole household, as well as the nobility, foreign
ambassadors, and municipal functionaries. In like manner Ferdinand, on the
return from his campaigns, was received at the gates of the city, and
escorted in solemn pomp beneath a rich canopy of state to the cathedral
church, where he prostrated himself in grateful adoration of the Lord of
hosts. Intelligence of their triumphant progress in the war was constantly
transmitted to the pope, who returned his benediction, accompanied by more
substantial marks of favor, in bulls of crusade, and taxes on
ecclesiastical rents. [35]

The ceremonials observed on the occupation of a new conquest were such as
to affect the heart no less than the imagination. "The royal
_alferez_," says Marineo, "raised the standard of the Cross, the sign
of our salvation, on the summit of the principal fortress; and all who
beheld it prostrated themselves on their knees in silent worship of the
Almighty, while the priests chanted the glorious anthem, _Te Deum
laudamus_. The ensign or pennon of St. James, the chivalric patron of
Spain, was then unfolded, and all invoked his blessed name. Lastly was
displayed the banner of the sovereigns, emblazoned with the royal arms; at
which the whole army shouted forth, as if with one voice, 'Castile,
Castile!' After these solemnities, a bishop led the way to the principal
mosque, which, after the rites of purification, he consecrated to the
service of the true faith." The standard of the Cross above referred to
was of massive silver, and was a present from Pope Sixtus the Fourth to
Ferdinand, in whose tent it was always carried throughout these campaigns.
An ample supply of bells, vases, missals, plate, and other sacred
furniture, was also borne along with the camp, being provided by the queen
for the purified mosques. [36]

The most touching part of the incidents usually occurring at the surrender
of a Moorish city was the liberation of the Christian captives immured in
its dungeons. On the capture of Ronda, in 1485, more than four hundred of
these unfortunate persons, several of them cavaliers of rank, some of whom
had been taken in the fatal expedition of the Axarquia, were restored to
the light of heaven. On being brought before Ferdinand, they prostrated
themselves on the ground, bathing his feet with tears, while their wan and
wasted figures, their dishevelled locks, their beards reaching down to
their girdles, and their limbs loaded with heavy manacles, brought tears
into the eye of every spectator. They were then commanded to present
themselves before the queen at Cordova, who liberally relieved their
necessities, and, after the celebration of public thanksgiving, caused
them to be conveyed to their own homes. The fetters of the liberated
captives were suspended in the churches, where they continued to be
revered by succeeding generations as the trophies of Christian warfare.
[37]

Ever since the victory of Lucena, the sovereigns had made it a capital
point of their policy to foment the dissensions of their enemies. The
young king Abdallah, after his humiliating treaty with Ferdinand, lost
whatever consideration he had previously possessed. Although the sultana
Zoraya, by her personal address, and the lavish distribution of the royal
treasures, contrived to maintain a faction for her son, the better classes
of his countrymen despised him as a renegade, and a vassal of the
Christian king. As their old monarch had become incompetent, from
increasing age and blindness, to the duties of his station in these
perilous times, they turned their eyes on his brother Abdallah, surnamed
El Zagal, or "The Valiant," who had borne so conspicuous a part in the
rout of the Axarquia. The Castilians depict this chief in the darkest
colors of ambition and cruelty; but the Moslem writers afford no such
intimation, and his advancement to the throne at that crisis seems to be
in some measure justified by his eminent talents as a military leader.

On his way to Granada, he encountered and cut to pieces a body of
Calatrava knights from Alhama, and signalized his entrance into his new
capital by bearing along the bloody trophies of heads dangling from his
saddlebow, after the barbarous fashion long practised in these wars.
[38] It was observed that the old king Abul Hacen did not long survive his
brother's accession. [39] The young king Abdallah sought the protection of
the Castilian sovereigns in Seville, who, true to their policy, sent him
back into his own dominions with the means of making headway against his
rival. The _alfakies_ and other considerate persons of Granada,
scandalized at these fatal feuds, effected a reconciliation, on the basis
of a division of the kingdom between the parties. But wounds so deep could
not be permanently healed. The site of the Moorish capital was most
propitious to the purposes of faction. It covered two swelling eminences,
divided from each other by the deep waters of the Darro. The two factions
possessed themselves respectively of these opposite quarters. Abdallah was
not ashamed to strengthen himself by the aid of Christian mercenaries; and
a dreadful conflict was carried on for fifty days and nights, within the
city, which swam with the blood that should have been shed only in its
defence. [40]

Notwithstanding these auxiliary circumstances, the progress of the
Christians was comparatively slow. Every cliff seemed to be crowned with a
fortress; and every fortress was defended with the desperation of men
willing to bury themselves under its ruins. The old men, women, and
children, on occasions of a siege, were frequently despatched to Granada.
Such was the resolution, or rather ferocity of the Moors, that Malaga
closed its gates against the fugitives from Alora, after its surrender,
and even massacred some of them in cold blood. The eagle eye of El Zagal
seemed to take in at a glance the whole extent of his little territory,
and to detect every vulnerable point in his antagonist, whom he
encountered where he least expected it; cutting off his convoys,
surprising his foraging parties, and retaliating by a devastating inroad
on the borders. [41]

No effectual and permanent resistance, however, could be opposed to the
tremendous enginery of the Christians. Tower and town fell before it.
Besides the principal towns of Cartama, Coin, Setenil, Ronda, Marbella,
Illora, termed by the Moors "the right eye," Moclin, "the shield" of
Granada, and Loja, after a second and desperate siege in the spring of
1486, Bernaldez enumerates more than seventy subordinate places in the Val
de Cartama, and thirteen others after the fall of Marbella. Thus the
Spaniards advanced their line of conquest more than twenty leagues beyond
the western frontier of Granada. This extensive tract they strongly
fortified and peopled, partly with Christian subjects, and partly with
Moorish, the original occupants of the soil, who were secured in the
possession of their ancient lands, under their own law. [42]

Thus the strong posts, which may be regarded as the exterior defences of
the city of Granada, were successively carried. A few positions alone
remained of sufficient strength to keep the enemy at bay. The most
considerable of these was Malaga, which from its maritime situation
afforded facilities for a communication with the Barbary Moors, that the
vigilance of the Castilian cruisers could not entirely intercept. On this
point, therefore, it was determined to concentrate all the strength of the
monarchy, by sea and land, in the ensuing campaign of 1487.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two of the most important authorities for the war of Granada are Fernando
del Pulgar and Antonio de Lebrija, or Nebrissensis, as he is called from
the Latin _Nebrissa_.

Few particulars have been preserved respecting the biography of the
former. He was probably a native of Pulgar, near Toledo. The Castilian
writers recognize certain provincialisms in his style belonging to that
district. He was secretary to Henry IV., and was charged with various
confidential functions by him. He seems to have retained his place on the
accession of Isabella, by whom he was appointed national historiographer
in 1482, when, from certain remarks in his letters, it would appear he was
already advanced in years. This office, in the fifteenth century,
comprehended, in addition to the more obvious duties of an historian, the
intimate and confidential relations of a private secretary. "It was the
business of the chronicler," says Bernaldez, "to carry on foreign
correspondence in the service of his master, acquainting himself with
whatever was passing in other courts and countries, and, by the discreet
and conciliatory tenor of his epistles, to allay such feuds as might arise
between the king and his nobility, and establish harmony between them."
From this period Pulgar remained near the royal person, accompanying the
queen in her various progresses through the kingdom, as well as in her
military expeditions into the Moorish territory. He was consequently an
eye-witness of many of the warlike scenes which he describes, and, from
his situation at the court, had access to the most ample and accredited
sources of information. It is probable he did not survive the capture of
Granada, as his history falls somewhat short of that event. Pulgar's
chronicle, in the portion containing a retrospective survey of events
previous to 1482, may be charged with gross inaccuracy. But, in all the
subsequent period, it may be received as perfectly authentic, and has all
the air of impartiality. Every circumstance relating to the conduct of the
war is developed with equal fulness and precision. His manner of
narration, though prolix, is perspicuous, and may compare favorably with
that of contemporary writers. His sentiments may compare still more
advantageously in point of liberality, with those of the Castilian
historians of a later age.

Pulgar left some other works, of which his commentary on the ancient
satire of "Mingo Revulgo," his "Letters," and his "Claros Varones," or
sketches of illustrious men, have alone been published. The last contains
notices of the most distinguished individuals of the court of Henry IV.,
which, although too indiscriminately encomiastic, are valuable
subsidiaries to an accurate acquaintance with the prominent actors of the
period. The last and most elegant edition of Pulgar's Chronicle was
published at Valencia in 1780, from the press of Benito Montfort, in large
folio.

Antonio de Lebrija was one of the most active and erudite scholars of this
period. He was born in the province of Andalusia, in 1444. After the usual
discipline at Salamanca, he went at the age of nineteen to Italy, where he
completed his education in the university of Bologna. He returned to Spain
ten years after, richly stored with classical learning and the liberal
arts that were then taught in the flourishing schools of Italy. He lost no
time in dispensing to his countrymen his various acquisitions. He was
appointed to the two chairs of grammar and poetry (a thing unprecedented)
in the university of Salamanca, and lectured at the same time in these
distinct departments. He was subsequently preferred by Cardinal Ximenes to
a professorship in his university of Alcala de Henares, where his services
were liberally requited, and where he enjoyed the entire confidence of his
distinguished patron, who consulted him on all matters affecting the
interests of the institution. Here he continued, delivering his lectures
and expounding the ancient classics to crowded audiences, to the advanced
age of seventy-eight, when he was carried off by an attack of apoplexy.

Lebrija, besides his oral tuition, composed works on a great variety of
subjects, philological, historical, theological, etc. His emendation of
the sacred text was visited with the censure of the Inquisition, a
circumstance which will not operate to his prejudice with posterity.
Lebrija was far from being circumscribed by the narrow sentiments of his
age. He was warmed with a generous enthusiasm for letters, which kindled a
corresponding flame in the bosoms of his disciples, among whom may be
reckoned some of the brightest names in the literary annals of the period.
His instruction effected for classical literature in Spain what the labors
of the great Italian scholars of the fifteenth century did for it in their
country; and he was rewarded with the substantial gratitude of his own
age, and such empty honors as could be rendered by posterity. For very
many years, the anniversary of his death was commemorated by public
services, and a funeral panegyric, in the university of Alcala.

The circumstances attending the composition of his Latin Chronicle, so
often quoted in this history, are very curious. Carbajal says, that he
delivered Pulgar's Chronicle, after that writer's death, into Lebrija's
hands for the purpose of being translated into Latin. The latter proceeded
in his task, as far as the year 1486. His history, however, can scarcely
be termed a translation, since, although it takes up the same thread of
incident, it is diversified by many new ideas and particular facts. This
unfinished performance was found among Lebrija's papers, after his
decease, with a preface containing not a word of acknowledgment to Pulgar.
It was accordingly published for the first time, in 1545 (the edition
referred to in this history), by his son Sancho, as an original production
of his father. Twenty years after, the first edition of Pulgar's original
Chronicle was published at Valladolid, from the copy which belonged to
Lebrija, by his grandson Antonio. This work appeared also as Lebrija's.
Copies however of Pulgar's Chronicle were preserved in several private
libraries; and two years later, 1567, his just claims were vindicated by
an edition at Saragossa, inscribed with his name as its author.

Lebrija's reputation has sustained some injury from this transaction,
though most undeservedly. It seems probable, that he adopted Pulgar's text
as the basis of his own, intending to continue the narrative to a later
period. His unfinished manuscript being found among his papers after his
death, without reference to any authority, was naturally enough given to
the world as entirely his production. It is more strange, that Pulgar's
own Chronicle, subsequently printed as Lebrija's, should have contained no
allusion to its real author. The History, although composed as far as it
goes with sufficient elaboration and pomp of style, is one that adds, on
the whole, but little to the fame of Lebrija. It was at best but adding a
leaf to the laurel on his brow, and was certainly not worth a plagiarism.


FOOTNOTES

[1]
  "Por esa puerte de Elvira
  sale muy gran cabalgada:
  cuanto del _hidalgo moro_,
  cuanto de la yegua baya.

   *   *   *   *   *   *

  "Cuanta pluma y gentileza,
  cuanto capellar de grana,
  cuanto bayo borceguf,
  cuanto raso que se esmalta,

  "Cuanto de espuela de oro,
  cuanta estribera de plata!
  Toda es gente valerosa,
  y esperta para batalla.

  "En medio de todos ellos
  va el rey Chico de Granada,
  mirando las damas moras
  de las torres del Alhambra.

  "La reina mora su madre
  de esta manera le habla;
  'Ala te guarde, mi hijo,
  Mahoma vaya en tu guarda.'" Hyta, Guerras de Granada, tom. i. p. 232.

[2] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 36.--Cardonne, Hist.
d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 267-271.--Bernaldez, Reyes
Catolicos, MS., cap. 60.--Pedraza, Antiguedad de Granada, fol. 10.--
Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

[3] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, part. 3, cap. 20.

The _donzeles_, of which Diego de Cordova was alcayde, or captain, were a
body of young cavaliers, originally brought up as pages in the royal
household, and organized as a separate corps of the militia. Salazar
de Mendoza, Dignidades, p. 259.--See also Morales, Obras, tom. xiv. p. 80.

[4] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 36.--Abarca, Reyes de
Aragon, tom. ii. fol. 302.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1483.--Bernaldez,
Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 61.--Pulgar, Cronica, cap. 20.--Marmol,
Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

[5] Garibay, Compendio, tom. ii. p. 637.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi
supra.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 61.--Conde, Dominacion de
los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 36.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne,
tom. iii. pp. 271-274.

The various details, even to the site of the battle, are told in the usual
confused and contradictory manner by the garrulous chroniclers of the
period. All authorities, however, both Christian and Moorish, agree as to
its general results.

[6] Mendoza, Dignidades, p. 382.--Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1,
quinc. 4, dial. 9.

[7] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 36.--Cardonne, Hist.
d'Afrique et d'Espagne, pp. 271-274.

[8] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 23.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib.
1, cap. 12.

Charles V. does not seem to have partaken of his grandfather's delicacy in
regard to an interview with his royal captive, or indeed to any part of
his deportment towards him.

[9] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes,
cap. 36.

[10] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, loc. cit.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes,
cap. 36.

[11] The term _cavalgada_ seems to be used indifferently by the ancient
Spanish writers to represent a marauding party, the foray itself, or the
booty taken in it.

[12] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 22.--Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom.
vi. Ilust. 6.

[13] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 32, 41.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv lib.
20, cap. 59.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 3, cap. 5.

[14] Machiavelli, Arte della Guerra, lib. 3.

[15] Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. Ilust. 6.

According to Gibbon, the cannon used by Mahomet in the siege of
Constantinople, about thirty years before this time, threw stone balls,
which weighed above 600 pounds. The measure of the bore was twelve palms.
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, chap. 68.

[16] Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. Ilust. 6.

We get a more precise notion of the awkwardness with which the artillery
was served in the infancy of the science, from a fact recorded in the
Chronicle of John II., that at the siege of Setenil, in 1407, five
lombards were able to discharge only forty shot in the course of a day. We
have witnessed an invention, in our time, that of our ingenious
countryman, Jacob Perkins, by which a gun, with the aid of that miracle-
worker, steam, is enabled to throw a thousand bullets in a single minute.

[17] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 174.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
cap. 44. Some writers, as the Abbe Mignot, (Histoire des Rois Catholiques
Ferdinand et Isabelle, (Paris, 1766,) tom. i. p. 273,) have referred the
invention of bombs to the siege of Ronda. I find no authority for this.
Pulgar's words are, "They made many iron balls, large and small, some of
which they cast in a mould, having reduced the iron to a state of fusion,
so that it would run like any other metal."

[18] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 51.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
cap. 82.

[19] Mendoza, Guerra de Granada, (Valencia, 1776,) pp. 73, 74.--Zurita,
Anales, tom. iv. lib. 20, cap. 59.--Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. p.
168. According to Mendoza, a decoction of the quince furnished the most
effectual antidote known against this poison.

[20] Abarca, Reyes de Aragon, tom. ii. fol. 304.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum
Decades, ii. lib. 4, cap. 2.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 76.--
Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

Pulgar, who is by no means bigoted for the age, seems to think the literal
terms granted by Ferdinand to the enemies of the faith stand in need of
perpetual apology. See Reyes Catolicos, cap. 44 et passim.

[21] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 75.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
cap. 21, 33, 42.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 8, cap. 6.--
Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 13.

[22] Mem. de la Acad. de Hist., tom. vi. Ilust. 6.

[23] Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 3, cap. 6.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, cap. 31.

[24] After another daring achievement, the sovereigns granted him and his
heirs the royal suit worn by the monarchs of Castile on Ladyday; a
present, says Abarca, not to be estimated by its cost. Reyes de Aragon,
tom. ii. fol. 308.

[25] Abarca, Reyes de Aragon, ubi supra.--Peter Martyr, Opus Epist., lib
1, epist. 41.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 68.--Zurita, Anales,
tom. iv. cap. 58.

[26] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 31, 67, 69.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum
Decades, ii. lib. 2, cap. 10.

[27] Reyes Catolicos, cap. 21.

[28] Peter Martyr, Opus Epist., lib. 1, epist. 62.--Bernaldez, Reyes
Catolicos, MS., cap. 78.

[29] Guillaume de Ialigny, Histoire de Charles VIII., (Paris, 1617,) pp.
90-94.

[30] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 75.--This city, even before the
New World had poured its treasures into its lap, was conspicuous for its
magnificence, as the ancient proverb testifies. Zuniga, Annales de
Sevilla, p. 183.

[31] Pulgar. Reyes Catolicos, cap. 41.

[32] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 59.--This nobleman, whose name was
Inigo Lopez de Mendoza, was son of the first duke, Diego Hurtado, who
supported Isabella's claims to the crown. Oviedo was present at the siege
of Illora, and gives a minute description of his appearance there. "He
came," says that writer, "attended by a numerous body of cavaliers and
gentlemen, as befitted so great a lord. He displayed all the luxuries
which belong to a time of peace; and his tables, which were carefully
served, were loaded with rich and curiously wrought plate, of which he had
a greater profusion than any other grandee in the kingdom." In another
place he says, "The duke Inigo was a perfect Alexander for his liberality,
in all his actions princely, maintaining unbounded hospitality among his
numerous vassals and dependents, and beloved throughout Spain. His palaces
were garnished with the most costly tapestries, jewels, and rich stuffs of
gold and silver. His chapel was filled with accomplished singers and
musicians; his falcons, hounds, and his whole hunting establishment,
including a magnificent stud of horses, not to be matched by any other
nobleman in the kingdom. Of the truth of all which," concludes Oviedo, "I
myself have been an eye-witness, and enough others can testify." See
Oviedo, (Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 8,) who has given the
genealogy of the Mendozas and Mendozinos, in all its endless
ramifications.

[33] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 80.--The lively author of "A
Year in Spain" describes, among other suits of armor still to be seen in
the museum of the armory at Madrid, those worn by Ferdinand and his
illustrious consort. "In one of the most conspicuous stations is the suit
of armor usually worn by Ferdinand the Catholic. He seems snugly seated
upon his war-horse with a pair of red velvet breeches, after the manner of
the Moors, with lifted lance and closed visor. There are several suits of
Ferdinand and of his queen Isabella, who was no stranger to the dangers of
a battle. By the comparative heights of the armor, Isabella would seem to
be the bigger of the two, as she certainly was the better." A Year in
Spain, by a young American, (Boston, 1829,) p. 116.

[34] Cardinal Mendoza, in the campaign of 1485, offered the queen to raise
a body of 3000 horse, and march at its head to the relief of Alhama, and
at the same time to supply her with such sums of money as might be
necessary in the present exigency. Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 50.

[35] In 1486, we find Ferdinand and Isabella performing a pilgrimage to
the shrine of St. James of Compostella. Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 86.

[36] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 173.--Bernaldez, Reyes. Catolicos,
MS., cap. 82, 87.

[37] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 47.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
cap. 75.

[38] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 37.--Cardonne, Hist.
d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 276, 281, 282.--Abarca, Reyes de
Aragon, tom. ii. fol. 304.

  "El enjaeza el caballo
  Be las cabezas de fama,"

says one of the old Moorish ballads. A garland of Christian heads seems to
have been deemed no unsuitable present from a Moslem knight to his lady
love. Thus one of the Zegries triumphantly asks,

  "?Que Cristianos habeis muerto,
    O escalado que murallas?
    ?O que cabezas famosas
    Aveis presentado a damas?"

This sort of trophy was also borne by the Christian cavaliers. Examples of
this may be found even as late as the siege of Granada. See, among others,
the ballad beginning

  "A vista de los dos Reyes."

[39] The Arabic historian alludes to the vulgar report of the old king's
assassination by his brother, but leaves us in the dark in regard to his
own opinion of its credibility. "Algunos dicen que le procuro la muerte su
hermano el Rey Zagal; pero Dios lo sabe, que es el unico eterno e
inmutable."--Conde, Domination de los Arabes, tom. in. cap. 38.

[40] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap. 38.--Cardonne, Hist.
d'Afrique et d'Espagne, pp. 291, 292.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana, lib. 25,
cap. 9.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.

  "Muy revuelta anda Granada
  en armas y fuego ardiendo,
  y los ciudadanos de ella
  duras muertes padeciendo;

  Por tres reyes que hay esquivos,
  cada uno pretendiendo
  el mando, cetro y corona
  de Granada y su gobierno," etc.

See this old _romance_, mixing up fact and fiction, with more of the
former than usual, in Hyta, Guerras de Granada, tom. i. p. 292.

[41] Among other achievements, Zagal surprised and beat the count of Cabra
in a night attack upon Moclin, and wellnigh retaliated on that nobleman
his capture of the Moorish king Abdallah. Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap.
48.

[42] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 75.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
cap. 48.--Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, ii. lib. 3, cap. 5, 7; lib. 4,
cap. 2, 3.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 12.


END OF VOL. I.








This eBook was produced by: Anne Soulard, Tiffany Vergon,
Charles Aldarondo and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF FERDINAND AND ISABELLA, THE CATHOLIC.

BY
WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. II.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.


PART FIRST. [CONTINUED.]

CHAPTER XII.
  INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF THE KINGDOM.--INQUISITION IN ARAGON.
  ISABELLA ENFORCES THE LAWS
  CHASTISEMENT OF CERTAIN ECCLESIASTICS
  MARRIAGE OF CATHARINE OF NAVARRE
  LIBERATION OF CATALAN SERFS
  INQUISITION IN ARAGON
  REMONSTRANCES OF CORTES
  CONSPIRACY FORMED
  ASSASSINATION OF ARBUES
  CRUEL PERSECUTIONS
  INQUISITION THROUGHOUT FERDINAND'S DOMINIONS

CHAPTER XIII.
  WAR OF GRANADA.--SURRENDER OF VELEZ MALAGA.--SIEGE AND CONQUEST
    OF MALAGA.
  POSITION OF VELEZ MALAGA
  ARMY BEFORE VELEZ
  DEFEAT OF EL ZAGAL
  NARROW ESCAPE OF FERDINAND
  SURRENDER OF VELEZ
  DESCRIPTION OF MALAGA
  SHARP RECONTRE
  MALAGA INVESTED BY SEA AND LAND
  BRILLIANT SPECTACLE
  EXTENSIVE PREPARATIONS
  THE QUEEN VISITS THE CAMP
  SUMMONS OF THE TOWN
  DANGER OF THE MARQUIS OF CADIZ
  CIVIL FEUDS OF THE MOORS
  ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE THE SOVEREIGNS
  DISTRESS AND RESOLUTION OF THE BESIEGED
  ENTHUSIASM OF THE CHRISTIANS
  DISCIPLINE OF THE ARMY
  GENERAL SALLY
  GENEROSITY OF A MOORISH KNIGHT
  OUTWORKS CARRIED
  GRIEVOUS FAMINE
  PROPOSALS FOR SURRENDER
  HAUGHTY DEMEANOR OF FERDINAND
  MALAGA SURRENDERS AT DISCRETION
  PURIFICATION OF THE CITY
  ENTRANCE OF THE SOVEREIGNS
  RELEASE OF CHRISTIAN CAPTIVES
  LAMENT OF THE MALAGANS
  SENTENCE PASSED ON THEM
  WARY DEVICE OF FERDINAND
  CRUEL POLICY OF THE VICTORS
  MEASURES FOR REPEOPLING MALAGA

CHAPTER XIV.
  WAR OF GRANADA.--CONQUEST OF BAZA.--SUBMISSION OF EL ZAGAL.
  THE SOVEREIGNS VISIT ARAGON
  INROADS INTO GRANADA
  BORDER WAR
  EMBASSY FROM MAXIMILIAN
  PREPARATIONS FOR THE SIEGE OF BAZA
  THE KING TAKES COMMAND OF THE ARMY
  POSITION AND STRENGTH OF BAZA
  ASSAULT ON THE GARDEN
  DESPONDENCY OF THE SPANISH CHIEFS
  DISPELLED BY ISABELLA
  GARDENS CLEARED OF THEIR TIMBER
  CITY CLOSELY INVESTED
  MISSION FROM THE SULTAN OF EGYPT
  HOUSES ERECTED FOB THE ARMY
  ITS STRICT DISCIPLINE
  HEAVY TEMPEST
  ISABELLA'S ENERGY
  HER PATRIOTIC SACRIFICES
  RESOLUTION OF THE BESIEGED
  ISABELLA VISITS THE CAMP
  SUSPENSION OF ARMS
  BAZA SURRENDERS
  CONDITIONS
  OCCUPATION OF THE CITY
  TREATY OF SURRENDER WITH EL ZAGAL
  PAINFUL MARCH OF THE SPANISH ARMY
  INTERVIEW BETWEEN FERDINAND AND EL ZAGAL
  OCCUPATION OF EL ZAGAL'S DOMAIN
  EQUIVALENT ASSIGNED TO HIM
  DIFFICULTIES OF THIS CAMPAIGN
  ISABELLA'S POPULARITY AND INFLUENCE
  NOTICE OF PETER MARTYR

CHAPTER XV.
  WAR OF GRANADA.-SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF THE CITY OF GRANADA.
  THE INFANTA ISABELLA
  PUBLIC FESTIVITIES
  GRANADA SUMMONED IN VAIN
  KNIGHTHOOD OF DON JUAN
  FERDINAND'S POLICY
  ISABELLA DEPOSES THE JUDGES OF CHANCERY
  FERDINAND MUSTERS HIS FORCES
  ENCAMPS IN THE VEGA
  POSITION OF GRANADA
  MOSLEM AND CHRISTIAN CHIVALRY
  THE QUEEN SURVEYS THE CITY
  SKIRMISH WITH THE ENEMY
  CONFLAGRATION OF THE CHRISTIAN CAMP
  ERECTION OF SANTA FE
  NEGOTIATIONS FOR SURRENDER
  CAPITULATION OF GRANADA
  COMMOTIONS IN GRANADA
  PREPARATIONS FOR OCCUPYING THE CITY
  THE CROSS RAISED ON THE ALHAMBRA
  FATE OF ABDALLAH
  RESULTS OF THE WAR OF GRANADA
  ITS MORAL INFLUENCE
  ITS MILITARY INFLUENCE
  DESTINY OF THE MOORS
  DEATH AND CHARACTER OF THE MARQUIS OF CADIZ
  NOTICE OF BERNALDEZ, CURATE OF LOS PALACIOS
  IRVING'S CHRONICLE OF GRANADA

CHAPTER XVI.
  APPLICATION OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS AT THE SPANISH COURT.
  MARITIME ENTERPRISE OF THE PORTUGUESE
  EARLY SPANISH DISCOVERIES
  EARLY HISTORY OF COLUMBUS
  BELIEF OF LAND IN THE WEST
  COLUMBUS APPLIES TO PORTUGAL
  TO THE COURT OF CASTILE
  REFERRED TO A COUNCIL
  HIS APPLICATION REJECTED
  HE PREPARES TO LEAVE SPAIN
  INTERPOSITION IN HIS BEHALF
  COLUMBUS AT SANTA FE
  NEGOTIATIONS AGAIN BROKEN OFF
  THE QUEEN'S FAVORABLE DISPOSITION
  FINAL ARRANGEMENT WITH COLUMBUS
  HE SAILS ON HIS FIRST VOYAGE
  INDIFFERENCE TO HIS ENTERPRISE
  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS DUE TO ISABELLA
  NOTICE OF NAVARRETE

CHAPTER XVII.
  EXPULSION OF THE JEWS FROM SPAIN.
  EXCITEMENT AGAINST THE JEWS
  FOMENTED BY THE CLERGY
  VIOLENT CONDUCT OF TORQUEMADA
  EDICT OF EXPULSION
  ITS SEVERE OPERATION
  CONSTANCY OF THE JEWS
  ROUTES OF THE EMIGRANTS
  THEIR SUFFERINGS IN AFRICA
  IN OTHER COUNTRIES
  WHOLE NUMBER OF EXILES
  DISASTROUS RESULTS
  TRUE MOTIVES OF THE EDICT
  CONTEMPORARY JUDGMENTS
  MISTAKEN PIETY OF THE QUEEN

CHAPTER XVIII.
  ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION OF FERDINAND.--RETURN AND SECOND VOYAGE OF
    COLUMBUS.
  THE SOVEREIGNS VISIT ARAGON
  ATTEMPT ON FERDINAND'S LIFE
  GENERAL CONSTERNATION
  LOYALTY OF THE PEOPLE
  SLOW RECOVERY OF THE KING
  PUNISHMENT OF THE ASSASSIN
  RETURN OF COLUMBUS
  DISCOVERY OF THE WEST INDIES
  JOYOUS RECEPTION OF COLUMBUS
  HIS PROGRESS TO BARCELONA
  INTERVIEW WITH THE SOVEREIGNS
  SENSATIONS CAUSED BY THE DISCOVERY
  BOARD FOR INDIAN AFFAIRS
  REGULATIONS OF TRADE
  PREPARATIONS FOR A SECOND VOYAGE
  CONVERSION OF THE NATIVES
  NEW POWERS GRANTED TO COLUMBUS
  APPLICATION TO ROME
  FAMOUS BULLS OF ALEXANDER VI
  JEALOUSY OF THE COURT OF LISBON
  WARY DIPLOMACY
  SECOND VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS
  MISSION TO PORTUGAL
  DISGUST OF JOHN II
  TREATY OF TORDESILLAS

CHAPTER XIX.
  CASTILIAN LITERATURE.--CULTIVATION OF THE COURT.--CLASSICAL LEARNING.--
    SCIENCE.
  FERDINAND'S EDUCATION NEGLECTED
  INSTRUCTION OF ISABELLA
  HER COLLECTION OF BOOKS
  TUITION OF THE INFANTAS
  OF PRINCE JOHN
  THE QUEEN'S CARE FOR THE EDUCATION OF HER NOBLES
  LABORS OF MARTYR
  OF LUCIO MARINEO
  SCHOLARSHIP OF THE NOBLES
  ACCOMPLISHED WOMEN
  CLASSICAL LEARNING
  LEBRIJA
  ARIAS BARBOSA
  MERITS OF THE SPANISH SCHOLARS
  UNIVERSITIES
  SACRED STUDIES
  OTHER SCIENCES
  PRINTING INTRODUCED
  THE QUEEN ENCOURAGES IT
  ITS RAPID DIFFUSION
  ACTUAL PROGRESS OF SCIENCE

CHAPTER XX.
  CASTILIAN LITERATURE.--ROMANCES OF CHIVALRY.--LYRICAL POETRY.--
    THE DRAMA.
  THIS REIGN AN EPOCH IN POLITE LETTERS
  ROMANCES OF CHIVALRY
  THEIR PERNICIOUS EFFECTS
  BALLADS OR ROMANCES
  EARLY CULTIVATION IN SPAIN
  RESEMBLANCE TO THE ENGLISH
  MOORISH MINSTRELSY
  ITS DATE AND ORIGIN
  ITS HIGH REPUTE
  NUMEROUS EDITIONS OF THE BALLADS
  LYRIC POETRY
  CANCIONERO GENERAL
  ITS LITERARY VALUE
  LOW STATE OF LYRIC POETRY
  COPLAS OF MANRIQUE
  RISE OF THE SPANISH DRAMA
  TRAGICOMEDY OF CELESTINA
  CRITICISM ON IT
  IT OPENED THE WAY TO DRAMATIC WRITING
  NUMEROUS EDITIONS OF IT
  JUAN DE LA ENCINA
  HIS DRAMATIC ECLOGUES
  TORRES DE NAHARRO
  HIS COMEDIES
  SIMILAR IN SPIRIT WITH THE LATER DRAMAS
  NOT ACTED IN SPAIN
  LOW CONDITION OF THE STAGE
  TRAGIC DRAMA
  OLIVA'S CLASSIC IMITATIONS
  NOT POPULAR
  NATIONAL SPIRIT OF THE LITERATURE OF THIS EPOCH
  MORATIN'S DRAMATIC CRITICISM

PART SECOND.

THE PERIOD WHEN, THE INTERIOR ORGANIZATION OF THE MONARCHY HAVING BEEN
COMPLETED, THE SPANISH NATION ENTERED ON ITS SCHEMES OF DISCOVERY AND
CONQUEST; OR THE PERIOD ILLUSTRATING MORE PARTICULARLY THE FOREIGN POLICY
OF FERDINAND AND ISABELLA.

CHAPTER I.
  ITALIAN WARS.--GENERAL VIEW OF EUROPE.--INVASION OF ITALY BY CHARLES
    VIII., OF FRANCE.
  FOREIGN POLITICS DIRECTED BY FERDINAND
  EUROPE AT THE CLOSE OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY
  CHARACTER OF THE REIGNING SOVEREIGNS
  IMPROVED POLITICAL AND MORAL CONDITION
  MORE INTIMATE RELATIONS BETWEEN STATES
  FOREIGN RELATIONS CONDUCTED BY THE SOVEREIGN
  ITALY THE SCHOOL OF POLITICS
  HER MOST POWERFUL STATES
  CHARACTER OF ITALIAN POLITICS
  INTERNAL PROSPERITY
  INTRIGUES OF SFORZA
  CHARLES VIII., OF FRANCE
  HIS PRETENSIONS TO NAPLES
  NEGOTIATIONS RESPECTING ROUSSILLON
  CHARLES'S COUNSELLORS IN THE PAY OP FERDINAND
  TREATY OF BARCELONA
  ITS IMPORTANCE TO SPAIN
  ALARM AT THE FRENCH INVASION, IN ITALY
  IN EUROPE, ESPECIALLY SPAIN
  PREPARATIONS OF CHARLES
  AN ENVOY SENT TO THE FRENCH COURT
  ANNOUNCES FERDINAND'S VIEWS
  CHARLES'S DISSATISFACTION
  THE FRENCH CROSS THE ALPS
  ITALIAN TACTICS
  THE SWISS INFANTRY
  FRENCH ARTILLERY
  SFORZA JEALOUS OF THE FRENCH
  THE POPE CONFERS THE TITLE OF CATHOLIC
  NAVAL PREPARATIONS IN SPAIN
  SECOND MISSION TO CHARLES VIII
  BOLD CONDUCT OF THE ENVOYS
  THE KING OF NAPLES FLIES TO SICILY
  THE FRENCH ENTER NAPLES
  GENERAL HOSTILITY TO THEM
  LEAGUE OF VENICE
  ZURITA'S LIFE AND WRITINGS

CHAPTER II.
  ITALIAN WARS.--RETREAT OF CHARLES VIII.--CAMPAIGNS OF GONSALVO DE
    CORDOVA.--FINAL EXPULSION OF THE FRENCH.
  CONDUCT OF CHARLES
  PLUNDERS THE WORKS OF ART
  RETREAT OF THE FRENCH  GONSALVO DE CORDOVA
  HIS EARLY LIFE
  HIS BRILLIANT QUALITIES
  RAISED TO THE ITALIAN COMMAND
  ARRIVES IN ITALY
  LANDS IN CALABRIA
  MARCHES ON SEMINARA
  GONSALVO'S PRUDENCE
  BATTLE OF SEMINARA
  DEFEAT OF THE NEAPOLITANS
  GONSALVO RETREATS TO REGGIO
  FERDINAND RECOVERS HIS CAPITAL
  GONSALVO IN CALABRIA
  HIS SUCCESSES
  DECLINE OF THE FRENCH
  BESIEGED IN ATELLA
  GONSALVO SURPRISES LAINO
  ARRIVES BEFORE ATELLA
  RECEIVES THE TITLE OF GREAT CAPTAIN
  BEATS A DETACHMENT OF SWISS
  CAPITULATION OF MONTPENSIER
  MISERABLE STATE OF THE FRENCH
  DEATH OF FERDINAND OF NAPLES
  ACCESSION OF FREDERIC II
  TOTAL EXPULSION OF THE FRENCH
  REMARKS ON GUICCIARDINI AND GIOVIO
  SISMONDI

CHAPTER III.
  ITALIAN WARS.--GONSALVO SUCCORS THE POPE.--TREATY WITH FRANCE.--
    ORGANIZATION OF THE SPANISH MILITIA.
  WAR ON THE SIDE OF ROUSSILLON
  THE POPE ASKS THE AID OF GONSALVO
  STORMING AND CAPTURE OF OSTIA
  GONSALVO ENTERS ROME
  HIS RECEPTION BY THE POPE
  RETURNS TO SPAIN
  PEACE WITH FRANCE
  FERDINAND'S VIEWS RESPECTING NAPLES
  HIS FAME ACQUIRED BY THE WAR
  INFLUENCE OF THE WAR ON SPAIN
  ORGANIZATION OF THE MILITIA

CHAPTER IV.
  ALLIANCES OF THE ROYAL FAMILY.--DEATH OF PRINCE JOHN AND PRINCESS
    ISABELLA.
  ROYAL FAMILY OF CASTILE
  JOANNA BELTRANEJA
  MARRIAGE OF THE PRINCESS ISABELLA
  DEATH OF HER HUSBAND
  ALLIANCES WITH THE HOUSE OF AUSTRIA
  AND THAT OF ENGLAND
  JOANNA EMBARKS
  THE QUEEN'S ANXIETY
  MARGARET OF AUSTRIA
  RETURNS IN THE FLEET
  MARRIAGE OF JOHN AND MARGARET
  SECOND MARRIAGE OF PRINCESS ISABELLA
  SUDDEN ILLNESS OF PRINCE JOHN
  HIS DEATH
  HIS AMIABLE CHARACTER
  THE KING AND QUEEN OF PORTUGAL VISIT SPAIN
  OBJECTIONS TO THEIR RECOGNITION
  ISABELLA DISPLEASED
  HER DAUGHTER'S DEATH
  ITS EFFECTS ON ISABELLA
  PRINCE MIGUEL'S RECOGNITION

CHAPTER V.
  DEATH OF CARDINAL MENDOZA.--RISE OF XIMENES.--ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM.
  DEATH OF MENDOZA
  HIS EARLY LIFE
  AND CHARACTER
  HIS AMOURS
  THE QUEEN HIS EXECUTOR
  BIRTH OF XIMENES
  HE VISITS ROME
  HIS RETURN AND IMPRISONMENT
  ESTABLISHED AT SIGUENZA
  ENTERS THE FRANCISCAN ORDER
  HIS SEVERE PENANCE
  HIS ASCETIC LIFE
  HE IS MADE GUARDIAN OF SALZEDA
  INTRODUCED TO THE QUEEN
  MADE HER CONFESSOR
  ELECTED PROVINCIAL
  CORRUPTION OF THE MONASTERIES
  ATTEMPTS AT REFORM
  SEE OF TOLEDO VACANT
  OFFERED TO XIMENES
  HE RELUCTANTLY ACCEPTS
  CHARACTERISTIC ANECDOTES OF XIMENES
  HIS AUSTERE LIFE
  REFORM IN HIS DIOCESE
  EXAMPLE OF HIS SEVERITY
  REFORM OF THE MONASTIC ORDERS
  GREAT EXCITEMENT CAUSED BY IT
  VISIT OF THE FRANCISCAN GENERAL
  INSULTS THE QUEEN
  THE POPE'S INTERFERENCE
  CONSENTS TO THE REFORM
  ITS OPERATION AND EFFECTS
  ALVARO GOMEZ, AND BIOGRAPHERS OF XIMENES

CHAPTER VI.
  XIMENES IN GRANADA.--PERSECUTION, INSURRECTION, AND CONVERSION OF THE
    MOORS.
  INTRODUCTORY REMARKS
  XIMENES, HIS CONSTANCY OF PURPOSE
  TRANQUIL STATE OF GRANADA
  TENDILLA
  TALAVERA
  ARCHBISHOP OF GRANADA
  HIS MILD POLICY
  THE CLERGY DISSATISFIED WITH IT
  TEMPERATE SWAY OF THE SOVEREIGNS
  XIMENES IN GRANADA
  HIS VIOLENT MEASURES
  DESTROYS ARABIC BOOKS
  MISCHIEVOUS EFFECTS
  REVOLT OF THE ALBAYCIN
  XIMENES BESIEGED IN HIS PALACE
  THE INSURGENTS APPEASED BY TALAVERA
  DISPLEASURE OF THE SOVEREIGNS
  XIMENES HASTENS TO COURT
  CONVERSION OP GRANADA
  APPLAUDED BY THE SPANIARDS

CHAPTER VII.
  RISING IN THE ALPUXARRAS.--DEATH OF ALONSO DE AGUILAR.--EDICT AGAINST
    THE MOORS.
  THE ALPUXARRAS
  RISING OF THE MOORS
  HUEJA SACKED
  FERDINAND MARCHES INTO THE MOUNTAINS
  CARRIES LANJARON
  PUNISHMENT OF THE REBELS
  REVOLT OF THE SIERRA VERMEJA
  RENDEZVOUS AT RONDA
  EXPEDITION INTO THE SIERRA
  THE MOORS RETREAT UP THE MOUNTAINS
  RETURN ON THE SPANIARDS
  ALONSO DE AGUILAR
  HIS GALLANTRY AND DEATH
  HIS NOBLE CHARACTER
  BLOODY ROUT OF THE SPANIARDS
  DISMAY OF THE NATION
  THE REBELS SUBMIT TO FERDINAND
  BANISHMENT OR CONVERSION
  COMMEMORATIVE BALLADS
  MELANCHOLY REMINISCENCES
  EDICT AGAINST THE MOORS OF CASTILE
  CHRISTIANITY AND MAHOMETANISM
  CAUSES OF INTOLERANCE
  AGGRAVATED IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY
  EFFECTS OF THE INQUISITION
  DEFECTS OF THE TREATY OF GRANADA
  EVASION OF IT BY THE CHRISTIANS
  PRIESTLY CASUISTRY
  LAST NOTICE OF THE MOORS IN THE PRESENT REIGN

CHAPTER VIII.
  COLUMBUS.--PROSECUTION OF DISCOVERY.--HIS TREATMENT BY THE COURT.
  PROGRESS OF DISCOVERY
  MISCONDUCT OF THE COLONISTS
  COMPLAINTS AGAINST COLUMBUS
  HIS SECOND RETURN
  THE QUEEN'S CONFIDENCE IN HIM UNSHAKEN
  HONORS CONFERRED ON HIM
  HIS THIRD VOYAGE
  DISCOVERS TERRA FIRMA
  MUTINY IN THE COLONY
  LOUD COMPLAINTS AGAINST COLUMBUS
  BIGOTED VIEWS IN REGARD TO THE HEATHEN
  MORE LIBERAL SENTIMENTS OF ISABELLA
  SHE SENDS BACK THE INDIAN SLAVES
  AUTHORITY TO BOBADILLA
  OUTRAGE ON COLUMBUS
  DEEP REGRET OF THE SOVEREIGNS
  RECEPTION OF COLUMBUS
  VINDICATION OF THE SOVEREIGNS
  COMMISSION TO OVANDO
  GROUNDLESS IMPUTATIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT
  THE ADMIRAL'S DESPONDENCY
  HIS FOURTH AND LAST VOYAGE
  REMARKABLE FATE OF HIS ENEMIES

CHAPTER IX.
  SPANISH COLONIAL POLICY.
  CAREFUL PROVISION FOR THE COLONIES
  LIBERAL GRANTS
  LICENSE FOR PRIVATE VOYAGES
  THEIR SUCCESS
  INDIAN DEPARTMENT
  CASA DE CONTRATACION
  IMPORTANT PAPAL CONCESSIONS
  SPIRIT OF THE COLONIAL LEGISLATION
  THE QUEEN'S ZEAL FOB CONVERTING THE NATIVES
  UNHAPPILY DEFEATED
  IMMEDIATE PROFITS FROM THE DISCOVERIES
  ORIGIN OF THE VENEREAL DISEASE
  MORAL CONSEQUENCES OP THE DISCOVERIES
  THEIR GEOGRAPHICAL EXTENT
  HISTORIANS OF THE NEW WORLD
  PETER MARTYR
  HERRERA AND MUNOZ




PART FIRST. [CONTINUED.]


CHAPTER XII.

INTERNAL AFFAIRS OF THE KINGDOM.--INQUISITION IN ARAGON.

1483-1487.

Isabella enforces the Laws.--Punishment of Ecclesiastics.--Inquisition in
Aragon.--Remonstrances of the Cortes.--Conspiracy.--Assassination of the
Inquisitor Arbues.--Cruel Persecutions.--Inquisition throughout
Ferdinand's Dominions.


In such intervals of leisure as occurred amid their military operations,
Ferdinand and Isabella were diligently occupied with the interior
government of the kingdom, and especially with the rigid administration of
justice, the most difficult of all duties in an imperfectly civilized
state of society. The queen found especial demand for this in the northern
provinces, whose rude inhabitants were little used to subordination. She
compelled the great nobles to lay aside their arms, and refer their
disputes to legal arbitration. She caused a number of the fortresses,
which were still garrisoned by the baronial banditti, to be razed to the
ground; and she enforced the utmost severity of the law against such
inferior criminals as violated the public peace. [1]

Even ecclesiastical immunities, which proved so effectual a protection in
most countries at this period, were not permitted to screen the offender.
A remarkable instance of this occurred at the city of Truxillo, in 1486.
An inhabitant of that place had been committed to prison for some offence
by order of the civil magistrate. Certain priests, relations of the
offender, alleged that his religious profession exempted him from all but
ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and, as the authorities refused to deliver
him up, they inflamed the populace to such a degree, by their
representations of the insult offered to the church, that they rose in a
body, and, forcing the prison, set at liberty not only the malefactor in
question, but all those confined there. The queen no sooner heard of this
outrage on the royal authority, than she sent a detachment of her guard to
Truxillo, which secured the persons of the principal rioters, some of whom
were capitally punished, while the ecclesiastics, who had stirred up the
sedition, were banished the realm. Isabella, while by her example she
inculcated the deepest reverence for the sacred profession, uniformly
resisted every attempt from that quarter to encroach on the royal
prerogative. The tendency of her administration was decidedly, as there
will be occasion more particularly to notice, to abridge the authority
which that body had exercised in civil matters under preceding reigns. [2]

Nothing of interest occurred in the foreign relations of the kingdom,
during the period embraced by the preceding chapter; except perhaps the
marriage of Catharine, the young queen of Navarre, with Jean d'Albret, a
French nobleman, whose extensive hereditary domains, in the southwest
corner of France, lay adjacent to her kingdom. This connection was
extremely distasteful to the Spanish sovereigns, and indeed to many of the
Navarrese, who were desirous of the alliance with Castile. This was
ultimately defeated by the queen-mother, an artful woman, who, being of
the blood royal of France, was naturally disposed to a union with that
kingdom. Ferdinand did not neglect to maintain such an understanding with
the malcontents of Navarre, as should enable him to counteract any undue
advantage which the French monarch might derive from the possession of
this key, as it were, to the Castilian territory. [3]

In Aragon, two circumstances took place in the period under review,
deserving historical notice. The first relates to an order of the Catalan
peasantry, denominated vassals _de remenza_. These persons were subjected
to a feudal bondage, which had its origin in very remote ages, but which
had become in no degree mitigated, while the peasantry of every other part
of Europe had been gradually rising to the rank of freemen. The grievous
nature of the impositions had led to repeated rebellions in preceding
reigns. At length, Ferdinand, after many fruitless attempts at a mediation
between these unfortunate people and their arrogant masters, prevailed on
the latter, rather by force of authority than argument, to relinquish the
extraordinary seignorial rights, which they had hitherto enjoyed, in
consideration of a stipulated annual payment from their vassals. [4]

The other circumstance worthy of record, but not in like manner creditable
to the character of the sovereign, is the introduction of the modern
Inquisition into Aragon. The ancient tribunal had existed there, as has
been stated in a previous chapter, since the middle of the thirteenth
century, but seems to have lost all its venom in the atmosphere of that
free country; scarcely assuming a jurisdiction beyond that of an ordinary
ecclesiastical court. No sooner, however, was the institution organized on
its new basis in Castile, than Ferdinand resolved on its introduction, in
a similar form, in his own dominions.

Measures were accordingly taken to that effect in a meeting of a privy
council convened by the king at Taracona, during the session of the cortes
in that place, in April, 1484; and a royal order was issued, requiring all
the constituted authorities throughout the kingdom to support the new
tribunal in the exercise of its functions. A Dominican monk, Fray Gaspard
Juglar, and Pedro Arbues de Epila, a canon of the metropolitan church,
were appointed by the general, Torquemada, inquisitors over the diocese of
Saragossa; and, in the month of September following, the chief justiciary
and the other great officers of the realm took the prescribed oaths. [5]

The new institution, opposed to the ideas of independence common to all
the Aragonese, was particularly offensive to the higher orders, many of
whose members, including persons filling the most considerable official
stations, were of Jewish descent, and of course precisely the class
exposed to the scrutiny of the Inquisition. Without difficulty, therefore,
the cortes was persuaded in the following year to send a deputation to the
court of Rome, and another to Ferdinand, representing the repugnance of
the new tribunal to the liberties of the nation, as well as to their
settled opinions and habits, and praying that its operation might be
suspended for the present, so far at least as concerned the confiscation
of property, which it rightly regarded as the moving power of the whole
terrible machinery. [6]

Both the pope and the king, as may be imagined, turned a deaf ear to these
remonstrances. In the mean while the Inquisition commenced operations, and
autos da fe were celebrated at Saragossa, with all their usual horrors, in
the months of May and June, in 1485. The discontented Aragonese,
despairing of redress in any regular way, resolved to intimidate their
oppressors by some appalling act of violence. They formed a conspiracy for
the assassination of Arbues, the most odious of the inquisitors
established over the diocese of Saragossa. The conspiracy, set on foot by
some of the principal nobility, was entered into by most of the new
Christians, or persons of Jewish extraction in the district. A sum of ten
thousand reals was subscribed to defray the necessary expenses for the
execution of their project. This was not easy, however, since Arbues,
conscious of the popular odium that he had incurred, protected his person
by wearing under his monastic robes a suit of mail, complete even to the
helmet beneath his hood. With similar vigilance, he defended, also, every
avenue to his sleeping apartment. [7]

At length, however, the conspirators found an opportunity of surprising
him while at his devotions. Arbues was on his knees before the great altar
of the cathedral, near midnight, when his enemies, who had entered the
church in two separate bodies, suddenly surrounded him, and one of them
wounded him in the arm with a dagger, while another dealt him a fatal blow
in the back of his neck. The priests, who were preparing to celebrate
matins in the choir of the church, hastened to the spot; but not before
the assassins had effected their escape. They transported the bleeding
body of the inquisitor to his apartment, where he survived only two days,
blessing the Lord that he had been permitted to seal so good a cause with
his blood. The whole scene will readily remind the English reader of the
assassination of Thomas a Becket. [8]

The event did not correspond with the expectations of the conspirators.
Sectarian jealousy proved stronger than hatred of the Inquisition. The
populace, ignorant of the extent or ultimate object of the conspiracy,
were filled with vague apprehensions of an insurrection of the new
Christians, who had so often been the objects of outrage; and they could
only be appeased by the archbishop of Saragossa, riding through the
streets, and proclaiming that no time should be lost in detecting and
punishing the assassins.

This promise was abundantly fulfilled; and wide was the ruin occasioned by
the indefatigable zeal, with which the bloodhounds of the tribunal
followed up the scent. In the course of this persecution, two hundred
individuals perished at the stake, and a still greater number in the
dungeons of the Inquisition; and there was scarcely a noble family in
Aragon but witnessed one or more of its members condemned to humiliating
penance in the autos da fe. The immediate perpetrators of the murder were
all hanged, after suffering the amputation of their right hands. One, who
had appeared as evidence against the rest, under assurance of pardon, had
his sentence so far commuted, that his hand was not cut off till after he
had been hanged. It was thus that the Holy Office interpreted its promises
of grace. [9]

Arbues received all the honors of a martyr. His ashes were interred on the
spot where he had been assassinated. [10] A superb mausoleum was erected
over them, and, beneath his effigy, a bas-relief was sculptured
representing his tragical death, with an inscription containing a suitable
denunciation of the race of Israel. And at length, when the lapse of
nearly two centuries had supplied the requisite amount of miracles, the
Spanish Inquisition had the glory of adding a new saint to the calendar,
by the canonization of the martyr under Pope Alexander the Seventh, in
1664. [11]

The failure of the attempt to shake off the tribunal served only, as usual
in such cases, to establish it more firmly than before. Efforts at
resistance were subsequently, but ineffectually, made in other parts of
Aragon, and in Valencia and Catalonia. It was not established in the
latter province till 1487, and some years later in Sicily, Sardinia, and
the Balearic Isles. Thus Ferdinand had the melancholy satisfaction of
riveting the most galling yoke ever devised by fanaticism, round the necks
of a people, who till that period had enjoyed probably the greatest degree
of constitutional freedom which the world had witnessed.


FOOTNOTES

[1] Lebrija, Rerum Gestarum Decades, iii. lib. 1, cap. 10.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, part. 3, cap. 27, 39, 67, et alibi.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 175.--Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. fol. 348.

[2] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 66.--A pertinent example of this
occurred, December, 1485, at Alcala de Henares, where the court was
detained during the queen's illness, who there gave birth to her youngest
child, Dona Catalina, afterwards so celebrated in English history as
Catharine of Aragon. A collision took place in this city between the royal
judges and those of the archbishop of Toledo, to whose diocese it
belonged. The later stoutly maintained the pretensions of the church. The
queen with equal pertinacity asserted the supremacy of the royal
jurisdiction over every other in the kingdom, secular or ecclesiastical.
The affair was ultimately referred to the arbitration of certain learned
men, named conjointly by the adverse parties. It was not then determined,
however, and Pulgar has neglected to acquaint us with the award. Reyes
Catolicos, cap. 53.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1485.

[3] Aleson, Annales de Navarra, tom. v. lib. 35, cap. 2.

[4] Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. cap. 52, 67.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana, lib.
25, cap. 8.

[5] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 6, art. 2.--Zurita,
Anales, lib. 20, cap. 65.

At this cortes, convened at Taracona, Ferdinand and Isabella experienced
an instance of the haughty spirit of their Catalan subjects, who refused
to attend, alleging it to be a violation of their liberties to be summoned
to a place without the limits of their principality. The Valencians also
protested, that their attendance should not operate as a precedent to
their prejudice. It was usual to convene a central or general cortes at
Fraga, or Monzon, or some town, which the Catalans, who were peculiarly
jealous of their privileges, claimed to be within their territory. It was
still more usual, to hold separate cortes of the three kingdoms
simultaneously in such contiguous places in each, as would permit the
royal presence in all during their session. See Blancas, Mode de Proceder
en Cortes de Aragon, (Zaragoza, 1641,) cap. 4.

[6] By one of the articles in the Privilegium Generale, the Magna Charta
of Aragon, it is declared, "Que turment: ni inquisicion; no sian en Aragon
como sian contra Fuero el qual dize que alguna pesquisa no hauemos: et
contra el privilegio general, el qual vieda que inquisicion so sia feyta."
(Fueros y Observancias, fol. 11.) The tenor of this clause (although the
term _inquisicion_ must not be confounded with the name of the modern
institution) was sufficiently precise, one might have thought, to secure
the Aragonese from the fangs of this terrible tribunal.

[7] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, chap. 6, art. 2, 3.

[8] Llorente, ubi supra.--Paramo, De Origine Inquisitionis, pp. 182, 183.
--Ferreras, Hist. d'Espagne, tom. viii. pp. 37, 38.

[9] Llorente, Hist. de l'Inquisition, tom. i. chap. 6, art. 5.--Blancas,
Aragonensium Rerum Commentarii, (Caesaraugustae, 1588,) p. 266. Among
those, who after a tedious imprisonment were condemned to do penance in an
auto da fe, was a nephew of King Ferdinand, Don James of Navarre. Mariana,
willing to point the tale with a suitable moral, informs us, that,
although none of the conspirators were ever brought to trial, they all
perished miserably within a year, in different ways, by the judgment of
God. (Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. p. 368.) Unfortunately for the effect of
this moral, Llorente, who consulted the original processes, must be
received as the better authority of the two.

[10] According to Paramo, when the corpse of the inquisitor was brought to
the place where he had been assassinated, the blood, which had been
coagulated on the pavement, smoked up and boiled with most miraculous
fervor! De Origine Inquisitionis, p. 382.

[11] Paramo, De Origine Inquisitionis, p. 183.--Llorente, Hist. de
l'Inquisition, chap. 6, art. 4. France and Italy also, according to
Llorente, could each boast a saint inquisitor. Their renown, however, has
been, eclipsed by the superior splendors of their great master, St.
Dominic;

  --"Fils inconnus d'un si glorieux pere."




CHAPTER XIII.

WAR OF GRANADA.--SURRENDER OF VELEZ MALAGA.--SIEGE AND CONQUEST OF MALAGA.

1487.

Narrow Escape of Ferdinand before Velez.--Malaga invested by Sea and
Land.--Brilliant Spectacle.--The Queen visits the Camp.--Attempt to
Assassinate the Sovereigns.--Distress and Resolution of the Besieged.--
Enthusiasm of the Christians.--Outworks Carried by them.--Proposals for
Surrender.--Haughty Demeanor of Ferdinand.--Malaga Surrenders at
Discretion.--Cruel Policy of the Victors.


Before commencing operations against Malaga, it was thought expedient by
the Spanish council of war to obtain possession of Velez Malaga, situated
about five leagues distant from the former. This strong town stood along
the southern extremity of a range of mountains that extend to Granada. Its
position afforded an easy communication with that capital, and obvious
means of annoyance to an enemy interposed between itself and the adjacent
city of Malaga. The reduction of this place, therefore, became the first
object of the campaign.

The forces assembled at Cordova, consisting of the levies of the
Andalusian cities principally, of the retainers of the great nobility, and
of the well-appointed chivalry which thronged from all quarters of the
kingdom, amounted on this occasion to twelve thousand horse and forty
thousand foot; a number, which sufficiently attests the unslackened ardor
of the nation in the prosecution of the war. On the 7th of April, King
Ferdinand, putting himself at the head of this formidable host, quitted
the fair city of Cordova amid the cheering acclamations of its
inhabitants, although these were somewhat damped by the ominous occurrence
of an earthquake, which demolished a part of the royal residence, among
other edifices, during the preceding night. The route, after traversing
the Yeguas and the old town of Antequera, struck into a wild, hilly
country, that stretches towards Velez. The rivers were so much swollen by
excessive rains, and the passes so rough and difficult, that the army in
part of its march advanced only a league a day; and on one occasion, when
no suitable place occurred for encampment for the space of five leagues,
the men fainted with exhaustion, and the beasts dropped down dead in the
harness. At length, on the 17th of April, the Spanish army sat down before
Velez Malaga, where in a few days they were joined by the lighter pieces
of their battering ordnance; the roads, notwithstanding the immense labor
expended on them, being found impracticable for the heavier. [1]

The Moors were aware of the importance of Velez to the security of Malaga.
The sensation excited in Granada by the tidings of its danger was so
strong, that the old chief, El Zagal, found it necessary to make an effort
to relieve the beleaguered city, notwithstanding the critical posture in
which his absence would leave his affairs in the capital. Dark clouds of
the enemy were seen throughout the day mustering along the heights, which
by night were illumined with a hundred fires. Ferdinand's utmost vigilance
was required for the protection of his camp against the ambuscades and
nocturnal sallies of his wily foe. At length, however, El Zagal, having
been foiled in a well-concerted attempt to surprise the Christian quarters
by night, was driven across the mountains by the marquis of Cadiz, and
compelled to retreat on his capital, completely baffled in his enterprise.
There the tidings of his disaster had preceded him. The fickle populace,
with whom misfortune passes for misconduct, unmindful of his former
successes, now hastened to transfer their allegiance to his rival,
Abdallah, and closed the gates against him; and the unfortunate chief
withdrew to Guadix, which, with Almeria, Baza, and some less considerable
places, still remained faithful. [2]

Ferdinand conducted the siege all the while with his usual vigor, and
spared no exposure of his person to peril or fatigue. On one occasion,
seeing a party of Christians retreating in disorder before a squadron of
the enemy, who had surprised them while fortifying an eminence near the
city, the king, who was at dinner in his tent, rushed out with no other
defensive armor than his cuirass, and, leaping on his horse, charged
briskly into the midst of the enemy, and succeeded in rallying his own
men. In the midst of the rencontre, however, when he had discharged his
lance, he found himself unable to extricate his sword from the scabbard
which hung from the saddle-bow. At this moment he was assaulted by several
Moors, and must have been either slain or taken, but for the timely rescue
of the marquis of Cadiz, and a brave cavalier, Garcilasso de la Vega, who,
galloping up to the spot with their attendants, succeeded after a sharp
skirmish in beating off the enemy. Ferdinand's nobles remonstrated with
him on this wanton exposure of his person, representing that he could
serve them more effectually with his head than his hand. But he answered,
that "he could not stop to calculate chances, when his subjects were
perilling their lives for his sake;" a reply, says Pulgar, which endeared
him to the whole army. [3]

At length, the inhabitants of Velez, seeing the ruin impending from the
bombardment of the Christians, whose rigorous blockade both by sea and
land excluded all hopes of relief from without, consented to capitulate on
the usual conditions of security to persons, property, and religion. The
capitulation of this place, April 27th, 1487, was followed by that of more
than twenty places of inferior note lying between it and Malaga, so that
the approaches to this latter city were now left open to the victorious
Spaniards. [4]

This ancient city, which, under the Spanish Arabs in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, formed the capital of an independent principality,
was second only to the metropolis itself, in the kingdom of Granada. Its
fruitful environs furnished abundant articles of export, while its
commodious port on the Mediterranean opened a traffic with the various
countries washed by that inland sea, and with the remoter regions of
India. Owing to these advantages, the inhabitants acquired unbounded
opulence, which showed itself in the embellishments of their city, whose
light forms of architecture, mingling after the eastern fashion with
odoriferous gardens and fountains of sparkling water, presented an
appearance most refreshing to the senses in this sultry climate. [5]

The city was encompassed by fortifications of great strength, and in
perfect repair. It was commanded by a citadel, connected by a covered way
with a second fortress impregnable from its position, denominated
Gebalfaro, which stood along the declivities of the bold sierra of the
Axarquia, whose defiles had proved so disastrous to the Christians. The
city lay between two spacious suburbs, the one on the land side being also
encircled by a formidable wall; and the other declining towards the sea,
showing an expanse of olive, orange, and pomegranate gardens, intermingled
with the rich vineyards that furnished the celebrated staple for its
export.

Malaga was well prepared for a siege by supplies of artillery and
ammunition. Its ordinary garrison was reinforced by volunteers from the
neighboring towns, and by a corps of African mercenaries, Gomeres, as they
were called, men of ferocious temper, but of tried valor and military
discipline. The command of this important post had been intrusted by El
Zagal to a noble Moor, named Hamet Zeli, whose renown in the present war
had been established by his resolute defence of Ronda. [6]

Ferdinand, while lying before Velez, received intelligence that many of
the wealthy burghers of Malaga were inclined to capitulate at once, rather
than hazard the demolition of their city by an obstinate resistance. He
instructed the marquis of Cadiz, therefore, to open a negotiation with
Hamet Zeli, authorizing him to make the most liberal offers to the alcayde
himself, as well as his garrison, and the principal citizens of the place,
on condition of immediate surrender. The sturdy chief, however, rejected
the proposal with disdain, replying, that he had been commissioned by his
master to defend the place to the last extremity, and that the Christian
king could not offer a bribe large enough to make him betray his trust.
Ferdinand, finding little prospect of operating on this Spartan temper,
broke up his camp before Velez, on the 7th of May, and advanced with his
whole army as far as Bezmillana, a place on the seaboard about two leagues
distant from Malaga. [7]

The line of march now lay through a valley commanded at the extremity
nearest the city by two eminences; the one on the sea-coast, the other
facing the fortress of the Gebalfaro, and forming part of the wild sierra
which overshadowed Malaga on the north. The enemy occupied both these
important positions. A corps of Galicians were sent forward to dislodge
them from the eminence towards the sea. But it failed in the assault, and,
notwithstanding it was led up a second time by the commander of Leon and
the brave Garcilasso de la Vega, [8] was again repulsed by the intrepid
foe.

A similar fate attended the assault on the sierra, which was conducted by
the troops of the royal household. They were driven back on the vanguard,
which had halted in the valley under command of the grand master of St.
James, prepared to support the attack on either side. Being reinforced,
the Spaniards returned to the charge with the most determined resolution.
They were encountered by the enemy with equal spirit. The latter, throwing
away their lances, precipitated themselves on the ranks of the assailants,
making use only of their daggers, grappling closely man to man, till both
rolled promiscuously together down the steep sides of the ravine. No mercy
was asked or shown. None thought of sparing or of spoiling, for hatred,
says the chronicler, was stronger than avarice. The main body of the army,
in the mean while, pent up in the valley, were compelled to witness the
mortal conflict, and listen to the exulting cries of the enemy, which,
after the Moorish custom, rose high and shrill above the din of battle,
without being able to advance a step in support of their companions, who
were again forced to give way before their impetuous adversaries, and fall
back on the vanguard under the grand master of St. James. Here, however,
they speedily rallied; and, being reinforced, advanced to the charge a
third time, with such inflexible courage as bore down all opposition, and
compelled the enemy, exhausted, or rather overpowered by superior numbers,
to abandon his position. At the same time the rising ground on the seaside
was carried by the Spaniards under the commander of Leon and Garcilasso de
la Vega, who, dividing their forces, charged the Moors so briskly in front
and rear, that they were compelled to retreat on the neighboring fortress
of Gebalfaro. [9]

As it was evening before these advantages were obtained, the army did not
defile into the plains around Malaga before the following morning, when
dispositions were made for its encampment. The eminence on the sierra, so
bravely contested, was assigned as the post of greatest danger to the
marquis duke of Cadiz. It was protected by strong works lined with
artillery, and a corps of two thousand five hundred horse and fourteen
thousand foot was placed under the immediate command of that nobleman. A
line of defence was constructed along the declivity from this redoubt to
the seashore. Similar works, consisting of a deep trench and palisades,
or, where the soil was too rocky to admit of them, of an embankment or
mound of earth, were formed in front of the encampment, which embraced the
whole circuit of the city; and the blockade was completed by a fleet of
armed vessels, galleys and caravels, which rode in the harbor under the
command of the Catalan admiral, Requesens, and effectually cut off all
communication by water. [10]

The old chronicler Bernaldez warms at the aspect of the fair city of
Malaga, thus encompassed by Christian legions, whose deep lines,
stretching far over hill and valley, reached quite round from one arm of
the sea to the other. In the midst of this brilliant encampment was seen
the royal pavilion, proudly displaying the united banners of Castile and
Aragon, and forming so conspicuous a mark for the enemy's artillery, that
Ferdinand, after imminent hazard, was at length compelled to shift his
quarters. The Christians were not slow in erecting counter-batteries; but
the work was obliged to be carried on at night, in order to screen them
from the fire of the besieged. [11]

The first operations of the Spaniards were directed against the suburb, on
the land side of the city. The attack was intrusted to the count of
Cifuentes, the nobleman who had been made prisoner in the affair of the
Axarquia, and subsequently ransomed. The Spanish ordnance was served with
such effect, that a practicable breach was soon made in the wall. The
combatants now poured their murderous volleys on each other through the
opening, and at length met on the ruins of the breach. After a desperate
struggle the Moors gave way. The Christians rushed into the enclosure, at
the same time effecting a lodgment on the rampart; and, although a part of
it, undermined by the enemy, gave way with a terrible crash, they still
kept possession of the remainder, and at length drove their antagonists,
who sullenly retreated step by step, within the fortifications of the
city. The lines were then drawn close around the place. Every avenue of
communication was strictly guarded, and every preparation was made for
reducing the town by regular blockade. [12]

In addition to the cannon brought round by water from Velez, the heavier
lombards, which from the difficulty of transportation had been left during
the late Siege at Antequera, were now conducted across roads, levelled for
the purpose, to the camp. Supplies of marble bullets were also brought
from the ancient and depopulated city of Algezira, where they had lain
ever since its capture in the preceding century by Alfonso the Eleventh.
The camp was filled with operatives, employed in the manufacture of balls
and powder, which were stored in subterranean magazines, and in the
fabrication of those various kinds of battering enginery, which continued
in use long after the introduction of gunpowder. [13]

During the early part of the siege, the camp experienced some temporary
inconvenience from the occasional interruption of the supplies transported
by water. Rumors of the appearance of the plague in some of the adjacent
villages caused additional uneasiness; and deserters, who passed into
Malaga, reported these particulars with the usual exaggeration, and
encouraged the besieged to persevere, by the assurance that Ferdinand
could not much longer keep the field, and that the queen had actually
written to advise his breaking up the camp. Under these circumstances,
Ferdinand saw at once the importance of the queen's presence in order to
dispel the delusion of the enemy, and to give new heart to his soldiers.
He accordingly sent a message to Cordova, where she was holding her court,
requesting her appearance in the camp.

Isabella had proposed to join her husband before Velez, on receiving
tidings of El Zagal's march from Granada, and had actually enforced levies
of all persons capable of bearing arms, between twenty and seventy years
of age, throughout Andalusia, but subsequently disbanded them, on learning
the discomfiture of the Moorish army. Without hesitation, she now set
forward, accompanied by the cardinal of Spain and other dignitaries of the
church, together with the infanta Isabella, and a courtly train of ladies
and cavaliers in attendance on her person. She was received at a short
distance from the camp by the marquis of Cadiz and the grand master of St.
James, and escorted to her quarters amidst the enthusiastic greetings of
the soldiery. Hope now brightened every countenance. A grace seemed to be
shed over the rugged features of war; and the young gallants thronged from
all quarters to the camp, eager to win the guerdon of valor from the hands
of those from whom it is most grateful to receive it. [14]

Ferdinand, who had hitherto brought into action only the lighter pieces of
ordnance, from a willingness to spare the noble edifices of the city, now
pointed his heaviest guns against its walls. Before opening his fire,
however, he again summoned the place, offering the usual liberal terms in
case of immediate, compliance, and engaging otherwise, "with the blessing
of God, to make them all slaves"! But the heart of the alcayde was
hardened like that of Pharaoh, says the Andalusian chronicler, and the
people were swelled with vain hopes, so that their ears were closed
against the proposal; orders were even issued to punish with death any
attempt at a parley. On the contrary, they made answer by a more lively
cannonade than before, along the whole line of ramparts and fortresses
which overhung the city. Sallies were also made at almost every hour of
the day and night on every assailable point of the Christian lines, so
that the camp was kept in perpetual alarm. In one of the nocturnal
sallies, a body of two thousand men from the castle of Gebalfaro succeeded
in surprising the quarters of the marquis of Cadiz, who, with his
followers, was exhausted by fatigue and watching, during the two preceding
nights. The Christians, bewildered with the sudden tumult which broke
their slumber, were thrown into the greatest confusion; and the marquis,
who rushed half armed from his tent, found no little difficulty in
bringing them to order, and beating off the assailants, after receiving a
wound in the arm from an arrow; while he had a still narrower escape from
the ball of an arquebus, that penetrated his buckler and hit him below the
cuirass, but fortunately so much spent as to do him no injury. [15]

The Moors were not unmindful of the importance of Malaga, or the gallantry
with which it was defended. They made several attempts to relieve it,
whose failure was less owing to the Christians than to treachery and their
own miserable feuds. A body of cavalry, which El Zagal despatched from
Guadix to throw succors into the beleaguered city, was encountered and cut
to pieces by a superior force of the young king Abdallah, who consummated
his baseness by sending an embassy to the Christian camp, charged with a
present of Arabian horses sumptuously caparisoned to Ferdinand, and of
costly silks and Oriental perfumes to the queen; at the same time
complimenting them on their successes, and soliciting the continuance of
their friendly dispositions towards himself. Ferdinand and Isabella
requited this act of humiliation by securing to Abdallah's subjects the
right of cultivating their fields in quiet, and of trafficking with the
Spaniards in every commodity, save military stores. At this paltry price
did the dastard prince consent to stay his arm, at the only moment when it
could be used effectually for his country. [16]

More serious consequences were like to have resulted from an attempt made
by another party of Moors from Guadix to penetrate the Christian lines.
Part of them succeeded, and threw themselves into the besieged city. The
remainder were cut in pieces. There was one, however, who, making no show
of resistance, was made prisoner without harm to his person. Being brought
before the marquis of Cadiz, he informed that nobleman, that he could make
some important disclosures to the sovereigns. He was accordingly conducted
to the royal tent; but, as Ferdinand was taking his siesta, in the sultry
hour of the day, the queen, moved by divine inspiration, according to the
Castilian historian, deferred the audience till her husband should awake,
and commanded the prisoner to be detained in the adjoining tent. This was
occupied by Dona Beatrix de Bobadilla, marchioness of Moya, Isabella's
early friend, who happened to be at that time engaged in discourse with a
Portuguese nobleman, Don Alvaro, son of the duke of Braganza. [17]

The Moor did not understand the Castilian language, and, deceived by the
rich attire and courtly bearing of these personages, he mistook them for
the king and queen. While in the act of refreshing himself with a glass of
water, he suddenly drew a dagger from beneath the broad folds of his
_albornoz_, or Moorish mantle, which he had been incautiously suffered to
retain, and, darting on the Portuguese prince, gave him a deep wound on
the head; and then, turning like lightning on the marchioness, aimed a
stroke at her, which fortunately glanced without injury, the point of the
weapon being turned by the heavy embroidery of her robes. Before he could
repeat his blow, the Moorish Scaevola, with a fate very different from
that of his Roman prototype, was pierced with a hundred wounds by the
attendants, who rushed to the spot, alarmed by the cries of the
marchioness, and his mangled remains were soon after discharged from a
catapult into the city; a foolish bravado, which the besieged requited by
slaying a Galician gentleman, and sending his corpse astride upon a mule
through the gates of the town into the Christian camp. [18]

This daring attempt on the lives of the king and queen spread general
consternation throughout the army. Precautions were taken for the future,
by ordinances prohibiting the introduction of any unknown person armed, or
any Moor whatever, into the royal quarters; and the bodyguard was
augmented by the addition of two hundred hidalgos of Castile and Aragon,
who, with their retainers, were to keep constant watch over the persons of
the sovereigns.

Meanwhile, the city of Malaga, whose natural population was greatly
swelled by the influx of its foreign auxiliaries, began to be straitened
for supplies, while its distress was aggravated by the spectacle of
abundance which reigned throughout the Spanish camp. Still, however, the
people, overawed by the soldiery, did not break out into murmurs, nor did
they relax in any degree the pertinacity of their resistance. Their
drooping spirits were cheered by the predictions of a fanatic, who
promised that they should eat the grain which they saw in the Christian
camp; a prediction, which came to be verified, like most others that are
verified at all, in a very different sense from that intended or
understood.

The incessant cannonade kept up by the besieging army, in the mean time,
so far exhausted their ammunition, that they were constrained to seek
supplies from the most distant parts of the kingdom, and from foreign
countries. The arrival of two Flemish transports at this juncture, from
the emperor of Germany, whose interest had been roused in the crusade,
afforded a seasonable reinforcement of military stores and munitions.

The obstinate defence of Malaga had given the siege such celebrity, that
volunteers, eager to share in it, flocked from all parts of the Peninsula
to the royal standard. Among others, the duke of Medina Sidonia, who had
furnished his quota of troops at the opening of the campaign, now arrived
in person with a reinforcement, together with a hundred galleys freighted
with supplies, and a loan of twenty thousand doblas of gold to the
sovereigns for the expenses of the war. Such was the deep interest in it
excited throughout the nation, and the alacrity which every order of men
exhibited in supporting its enormous burdens. [19]

The Castilian army, swelled by these daily augmentations, varied in its
amount, according to different estimates, from sixty to ninety thousand
men. Throughout this immense host, the most perfect discipline was
maintained. Gaming was restrained by ordinances interdicting the use of
dice and cards, of which the lower orders were passionately fond.
Blasphemy was severely punished. Prostitutes, the common pest of a camp,
were excluded; and so entire was the subordination, that not a knife was
drawn, and scarcely a brawl occurred, says the historian, among the motley
multitude. Besides the higher ecclesiastics who attended the court, the
camp was well supplied with holy men, priests, friars, and the chaplains
of the great nobility, who performed the exercises of religion in their
respective quarters with all the pomp and splendor of the Roman Catholic
worship; exalting the imaginations of the soldiers into the high
devotional feeling, which became those who were fighting the battles of
the Cross. [20]

Hitherto, Ferdinand, relying on the blockade, and yielding to the queen's
desire to spare the lives of her soldiers, had formed no regular plan of
assault upon the town. But, as the season rolled on without the least
demonstration of submission on the part of the besieged, he resolved to
storm the works, which, if attended by no other consequences, might at
least serve to distress the enemy, and hasten the hour of surrender. Large
wooden towers on rollers were accordingly constructed, and provided with
an apparatus of drawbridges and ladders, which, when brought near to the
ramparts, would open a descent into the city. Galleries were also wrought,
some for the purpose of penetrating into the place, and others to sap the
foundations of the walls. The whole of these operations was placed under
the direction of Francisco Ramirez, the celebrated engineer of Madrid.

But the Moors anticipated the completion of these formidable preparations
by a brisk, well-concerted attack on all points of the Spanish lines. They
countermined the assailants, and, encountering them in the subterraneous
passages, drove them back, and demolished the frame-work of the galleries.
At the same time, a little squadron of armed vessels, which had been
riding in safety under the guns of the city, pushed out and engaged the
Spanish fleet. Thus the battle raged with fire and sword, above and under
ground, along the ramparts, the ocean, and the land, at the same time.
Even Pulgar cannot withhold his tribute of admiration to this
unconquerable spirit in an enemy, wasted by all the extremities of famine
and fatigue. "Who does not marvel," he says, "at the bold heart of these
infidels in battle, their prompt obedience to their chiefs, their
dexterity in the wiles of war, their patience under privation, and
undaunted perseverance in their purposes?" [21]

A circumstance occurred in a sortie from the city, indicating a trait of
character worth recording. A noble Moor, named Abrahen Zenete, fell in
with a number of Spanish children who had wandered from their quarters.
Without injuring them, he touched them gently with the handle of his
lance, saying, "Get ye gone, varlets, to your mothers." On being rebuked
by his comrades, who inquired why he had let them escape so easily, he
replied, "Because I saw no beard upon their chins." "An example of
magnanimity," says the Curate of Los Palacios, "truly wonderful in a
heathen, and which might have reflected credit on a Christian hidalgo."
[22]

But no virtue nor valor could avail the unfortunate Malagans against the
overwhelming force of their enemies, who, driving them back from every
point, compelled them, after a desperate struggle of six hours, to shelter
themselves within the defences of the town. The Christians followed up
their success. A mine was sprung near a tower, connected by a bridge of
four arches with the main works of the place. The Moors, scattered and
intimidated by the explosion, retreated across the bridge, and the
Spaniards, carrying the tower, whose guns completely enfiladed it,
obtained possession of this important pass into the beleaguered city. For
these and other signal services during the siege, Francisco Ramirez, the
master of the ordnance, received the honors of knighthood from the hand of
King Ferdinand. [23]

The citizens of Malaga, dismayed at beholding the enemy established in
their defences, and fainting under exhaustion from a siege which had
already lasted more than three months, now began to murmur at the
obstinacy of the garrison, and to demand a capitulation. Their magazines
of grain were emptied, and for some weeks they had been compelled to
devour the flesh of horses, dogs, cats, and even the boiled hides of these
animals, or, in default of other nutriment, vine leaves dressed with oil,
and leaves of the palm tree, pounded fine, and baked into a sort of cake.
In consequence of this loathsome and unwholesome diet, diseases were
engendered. Multitudes were seen dying about the streets. Many deserted to
the Spanish camp, eager to barter their liberty for bread; and the city
exhibited all the extremes of squalid and disgusting wretchedness, bred by
pestilence and famine among an overcrowded population. The sufferings of
the citizens softened the stern heart of the alcayde, Hamet Zeli, who at
length yielded to their importunities, and, withdrawing his forces into
the Gebalfaro, consented that the Malagans should make the best terms they
could with their conqueror.

A deputation of the principal inhabitants, with an eminent merchant named
Ali Dordux at their head, was then despatched to the Christian quarters,
with the offer of the city to capitulate, on the same liberal conditions
which had been uniformly granted by the Spaniards. The king refused to
admit the embassy into his presence, and haughtily answered through the
commander of Leon, "that these terms had been twice offered to the people
of Malaga, and rejected; that it was too late for them to stipulate
conditions, and nothing now remained but to abide by those which he, as
their conqueror, should vouchsafe to them." [24]

Ferdinand's answer spread general consternation throughout Malaga. The
inhabitants saw too plainly that nothing was to be hoped from an appeal to
sentiments of humanity. After a tumultuous debate, the deputies were
despatched a second time to the Christian camp, charged with propositions
in which concession was mingled with menace. They represented that the
severe response of King Ferdinand to the citizens had rendered them
desperate. That, however, they were willing to resign to him their
fortifications, their city, in short, their property of every description,
on his assurance of their personal security and freedom. If he refused
this, they would take their Christian captives, amounting to five or six
hundred, from the dungeons in which they lay, and hang them like dogs over
the battlements; and then, placing their old men, women, and children in
the fortress, they would set fire to the town, and cut a way for
themselves through their enemies, or fall in the attempt. "So," they
continued, "if you gain a victory, it shall be such a one as shall make
the name of Malaga ring throughout the world, and to ages yet unborn!"
Ferdinand, unmoved by these menaces, coolly replied, that he saw no
occasion to change his former determination; but they might rest assured,
if they harmed a single hair of a Christian, he would put every soul in
the place, man, woman, and child, to the sword.

The anxious people, who thronged forth to meet the embassy on its return
to the city, were overwhelmed with the deepest gloom at its ominous
tidings. Their fate was now sealed. Every avenue to hope seemed closed by
the stern response of the victor. Yet hope will still linger; and,
although there were some frantic enough to urge the execution of their
desperate menaces, the greater number of the inhabitants, and among them
those most considerable for wealth and influence, preferred the chance of
Ferdinand's clemency to certain, irretrievable ruin.

For the last time, therefore, the deputies issued from the gates of the
city, charged with an epistle to the sovereigns from their unfortunate
countrymen, in which, after deprecating their anger, and lamenting their
own blind obstinacy, they reminded their highnesses of the liberal terms
which their ancestors had granted to Cordova, Antequera, and other cities,
after a defence as pertinacious as their own. They expatiated on the fame
which the sovereigns had established by the generous policy of their past
conquests, and, appealing to their magnanimity, concluded with submitting
themselves, their families, and their fortunes to their disposal. Twenty
of the principal citizens were then delivered up as hostages for the
peaceable demeanor of the city until its occupation by the Spaniards.
"Thus," says the Curate of Los Palacios, "did the Almighty harden the
hearts of these heathen, like to those of the Egyptians, in order that
they might receive the full wages of the manifold oppressions which they
had wrought on his people, from the days of King Roderic to the present
time." [25]

On the appointed day, the commander of Leon rode through the gates of
Malaga, at the head of his well-appointed chivalry, and took possession of
the _alcazaba_, or lower citadel. The troops were then posted on their
respective stations along the fortifications, and the banners of Christian
Spain triumphantly unfurled from the towers of the city, where the
crescent had been displayed for an uninterrupted period of nearly eight
centuries.

The first act was to purify the town from the numerous dead bodies, and
other offensive matter, which had accumulated during this long siege, and
lay festering in the streets, poisoning the atmosphere. The principal
mosque was next consecrated with due solemnity to the service of Santa
Maria de la Encarnacion. Crosses and bells, the symbols of Christian
worship, were distributed in profusion among the sacred edifices; where,
says the Catholic chronicler last quoted, "the celestial music of their
chimes, sounding at every hour of the day and night, caused perpetual
torment to the ears of the infidel." [26]

On the eighteenth day of August, being somewhat more than three months
from the date of opening trenches, Ferdinand and Isabella made their
entrance into the conquered city, attended by the court, the clergy, and
the whole of their military array. The procession moved in solemn state up
the principal streets, now deserted, and hushed in ominous silence, to the
new cathedral of St. Mary, where mass was performed; and as the glorious
anthem of the Te Deum rose for the first time within its ancient walls,
the sovereigns, together with the whole army, prostrated themselves in
grateful adoration of the Lord of hosts, who had thus reinstated them in
the domains of their ancestors.

The most affecting incident was afforded by the multitude of Christian
captives, who were rescued from the Moorish dungeons. They were brought
before the sovereigns, with their limbs heavily manacled, their beards
descending to their waists, and their sallow visages emaciated by
captivity and famine. Every eye was suffused with tears at the spectacle.
Many recognized their ancient friends, of whose fate they had long been
ignorant. Some, had lingered in captivity ten or fifteen years; and among
them were several belonging to the best families in Spain. On entering the
presence, they would have testified their gratitude by throwing themselves
at the feet of the sovereigns; but the latter, raising them up and
mingling their tears with those of the liberated captives, caused their
fetters to be removed, and, after administering to their necessities,
dismissed them with liberal presents. [27]

 The fortress of Gebalfaro surrendered on the day after the occupation of
Malaga by the Spaniards. The gallant Zegri chieftain, Hamet Zeli, was
loaded with chains; and, being asked why he had persisted so obstinately
in his _rebellion_, boldly answered, "Because I was commissioned to
defend the place to the last extremity; and, if I had been properly
supported, I would have died sooner than surrender now!"

The doom of the vanquished was now to be pronounced. On entering the city,
orders had been issued to the Spanish soldiery, prohibiting them under the
severest penalties from molesting either the persons or property of the
inhabitants. These latter were directed to remain in their respective
mansions with a guard set over them, while the cravings of appetite were
supplied by a liberal distribution of food. At length, the whole
population of the city, comprehending every age and sex, was commanded to
repair to the great courtyard of the alcazaba, which was overlooked on all
sides by lofty ramparts garrisoned by the Spanish soldiery. To this place,
the scene of many a Moorish triumph, where the spoil of the border foray
had been often displayed, and which still might be emblazoned with the
trophy of many a Christian banner, the people of Malaga now directed their
steps. As the multitude swarmed through the streets, filled with boding
apprehensions of their fate, they wrung their hands, and, raising their
eyes to heaven, uttered the most piteous lamentations. "Oh, Malaga," they
cried, "renowned and beautiful city, how are thy sons about to forsake
thee! Could not thy soil, on which they first drew breath, be suffered to
cover them in death? Where is now the strength of thy towers, where the
beauty of thy edifices? The strength of thy walls, alas, could not avail
thy children, for they had sorely displeased their Creator. What shall
become of thy old men and thy matrons, or of thy young maidens delicately
nurtured within thy halls, when they shall feel the iron yoke of bondage?
Can thy barbarous conquerors without remorse thus tear asunder the dearest
ties of life?" Such are the melancholy strains, in which the Castilian
chronicler has given utterance to the sorrows of the captive city. [28]

The dreadful doom of slavery was denounced on the assembled multitude.
One-third was to be transported into Africa in exchange for an equal
number of Christian captives detained there; and all, who had relatives or
friends in this predicament, were required to furnish a specification of
them. Another third was appropriated to reimburse the state for the
expenses of the war. The remainder were to be distributed as presents at
home and abroad. Thus, one hundred of the flower of the African warriors
were sent to the pope, who incorporated them into his guard, and converted
them all in the course of the year, says the Curate of Los Palacios, into
very good Christians. Fifty of the most beautiful Moorish girls were
presented by Isabella to the queen of Naples, thirty to the queen of
Portugal, others to the ladies of her court; and the residue of both sexes
were apportioned among the nobles, cavaliers, and inferior members of the
army, according to their respective rank and services. [29]

As it was apprehended that the Malagans, rendered desperate by the
prospect of a hopeless, interminable captivity, might destroy or secrete
their jewels, plate, and other precious effects, in which this wealthy
city abounded, rather than suffer them to fall into the hands of their
enemies, Ferdinand devised a politic expedient for preventing it. He
proclaimed that he would receive a certain sum, if paid within nine
months, as the ransom of the whole population, and that their personal
effects should be admitted in part payment. This sum averaged about thirty
doblas a head, including in the estimate all those who might die before
the determination of the period assigned. The ransom, thus stipulated,
proved more than the unhappy people could raise, either by themselves, or
agents employed to solicit contributions among their brethren of Granada
and Africa; at the same time, it so far deluded their hopes, that they
gave in a full inventory of their effects to the treasury. By this shrewd
device, Ferdinand obtained complete possession both of the persons and
property of his victims. [30]

Malaga was computed to contain from eleven to fifteen thousand
inhabitants, exclusive of several thousand foreign auxiliaries, within its
gates at the time of surrender. One cannot, at this day, read the
melancholy details of its story, without feelings of horror and
indignation. It is impossible to vindicate the dreadful sentence passed on
this unfortunate people for a display of heroism, which should have
excited admiration in every generous bosom. It was obviously most
repugnant to Isabella's natural disposition, and must be admitted to leave
a stain on her memory, which no coloring of history can conceal. It may
find some palliation, however, in the bigotry of the age, the more
excusable in a woman whom education, general example, and natural distrust
of herself accustomed to rely, in matters of conscience, on the spiritual
guides, whose piety and professional learning seemed to qualify them for
the trust. Even in this very transaction, she fell far short of the
suggestions of some of her counsellors, who urged her to put every
inhabitant without exception to the sword; which, they affirmed, would be
a just requital of their obstinate _rebellion_, and would prove a
wholesome warning to others! We are not told who the advisers of this
precious measure were; but the whole experience of this reign shows, that
we shall scarcely wrong the clergy much by imputing it to them. That their
arguments could warp so enlightened a mind, as that of Isabella, from the
natural principles of justice and humanity, furnishes a remarkable proof
of the ascendency which the priesthood usurped over the most gifted
intellects, and of their gross abuse of it, before the Reformation, by
breaking the seals set on the sacred volume, opened to mankind the
uncorrupted channel of divine truth. [31]

The fate of Malaga may be said to have decided that of Granada. The latter
was now shut out from the most important ports along her coast; and she
was environed on every point of her territory by her warlike foe, so that
she could hardly hope more from subsequent efforts, however strenuous and
united, than to postpone the inevitable hour of dissolution. The cruel
treatment of Malaga was the prelude to the long series of persecutions,
which awaited the wretched Moslems in the land of their ancestors; in that
land, over which the "star of Islamism," to borrow their own metaphor, had
shone in full brightness for nearly eight centuries, but where it was now
fast descending amid clouds and tempests to the horizon.

The first care of the sovereigns was directed towards repeopling the
depopulated city with their own subjects. Houses and lands were freely
granted to such as would settle there. Numerous towns and villages with a
wide circuit of territory were placed under its civil jurisdiction, and it
was made the head of a diocese embracing most of the recent conquests in
the south and west of Granada. These inducements, combined with the
natural advantages of position and climate, soon caused the tide of
Christian population to flow into the deserted city; but it was very long
before it again reached the degree of commercial consequence to which it
had been raised by the Moors. [32]

After these salutary arrangements, the Spanish sovereigns led back their
victorious legions in triumph to Cordova, whence dispersing to their
various homes, they prepared, by a winter's repose, for new campaigns and
more brilliant conquests.


FOOTNOTES

[1] Vedmar, Antiguedad y Grandezas de la Ciudad de Velez, (Granada, 1652,)
fol. 148.--Mariana, Hist. de Espana, tom. ii. lib. 27, cap. 10.--Pulgar,
Reyes Catolicos, part. iii. cap. 70.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1487.--
Bleda, Coronica, lib. 5, cap. 14.

[2] Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. pp. 292-294.--
Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--Vedmar, Antiguedad de Velez, fol.
151.

[3] L. Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 175.--Vedmar, Antiguedad.--de
Velez, fol. 150, 151.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 14.

In commemoration of this event, the city incorporated into its escutcheon
the figure of a king on horseback, in the act of piercing a Moor with his
javelin. Vedmar, Antiguedad de Velez, fol. 12.

[4] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 52.--Marmol, Rebelion de
Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 14.

[5] Conde doubts whether the name of Malaga is derived from the Greek
_malake_, signifying "agreeable," or the Arabic _malka_, meaning "royal."
Either etymology is sufficiently pertinent. (See El Nubiense, Descripcion
de Espana, p. 186, not.) For notices of sovereigns who swayed the sceptre
of Malaga, see Casiri, Bibliotheca Escurialensis, tom. ii. pp. 41, 56, 99,
et alibi.

[6] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. p. 237.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, cap. 74.--El Nubiense, Descripcion de Espana, not., p. 144.

[7] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 82.--Vedmar, Antiguedad de
Velez, fol. 154.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 74.

[8] This cavalier, who took a conspicuous part both in the military and
civil transactions of this reign, was descended from one of the most
ancient and honorable houses in Castile. Hyta, (Guerras Civiles de
Granada, tom. i. p. 399,) with more effrontery than usual, has imputed to
him a chivalrous rencontre with a Saracen, which is recorded of an
ancestor, in the ancient Chronicle of Alonso XI.

  "Garcilaso de la Vega
  desde alli se ha intitulado,
  porque en la Vega hiciera
  campo con aquel pagano."

Oviedo, however, with good reason, distrusts the etymology and the story,
as he traces both the cognomen and the peculiar device of the family to a
much older date than the period assigned in the Chronicle. Quincuagenas,
MS., bat. 1, quinc. 3, dial. 43.

[9] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 75.--Salazar de Mendoza, Cron. del Gran
Cardenal, lib. 1, cap. 64.

[10] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 83.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
cap. 76.--Carbajal, Anales, MS., ano 1487.

[11] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
ubi supra.

[12] Peter Martyr, Opus Epist., lib. 1, epist. 83--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, cap. 76.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 83.--Oviedo,
Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 36.

[13] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 76.

[14] Salazar de Mendoza, Cron. del Gran Cardenal, lib. 1, cap. 64.--
Zurita, Anales, tom. iv. cap. 70.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap.
83.

[15] Bleda, Coronica, lib. 5, cap. 15.--Conde, Dominacion, tom. iv. pp.
237, 238.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 83.--Pulgar, Reyes
Catolicos, cap. 79.

[16] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.

During the siege, ambassadors arrived from an African potentate, the king
of Tremecen, bearing a magnificent present to the Castilian sovereigns,
interceding for the Malagans, and at the same time asking protection for
his subjects from the Spanish cruisers in the Mediterranean. The
sovereigns graciously complied with the latter request, and complimented
the African monarch with a plate of gold, on which the royal arms were
curiously embossed, says Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 84.

[17] This nobleman, Don Alvaro de Portugal, had fled his native country,
and sought an asylum in Castile from the vindictive enmity of John II, who
had been put to death by the duke of Braganza, his elder brother. He was
kindly received by Isabella, to whom he was nearly related, and
subsequently preferred to several important offices of state. His son, the
count of Gelves, married a granddaughter of Christopher Columbus. Oviedo,
Quincuagenas, MS.

[18] Oviedo, Quincuagenas, MS., bat. 1, quinc. 1, dial. 23.--Peter Martyr,
Opus Epist., lib. 1, epist. 63.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap.
84.--Bleda, Coronica de los Moros, lib. 5, cap. 15.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 175, 176.

[19] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 87-89.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., cap. 84.

[20] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 87.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos,
cap. 71.

[21] Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. pp. 237, 238.--Pulgar,
Reyes Catolicos, cap. 80.--Caro de Torres, Ordenes Militares, fol. 82, 83.

[22] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 9l.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
cap. 84. The honest exclamation of the Curate brings to mind the similar
encomium of the old Moorish ballad,

  "Caballeros Granadinos, Aunque Moros, hijosdalgo."

Hyta, Guerras de Granada, tom. i., p. 257.

[23] There is no older well-authenticated account of the employment of
gunpowder in mining in European warfare, so far as I am aware, than this
by Ramirez. Tiraboschi, indeed, refers, on the authority of another
writer, to a work in the library of the Academy of Siena, composed by one
Francesco Giorgio, architect of the duke of Urbino, about 1480, in which
that person claims the merit of the invention. (Letteratura Italiana, tom.
vi. p. 370.) The whole statement is obviously too loose to warrant any
such conclusion. The Italian historians notice the use of gunpowder mines
at the siege of the little town of Serezanello in Tuscany, by the Genoese,
in 1487, precisely contemporaneous with the siege of Malaga. (Machiavelli,
Istorie Fiorentine, lib. 8.--Guicciardini, Istoria d'Italia, (Milano,
1803,) tom. iii. lib. 6.) This singular coincidence, in nations having
then but little intercourse, would seem to infer some common origin of
greater antiquity. However this may be, the writers of both nations are
agreed in ascribing the first successful use of such mines on any extended
scale to the celebrated Spanish engineer, Pedro Navarro, when serving
under Gonsalvo of Cordova, in his Italian campaigns at the beginning of
the sixteenth century. Guicciardini, ubi supra.--Paolo Giovio, de Vita
Magni Gonsalvi, (Vitae Illustrium Virorum, Basiliae, 1578,) lib. 2.--
Aleson, Annales de Navarra, tom. v. lib. 35, cap. 12.

[24] Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. p. 296.--L.
Marineo, Cosas Memorables, fol. 175.--Rades y Andrada, Las Tres Ordenes,
fol. 54.--Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 92.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos,
MS., cap. 85.

[25] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 93.--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et
d'Espagne, tom. iii. p. 296.

The Arabic historians state that Malaga was betrayed by Ali Dordux, who
admitted the Spaniards into the castle, while the citizens were debating
on Ferdinand's terms. (See Conde, Domination de los Arabes, tom. iii. cap.
39.) The letter of the inhabitants, quoted at length by Pulgar, would seem
to be a refutation of this. And yet there are good grounds for suspecting
false play on the part of the ambassador Dordux, since the Castilian
writers admit that he was exempted, with forty of his friends, from the
doom of slavery and forfeiture of property, passed upon his fellow-
citizens.

[26] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 85.

[27] Carbajal, whose meagre annals have scarcely any merit beyond that of
a mere chronological table, postpones the surrender till September.
Anales, ano 1487.--Marmol, Rebelion de Moriscos, lib. 1, cap. 14.

[28] Bleda, Coronica, lib. 5, cap. 15.

As a counterpart to the above scene, twelve Christian renegades, found in
the city, were transfixed with canes, _acanavereados_, a barbarous
punishment derived from the Moors, which was inflicted by horsemen at full
gallop, who discharged pointed reeds at the criminal, until he expired
under repeated wounds. A number of relapsed Jews were at the same time
condemned to the flames. "These," says Father Abarca, "were the _fetes_
and illuminations most grateful to the Catholic piety of our sovereigns"!
Abarca, Reyes de Aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 3.

[29] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, ubi supra.--Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS.,
ubi supra.--Peter Martyr, Opus Epist., epist. 62.

[30] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 87.--L. Marineo, Cosas
Memorables, fol. 176.--Conde, Dominacion de los Arabes, tom. iii. p. 238.
--Cardonne, Hist. d'Afrique et d'Espagne, tom. iii. p. 296.--Carbajal,
Anales, MS., ano 1487.

Not a word of comment escapes the Castilian historians on this merciless
rigor of the conqueror towards the vanquished. It is evident that
Ferdinand did no violence to the feelings of his orthodox subjects.
_Tacendo clamant._

[31] Bernaldez, Reyes Catolicos, MS., cap. 87.--Bleda, Coronica, lib. 5,
cap. 15.

About four hundred and fifty Moorish Jews were ransomed by a wealthy
Israelite of Castile for 27,000 doblas of gold. A proof that the Jewish
stock was one which thrived amidst persecution.

It is scarcely possible that the circumstantial Pulgar should have omitted
to notice so important a fact as the scheme of the Moorish ransom, had it
occurred. It is still more improbable, that the honest Curate of Los
Palacios should have fabricated it. Any one who attempts to reconcile the
discrepancies of contemporary historians even, will have Lord Orford's
exclamation to his son Horace brought to his mind ten times a day; "Oh!
read me not history, for that I know to be false."

[32] Pulgar, Reyes Catolicos, cap. 94.--Col. de Ced., tom. vi. no. 321.




CHAPTER XIV.

WAR OF GRANADA.--CONQUEST OF BAZA.--SUBMISSION OF EL ZAGAL.

1487-1489.

The Sovereigns visit Aragon.--The King lays Siege to Baza.--Its Great
Strength.--Gardens Cleared of their Timber.--The Queen Raises the Spirits
of her Troops.--Her Patriotic Sacrifices.--Suspension of Arms.--Baza
Surrenders.--Treaty with Zagal.--Difficulties of the Campaign.--Isabella's
Popularity and Influence.


In the autumn of 1487, Ferdinand and Isabella, accompanied by the younger
branches of the royal family, visited Aragon, to obtain the recognition
from the cortes of Prince John's succession, now in his tenth year, as
well as to repress the disorders into which the country had fallen during
the long absence of its sovereigns. To this end, the principal cities and
communities of Aragon had recently adopted the institution of the
hermandad, organized on similar principles to that of Castile. Ferdinand,
on his arrival at Saragossa in the month of November, gave his royal
sanction to the association, extending the term of its duration to five
years, a measure extremely unpalatable to the great feudal nobility, whose
power, or rather abuse of power, was considerably abridged by this popular
military force. [1]

The sovereigns, after accomplishing the objects of their visit, and
obtaining an appropriation from the cortes for the Moorish war, passed
into Valencia, where measures of like efficiency were adopted for
restoring the authority of the law, which was exposed to such perpetual
lapses in this turbulent age, even in the best constituted governments, as
required for its protection the utmost vigilance, on the part of those
intrusted with the supreme executive power. From Valencia the court
proceeded to Murcia, where Ferdinand, in the month of June, 1488, assumed
the command of an army amounting to less than twenty thousand men, a small
force compared with those usually levied on these occasions; it being
thought advisable to suffer the nation to breathe a while, after the
exhausting efforts in which it had been unintermittingly engaged for so
many years.

Ferdinand, crossing the eastern borders of Granada, at no great distance
from Vera, which speedily opened its gates, kept along the southern slant
of the coast as far as Almeria; whence, after experiencing some rough
treatment from a sortie of the garrison, he marched by a northerly circuit
on Baza, for the purpose of reconnoitring its position, as his numbers
were altogether inadequate to its siege. A division of the army under the
marquis duke of Cadiz suffered itself to be drawn here into an ambuscade
by the wily old monarch El Zagal, who lay in Baza with a strong force.
After extricating his troops with some difficulty and loss from this
perilous predicament, Ferdinand retreated on his own dominions by the way
of Huescar, where he disbanded his army, and withdrew to offer up his
devotions at the cross of Caravaca. The campaign, though signalized by no
brilliant achievement, and indeed clouded with some slight reverses,
secured the surrender of a considerable number of fortresses and towns of
inferior note. [2]

The Moorish chief, El Zagal, elated by his recent success, made frequent
forays into the Christian territories, sweeping off the flocks, herds, and
growing crops of the husbandman; while the garrisons of Almeria and
Salobrena, and the bold inhabitants of the valley of Purchena, poured a
similar devastating warfare over the eastern borders of Granada into
Murcia. To meet this pressure, the Spanish sovereigns reinforced the
frontier with additional levies under Juan de Benavides and Garcilasso de
la Vega; while Christian knights, whose prowess is attested in many a
Moorish lay, flocked there from all quarters, as to the theatre of war.

During the following winter, of 1488, Ferdinand and Isabella occupied
themselves with the interior government of Castile, and particularly the
administration of justice. A commission was specially appointed to
supervise the conduct of the corregidors and subordinate magistrates, "so
that every one," says Pulgar, "was most careful to discharge his duty
faithfully, in order to escape the penalty, which was otherwise sure to
overtake him." [3]

While at Valladolid, the sovereigns received an embassy from Maximilian,
son of the emperor Frederic the Fourth, of Germany, soliciting their co-
operation in his designs against France for the restitution of his late
wife's rightful inheritance, the duchy of Burgundy, and engaging in turn
to support them in their claims on Roussillon and Cerdagne. The Spanish
monarchs had long entertained many causes of discontent with the French
court, both with regard to the mortgaged territory of Roussillon, and the
kingdom of Navarre; and they watched with jealous eye the daily increasing
authority of their formidable neighbor on their own frontier. They had
been induced, in the preceding summer, to equip an armanent at Biscay and
Guipuscoa, to support the duke of Brittany in his wars with the French
regent, the celebrated Anne de Beaujeu. This expedition, which proved
disastrous, was followed by another in the spring of the succeeding year.
[4] But, notwithstanding these occasional episodes to the great work in
which they were engaged, they had little leisure for extended operations;
and, although they entered into the proposed treaty of alliance with
Maximilian, they do not seem to have contemplated any movement of
importance before the termination of the Moorish war. The Flemish
ambassadors, after being entertained for forty days in a style suited to
impress them with high ideas of the magnificence of the Spanish court, and
of its friendly disposition towards their master, were dismissed with
costly presents, and returned to their own country. [5]

These negotiations show the increasing intimacy growing up between the
European states, who, as they settled their domestic feuds, had leisure to
turn their eyes abroad, and enter into the more extended field of
international politics. The tenor of this treaty indicates also the
direction which affairs were to take, when the great powers should be
brought into collision with each other on a common theatre of action.

All thoughts were now concentrated on the prosecution of the war with
Granada, which, it was determined, should be conducted on a more enlarged
scale than it had yet been; notwithstanding the fearful pest which had
desolated the country during the past year, and the extreme scarcity of
grain, owing to the inundations caused by excessive rains in the fruitful
provinces of the south. The great object proposed in this campaign was the
reduction of Baza, the capital of that division of the empire which
belonged to El Zagal. Besides this important city, that monarch's
dominions embraced the wealthy sea-port of Almeria, Guadix, and numerous
other towns and villages of less consequence, together with the mountain
region of the Alpuxarras, rich in mineral wealth; whose inhabitants,
famous for the perfection to which they had carried the silk manufacture,
were equally known for their enterprise and courage in war, so that El
Zagal's division comprehended the most potent and opulent portion of the
empire. [6] In the spring of 1489, the Castilian court passed to Jaen, at
which place the queen was to establish her residence, as presenting the
most favorable point of communication with the invading army. Ferdinand
advanced as far as Sotogordo, where, on the 27th of May, he put himself at
the head of a numerous force, amounting to about fifteen thousand horse
and eighty thousand foot, including persons of every description; among
whom was gathered, as usual, that chivalrous array of nobility and
knighthood, who, with stately and well-appointed retinues, were accustomed
to follow the royal standard in these crusades. [8]

The first point, against which operations were directed, was the strong
post of Cuxar, two leagues only from Baza, which surrendered after a brief
but desperate resistance. The occupation of this place, and some adjacent
fortresses, left the approaches open to El Zagal's capital. As the Spanish
army toiled up the heights of the mountain barrier, which towers above
Baza on the west, their advance was menaced by clouds of Moorish light
troops, who poured down a tempest of musket-balls and arrows on their
heads. These however were quickly dispersed by the advancing vanguard; and
the Spaniards, as they gained the summits of the hills, beheld the lordly
city of Baza, reposing in the shadows of the bold sierra that stretches
towards the coast, and lying in the bosom of a fruitful valley, extending
eight leagues in length, and three in breadth. Through this valley flowed
the waters of the Guadalentin and the Guadalquiton, whose streams were
conducted by a thousand canals over the surface of the vega. In the midst
of the plain, adjoining the suburbs, might be descried the orchard or
garden, as it was termed, of Baza, a league in length, covered with a
thick growth of wood, and with numerous villas and pleasure-houses of the
wealthy citizens, now converted into garrisoned fortresses. The suburbs
were encompassed by a low mud wall; but the fortifications of the city
were of uncommon strength. The place, in addition to ten thousand troops
of its own, was garrisoned by an equal number from Almeria; picked men,
under the command of the Moorish prince Cidi Yahye, a relative of El
Zagal, who lay at this time in Guadix, prepared to cover his own dominions
against any hostile movement of his rival in Granada. These veterans were
commissioned to defend the place to the last extremity; and, as due time
had been given for preparation, the town was victualled with fifteen
months' provisions, and even the crops growing in the vega had been
garnered before their prime, to save them from the hands of the enemy. [8]

The first operation, after the Christian army had encamped before the
walls of Baza, was to get possession of the garden, without which it would
be impossible to enforce a thorough blockade, since its labyrinth of
avenues afforded the inhabitants abundant facilities of communication with
the surrounding country. The assault was intrusted to the grand master of
St. James, supported by the principal cavaliers, and the king in person.
Their reception by the enemy was such as gave them a foretaste of the
perils and desperate daring they were to encounter in the present siege.
The broken surface of the ground, bewildered with intricate passes, and
thickly studded with trees and edifices, was peculiarly favorable to the
desultory and illusory tactics of the Moors. The Spanish cavalry was
brought at once to a stand; the ground proving impracticable for it, it
was dismounted, and led to the charge by its officers on foot. The men,
however, were soon scattered far asunder from their banners and their
leaders. Ferdinand, who from a central position endeavored to overlook the
field, with the design of supporting the attack on the points most
requiring it, soon lost sight of his columns amid the precipitous ravines,
and the dense masses of foliage which everywhere intercepted the view. The
combat was carried on, hand to hand, in the utmost confusion. Still the
Spaniards pressed forward, and, after a desperate struggle for twelve
hours, in which many of the bravest on both sides fell, and the Moslem
chief Reduan Zafarga had four horses successively killed under him, the
enemy were beaten back behind the intrenchments that covered the suburbs,
and the Spaniards, hastily constructing a defence of palisades, pitched
their tents on the field of battle. [9]

The following morning Ferdinand had the mortification to observe, that the
ground was too much broken and obstructed with wood, to afford a suitable
place for a general encampment. To evacuate his position, however, in the
face of the enemy, was a delicate manoeuvre, and must necessarily expose
him to severe loss. This he obviated, in a great measure, by a fortunate
stratagem. He commanded the tents nearest the town to be left standing,
and thus succeeded in drawing off the greater part of his forces, before
the enemy was aware of his intention.

After regaining his former position, a council of war was summoned to
deliberate on the course next to be pursued. The chiefs were filled with
despondency, as they revolved the difficulties of their situation. They
almost despaired of enforcing the blockade of a place, whose peculiar
situation gave it such advantages. Even could this be effected, the camp
would be exposed, they argued, to the assaults of a desperate garrison on
the one hand, and of the populous city of Guadix, hardly twenty miles
distant, on the other; while the good faith of Granada could scarcely be
expected to outlive a single reverse of fortune; so that, instead of
besieging, they might be more properly regarded as themselves besieged. In
addition to these evils, the winter frequently set in with much rigor in
this quarter; and the torrents, descending from the mountains, and
mingling with the waters of the valley, might overwhelm the camp with an
inundation, which, if it did not sweep it away at once, would expose it to
the perils of famine by cutting off all external communication. Under
these gloomy impressions, many of the council urged Ferdinand to break up
his position at once, and postpone all operations on Baza, until the
reduction of the surrounding country should make it comparatively easy.
Even the marquis of Cadiz gave in to this opinion; and Gutierre de
Cardenas, commander of Leon, a cavalier deservedly high in the confidence
of the king, was almost the only person of consideration decidedly opposed
to it. In this perplexity, Ferdinand, as usual in similar exigencies,
resolved to take counsel of the queen. [10]

Isabella received her husband's despatches a few hours after they were
written, by means of the regular line of posts maintained between the camp
and her station at Jaen. She was filled with chagrin at their import, from
which she plainly saw, that all her mighty preparations were about to
vanish into air. Without assuming the responsibility of deciding the
proposed question, however, she besought her husband not to distrust the
providence of God, which had conducted them through so many perils towards
the consummation of their wishes. She reminded him, that the Moorish
fortunes were never at so low an ebb as at present, and that their own
operations could probably never be resumed on such a formidable scale or
under so favorable auspices as now, when their arms had not been stained
with a single important reverse. She concluded with the assurance, that,
if his soldiers would be true to their duty, they might rely on her for
the faithful discharge of hers in furnishing them with all the requisite
supplies.

The exhilarating tone of this letter had an instantaneous effect,
silencing the scruples of the most timid, and confirming the confidence of
the others. The soldiers, in particular, who had received with
dissatisfaction some intimation of what was passing in the council,
welcomed it with general enthusiasm; and every heart seemed now intent on
furthering the wishes of their heroic queen by prosecuting the siege with
the utmost vigor.

The army was accordingly distributed into two encampments; one under the
marquis duke of Cadiz, supported by the artillery, the other under King
Ferdinand on the opposite side of the city. Between the two lay the garden
or orchard before mentioned, extending a league in length; so that, in
order to connect the works of the two camps, it became necessary to get
possession of this contested ground, and to clear it of the heavy timber
with which it was covered.

This laborious operation was intrusted to the commander of Leon, and the
work was covered by a detachment of seven thousand troops, posted in such
a manner as to check the sallies of the garrison. Notwithstanding four
thousand _taladores_, or pioneers, were employed in the task, the
forest was so dense, and the sorties from the city so annoying, that the
work of devastation did not advance more than ten paces a day, and was not
completed before the expiration of seven weeks. When the ancient groves,
so long the ornament and protection of the city, were levelled to the
ground, preparations were made for connecting the two camps, by a deep
trench, through which the mountain waters were made to flow; while the
borders were fortified with palisades, constructed of the timber lately
hewn, together with strong towers of mud or clay, arranged at regular
intervals. In this manner, the investment of the city was complete on the
side of the vega. [11]

As means of communication still remained open, however, by the opposite
sierra, defences of similar strength, consisting of two stone walls
separated by a deep trench, were made to run along the rocky heights and
ravines of the mountains until they touched the extremities of the
fortifications on the plain; and thus Baza was encompassed by an unbroken
line of circumvallation.

In the progress of the laborious work, which occupied ten thousand men,
under the indefatigable commander of Leon, for the space of two months, it
would have been easy for the people of Guadix, or of Granada, by co-
operation with the sallies of the besieged, to place the Christian army in
great peril. Some feeble demonstration of such a movement was made at
Guadix, but it was easily disconcerted. Indeed, El Zagal was kept in check
by the fear of leaving his own territory open to his rival, should he
march against the Christians. Abdallah, in the mean while, lay inactive in
Granada, incurring the odium and contempt of his people, who stigmatized
him as a Christian in heart, and a pensioner of the Spanish sovereigns.
Their discontent gradually swelled into a rebellion, which was suppressed
by him with a severity, that at length induced a sullen acquiescence in a
rule, which, however inglorious, was at least attended with temporary
security. [12]

While the camp lay before Baza, a singular mission was received from the
sultan of Egypt, who had been solicited by the Moors of Granada to
interpose in their behalf with the Spanish sovereigns. Two Franciscan
friars, members of a religious community in Palestine, were bearers of
despatches; which, after remonstrating with the sovereigns on. their
persecution of the Moors, contrasted it with the protection uniformly
extended by the sultan to the Christians in his dominions. The
communication concluded with menacing a retaliation of similar severities
on these latter, unless the sovereigns desisted from their hostilities
towards Granada.

From the camp, the two ambassadors proceeded to Jaen, where they were
received by the queen with all the deference due to their holy profession,
which seemed to derive additional sanctity from the spot in which it was
exercised. The menacing import of the sultan's communication, however, had
no power to shake the purposes of Ferdinand and Isabella, who made answer,
that they had uniformly observed the same policy in regard to their
Mahometan, as to their Christian subjects; but that they could no longer
submit to see their ancient and rightful inheritance in the hands of
strangers; and that, if these latter would consent to live under their
rule, as true and loyal subjects, they should experience the same paternal
indulgence which had been shown to their brethren. With this answer the
reverend emissaries returned to the Holy Land, accompanied by substantial
marks of the royal favor, in a yearly pension of one thousand ducats,
which the queen settled in perpetuity on their monastery, together with a
richly embroidered veil, the work of her own fair hands, to be suspended
over the Holy Sepulchre. The sovereigns subsequently despatched the
learned Peter Martyr as their envoy to the Moslem court, in order to
explain their proceedings more at length, and avert any disastrous
consequences from the Christian residents. [13]

In the mean while, the siege went forward with spirit; skirmishes and
single rencontres taking place every day between the high-mettled
cavaliers on both sides. These chivalrous combats, however, were
discouraged by Ferdinand, who would have confined his operations to strict
blockade, and avoided the unnecessary effusion of blood; especially as the
advantage was most commonly on the side of the enemy, from the peculiar
adaptation of their tactics to this desultory warfare. Although some
months had elapsed, the besieged rejected with scorn every summons to
surrender; relying on their own resources, and still more on the
tempestuous season of autumn, now fast advancing, which, if it did not
break up the encampment at once, would at least, by demolishing the roads,
cut off all external communication.

In order to guard against these impending evils, Ferdinand caused more
than a thousand houses, or rather huts, to be erected, with walls of earth
or clay, and roofs made of timber and tiles; while the common soldiers
constructed cabins by means of palisades loosely thatched with the
branches of trees. The whole work was accomplished in four days; and the
inhabitants of Baza beheld with amazement a city of solid edifices, with
all its streets and squares in regular order, springing as it were by
magic out of the ground, which had before been covered with the light and
airy pavilions of the camp. The new city was well supplied, owing to the
providence of the queen, not merely with the necessaries, but the luxuries
of life. Traders flocked there as to a fair, from Aragon, Valencia,
Catalonia, and even Sicily, freighted with costly merchandise, and with
jewelry and other articles of luxury; such as, in the indignant lament of
an old chronicler, "too often corrupt the souls of the soldiery, and bring
waste and dissipation into a camp."

That this was not the result, however, in the present instance, is
attested by more than one historian. Among others, Peter Martyr, the
Italian scholar before mentioned, who was present at this siege, dwells
with astonishment on the severe decorum and military discipline, which
everywhere obtained among this motley congregation of soldiers. "Who would
have believed," says he, "that the Galician, the fierce Asturian, and the
rude inhabitant of the Pyrenees, men accustomed to deeds of atrocious
violence, and to brawl and battle on the lightest occasions at home,
should mingle amicably, not only with one another, but with the Toledans,
La-Manchans, and the wily and jealous Andalusian; all living together in
harmonious subordination to authority, like members of one family,
speaking one tongue, and nurtured under a common discipline; so that the
camp seemed like a community modelled on the principles of Plato's
republic!" In another part of this letter, which was addressed to a
Milanese prelate, he panegyrizes the camp hospital of the queen, then a
novelty in war; which, he says, "is so profusely supplied with medical
attendants, apparatus, and whatever may contribute to the restoration or
solace of the sick, that it is scarcely surpassed in these respects by the
magnificent establishments of Milan." [14]

During the five months which the siege had now lasted, the weather had
proved uncommonly propitious to the Spaniards, being for the most part of
a bland and equal temperature, while the sultry heats of midsummer were
mitigated by cool and moderate showers. As the autumnal season advanced,
however, the clouds began to settle heavily around the mountains; and at
length one of those storms, predicted by the people of Baza, burst forth
with incredible fury, pouring a volume of waters down the rocky sides of
the sierra, which, mingling with those of the vega, inundated the camp of
the besiegers, and swept away most of the frail edifices constructed for
the use of the common soldiery. A still greater calamity befell them in
the dilapidation of the roads, which, broken up or worn into deep gullies
by the force of the waters, were rendered perfectly impassable. All
communication was of course suspended with Jaen, and a temporary
interruption of the convoys filled the camp with consternation. This
disaster, however, was speedily repaired by the queen, who, with an energy
always equal to the occasion, caused six thousand pioneers to be at once
employed in reconstructing the roads; the rivers were bridged over,
causeways new laid, and two separate passes opened through the mountains,
by which the convoys might visit the camp, and return without interrupting
each other. At the same time, the queen bought up immense quantities of
grain from all parts of Andalusia, which she caused to be ground in her
own mills; and, when the roads, which extended more than seven leagues in
length, were completed, fourteen thousand mules might be seen daily
traversing the sierra, laden with supplies, which from that time forward
were poured abundantly, and with the most perfect regularity, into the
camp. [15]

Isabella's next care was to assemble new levies of troops, to relieve or
reinforce those now in the camp; and the alacrity with which all orders of
men from every quarter of the kingdom answered her summons is worthy of
remark. But her chief solicitude was to devise expedients for meeting the
enormous expenditures incurred by the protracted operations of the year.
For this purpose, she had recourse to loans from individuals and religious
corporations, which were obtained without much difficulty, from the
general confidence in her good faith. As the sum thus raised, although
exceedingly large for that period, proved inadequate to the expenses,
further supplies were obtained from wealthy individuals, whose loans were
secured by mortgage of the royal demesne; and, as a deficiency still
remained in the treasury, the queen, as a last resource, pawned the crown
jewels and her own personal ornaments to the merchants of Barcelona and
Valencia, for such sums as they were willing to advance on them. [16] Such
were the efforts made by this high-spirited woman, for the furtherance of
her patriotic enterprise. The extraordinary results, which she was enabled
to effect, are less to be ascribed to the authority of her station, than
to that perfect confidence in her wisdom and virtue, with which she had
inspired the whole nation, and which secured their earnest co-operation in
all her undertakings. The empire, which she thus exercised, indeed, was
far more extended than any station, however exalted, or any authority,
however despotic, can confer; for it was over the hearts of her people.

Notwithstanding the vigor with which the siege was pressed, Baza made no
demonstration of submission. The garrison was indeed greatly reduced in
number; the ammunition was nearly expended; yet there still remained
abundant supplies of provisions in the town, and no signs of despondency
appeared among the people. Even the women of the place, with a spirit
emulating that of the dames of ancient Carthage, freely gave up their
jewels, bracelets, necklaces, and other personal ornaments, of which the
Moorish ladies were exceedingly fond, in order to defray the charges of
the mercenaries.

The camp of the besiegers, in the mean while, was also greatly wasted both
by sickness and the sword. Many, desponding under perils and fatigues,
which seemed to have no end, would even at this late hour have abandoned
the siege; and they earnestly solicited the queen's appearance in the
camp, in the hope that she would herself countenance this measure, on
witnessing their sufferings. Others, and by far the larger part, anxiously
desired the queen's visit, as likely to quicken the operations of the
siege, and bring it to a favorable issue. There seemed to be a virtue in
her presence, which, on some account or other, made it earnestly desired
by all.

Isabella yielded to the general wish, and on the 7th of November arrived
before the camp, attended by the infanta Isabella, the cardinal of Spain,
her friend, the marchioness of Moya, and other ladies of the royal
household. The inhabitants of Baza, says Bernaldez, lined the battlements
and housetops, to gaze at the glittering cavalcade as it emerged from the
depths of the mountains, amidst flaunting banners and strains of martial
music, while the Spanish cavaliers thronged forth in a body from the camp
to receive their beloved mistress, and gave her the most animated welcome.
"She came," says Martyr, "surrounded by a choir of nymphs, as if to
celebrate the nuptials of her child; and her presence seemed at once to
gladden and reanimate our spirits, drooping under long vigils, dangers,
and fatigue." Another writer, also present, remarks that, from the moment
of her appearance, a change seemed to come over the scene. No more of the
cruel skirmishes, which had before occurred every day; no report of
artillery, or clashing of arms, or any of the rude sounds of war, was to
be heard, but all seemed disposed to reconciliation and peace. [17]

The Moors probably interpreted Isabella's visit into an assurance, that
the Christian army would never rise from before the place until its
surrender. Whatever hopes they had once entertained of wearying out the
besiegers, were therefore now dispelled. Accordingly, a few days after the
queen's arrival, we find them proposing a parley for arranging terms of
capitulation.

On the third day after her arrival, Isabella reviewed her army, stretched
out in order of battle along the slope of the western hills; after which,
she proceeded to reconnoitre the beleaguered city, accompanied by the king
and the cardinal of Spain, together with a brilliant escort of the Spanish
chivalry. On the same day, a conference was opened with the enemy through
the _comendador_ of Leon; and an armistice arranged, to continue until the
old monarch, El Zagal, who then lay at Guadix, could be informed of the
real condition of the besieged, and his instructions be received,
determining the course to be adopted.

The alcayde of Baza represented to his master the low state to which the
garrison was reduced by the loss of lives and the failure of ammunition.
Still, he expressed such confidence in the spirit of his people, that he
undertook to make good his defence some time longer, provided any
reasonable expectation of succor could be afforded; otherwise, it would be
a mere waste of life, and must deprive him of such vantage ground as he
now possessed, for enforcing an honorable capitulation. The Moslem prince
acquiesced in the reasonableness of these representations. He paid a just
tribute to his brave kinsman Cidi Yahye's loyalty, and the gallantry of
his defence; but, confessing at the same time his own inability to relieve
him, authorized him to negotiate the best terms of surrender which he
could, for himself and garrison. [18]

A mutual desire of terminating the protracted hostilities infused a spirit
of moderation into both parties, which greatly facilitated the adjustment
of the articles. Ferdinand showed none of the arrogant bearing, which
marked his conduct towards the unfortunate people of Malaga, whether from
a conviction of its impolicy, or, as is more probable, because the city of
Baza was itself in a condition to assume a more imposing attitude. The
principal stipulations of the treaty were, that the foreign mercenaries
employed in the defence of the place should be allowed to march out with
the honors of war; that the city should be delivered up to the Christians;
but that the natives might have the choice of retiring with their personal
effects where they listed; or of occupying the suburbs, as subjects of the
Castilian crown, liable only to the same tribute which they paid to their
Moslem rulers, and secured in the enjoyment of their property, religion,
laws, and usages. [19]

On the fourth day of December, 1489, Ferdinand and Isabella took
possession of Baza, at the head of their legions, amid the ringing of
bells, the peals of artillery, and all the other usual accompaniments of
this triumphant ceremony; while the standard of the Cross, floating from
the ancient battlements of the city, proclaimed the triumph of the
Christian arms. The brave alcayde, Cidi Yahye, experienced a reception
from the sovereigns very different from that of the bold defender of
Malaga. He was loaded with civilities and presents; and these acts of
courtesy so won upon his heart, that he expressed a willingness to enter
into their service. "Isabella's compliments," says the Arabian historian,
dryly, "were repaid in more substantial coin."

Cidi Yahye was soon prevailed on to visit his royal kinsman El Zagal, at
Guadix, for the purpose of urging his submission to the Christian
sovereigns. In his interview with that prince, he represented the
fruitlessness of any attempt to withstand the accumulated forces of the
Spanish monarchies; that he would only see town after town pared away from
his territory, until no ground was left for him to stand on, and make
terms with the victor. He reminded him, that the baleful horoscope of
Abdallah had predicted the downfall of Granada, and that experience had
abundantly shown how vain it was to struggle against the tide of destiny.
The unfortunate monarch listened, says the Arabian annalist, without so
much as moving an eyelid; and, after a long and deep meditation, replied
with the resignation characteristic of the Moslems, "What Allah wills, he
brings to pass in his own way. Had he not decreed the fall of Granada,
this good sword might have saved it; but his will be done!" It was then
arranged, that the principal cities of Almeria, Guadix, and their
dependencies, constituting the domain of El Zagal, should be formally
surrendered by that prince to Ferdinand and Isabella, who should instantly
proceed at the head of their army to take possession of them. [20]

On the seventh day of December, therefore, the Spanish sovereigns, without
allowing themselves or their jaded troops any time for repose, marched out
of the gates of Baza, King Ferdinand occupying the centre, and the queen
the rear of the army. Their route lay across the most savage district of
the long sierra, which stretches towards Almeria; leading through many a
narrow pass, which a handful of resolute Moors, says an eye-witness, might
have made good against the whole Christian army, over mountains whose
peaks were lost in clouds, and valleys whose depths were never warmed by a
sun. The winds were exceedingly bleak, and the weather inclement, so that
men, as well as horses, exhausted by the fatigues of previous service,
were benumbed by the intense cold, and many of them frozen to death. Many
more, losing their way in the intricacies of the sierra, would have
experienced the same miserable fate, had it not been for the marquis of
Cadiz, whose tent was pitched on one of the loftiest hills, and who caused
beacon fires to be lighted around it, in order to guide the stragglers
back to their quarters.

At no great distance from Almeria, Ferdinand was met, conformably to the
previous arrangement, by El Zagal, escorted by a numerous body of Moslem
cavaliers. Ferdinand commanded his nobles to ride forward and receive the
Moorish prince. "His appearance," says Martyr, who was in the royal
retinue, "touched my soul with compassion; for, although a lawless
barbarian, he was a king, and had given signal proofs of heroism." El
Zagal, without waiting to receive the courtesies of the Spanish nobles,
threw himself from his horse, and advanced towards Ferdinand with the
design of kissing his hand; but the latter, rebuking his followers for
their "rusticity," in allowing such an act of humiliation in the
unfortunate monarch, prevailed on him to remount, and then rode by his
side towards Almeria. [21]

This city was one of the most precious jewels in the diadem of Granada. It
had amassed great wealth by its extensive commerce with Syria, Egypt, and
Africa; and its corsairs had for ages been the terror of the Catalan and
Pisan marine. It might have stood a siege as long as that of Baza, but it
was now surrendered without a blow, on conditions similar to those granted
to the former city. After allowing some days for the refreshment of their
wearied forces in this pleasant region, which, sheltered from the bleak
winds of the north by the sierra they had lately traversed, and fanned by
the gentle breezes of the Mediterranean, is compared by Martyr to the
gardens of the Hesperides, the sovereigns established a strong garrison
there, under the commander of Leon, and then, striking again into the
recesses of the mountains, marched on Guadix, which, after some opposition
on the part of the populace, threw open its gates to them. The surrender
of these principal cities was followed by that of all the subordinate
dependencies belonging to El Zagal's territory, comprehending a multitude
of hamlets scattered along the green sides of the mountain chain that
stretched from Granada to the coast. To all these places the same liberal
terms, in regard to personal rights and property, were secured, as to
Baza.

As an equivalent for these broad domains, the Moorish chief was placed in
possession of the _taha_, or district, of Andaraz, the vale of Alhaurin,
and half the salt-pits of Maleha, together with a considerable revenue in
money. He was, moreover, to receive the title of King of Andaraz, and to
render homage for his estates to the crown of Castile.

This shadow of royalty could not long amuse the mind of the unfortunate
prince. He pined away amid the scenes of his ancient empire; and, after
experiencing some insubordination on the part of his new vassals, he
determined to relinquish his petty principality, and withdraw for ever
from his native land. Having received a large sum of money, as an
indemnification for the entire cession of his territorial rights and
possessions to the Castilian crown, he passed over to Africa, where, it is
reported, he was plundered of his property by the barbarians, and
condemned to starve out the remainder of his days in miserable indigence.
[22]

The suspicious circumstances attending this prince's accession to the
throne throw a dark cloud over his fame, which would otherwise seem, at
least as far as his public life is concerned, to be unstained by any
opprobrious act. He possessed such energy, talent, and military science,
as, had he been fortunate enough to unite the Moorish nation under him by
an undisputed title, might have postponed the fall of Granada for many
years. As it was, these very talents, by dividing the state in his favor,
served only to precipitate its ruin.

The Spanish sovereigns, having accomplished the object of the campaign,
after stationing part of their forces on such points as would secure the
permanence of their conquests, returned with the remainder to Jaen, where
they disbanded the army on the 4th of January, 1490. The losses sustained
by the troops, during the whole period of their prolonged service, greatly
exceeded those of any former year, amounting to not less than twenty
thousand men, by far the larger portion of whom are said to have fallen
victims to diseases incident to severe and long-continued hardships and
exposure. [23]

Thus terminated the eighth year of the war of Granada, a year more
glorious to the Christian arms, and more important in its results, than
any of the preceding. During this period, an army of eighty thousand men
had kept the field, amid all the inclemencies of winter, for more than
seven months; an effort scarcely paralleled in these times, when both the
amount of levies, and period of service, were on the limited scale adapted
to the exigencies of feudal warfare. [24] Supplies for this immense host,
notwithstanding the severe famine of the preceding year, were punctually
furnished, in spite of every embarrassment presented by the want of
navigable rivers, and the interposition of a precipitous and pathless
sierra.

The history of this campaign is, indeed, most honorable to the courage,
constancy, and thorough discipline of the Spanish soldier, and to the
patriotism and general resources of the nation; but most of all to
Isabella. She it was, who fortified the timid councils of the leaders,
after the disasters of the garden, and encouraged them to persevere in the
siege. She procured all the supplies, constructed the roads, took charge
of the sick, and furnished, at no little personal sacrifice, the immense
sums demanded for carrying on the war; and when at last the hearts of the
soldiers were fainting under long-protracted sufferings, she appeared
among them, like some celestial visitant, to cheer their faltering
spirits, and inspire them with her own energy. The attachment to Isabella
seemed to be a pervading principle, which animated the whole nation by one
common impulse, impressing a unity of design on all its movements. This
attachment was imputable to her sex as well as character. The sympathy and
tender care, with which she regarded her people, naturally raised a
reciprocal sentiment in their bosoms. But when they beheld her directing
their counsels, sharing their fatigues and dangers, and displaying all the
comprehensive intellectual powers of the other sex, they looked up to her
as to some superior being, with feelings far more exalted than those of
mere loyalty. The chivalrous heart of the Spaniard did homage to her, as
to his tutelar saint; and she held a control over her people, such as no
man could have acquired in any age,--and probably no woman, in an age and
country less romantic.

        *       *       *       *       *

Pietro Martire, or, as he is called in English, Peter Martyr, so often
quoted in the present chapter, and who will constitute one of our best
authorities during the remainder of the history, was a native of Arona
(not of Anghiera, as commonly supposed), a place situated on the borders
of Lake Maggiore in Italy. (Mazzuchelli, Scrittori d'ltalia, (Brescia,
1753-63,) tom. ii. _voce_ Anghiera.) He was of noble Milanese extraction.
In 1477, at twenty-two years of age, he was sent to complete his education
at Rome, where he continued ten years, and formed an intimacy with the
most distinguished literary characters of that cultivated capital. In
1487, he was persuaded by the Castilian ambassador, the count of Tendilla,
to accompany him to Spain, where he was received with marked distinction
by the queen, who would have at once engaged him in the tuition of the
young nobility of the court, but, Martyr having expressed a preference of
a military life, she, with her usual delicacy, declined to press him on
the point. He was present, as we have seen, at the siege of Baza, and
continued with the army during the subsequent campaigns of the Moorish
war. Many passages of his correspondence, at this period, show a whimsical
mixture of self-complacency with a consciousness of the ludicrous figure
which he made in "exchanging the Muses for Mars."

At the close of the war, he entered the ecclesiastical profession, for
which he had been originally destined, and was persuaded to resume his
literary vocation. He opened his school at Valladolid, Saragossa,
Barcelona, Alcala de Henares, and other places; and it was thronged with
the principal young nobility from all parts of Spain, who, as he boasts in
one of his letters, drew their literary nourishment from him. "Suxerunt
mea literalia ubera Castellae principes fere omnes." His important
services were fully estimated by the queen, and, after her death, by
Ferdinand and Charles V., and he was recompensed with high ecclesiastical
preferment as well as civil dignities. He died about the year 1525, at the
age of seventy, and his remains were interred beneath a monument in the
cathedral church of Granada, of which he was prior.

Among Martyr's principal works is a treatise "De Legatione Babylonica,"
being an account of a visit to the sultan of Egypt, in 1501, for the
purpose of deprecating the retaliation with which he had menaced the
Christian residents in Palestine, for the injuries inflicted on the
Spanish Moslems. Peter Martyr conducted his negotiation with such address,
that he not only appeased the sultan's resentment, but obtained several
important immunities for his Christian subjects, in addition to those
previously enjoyed by them.

He also wrote an account of the discoveries of the New World, entitled "De
Rebus Oceanicis et Novo Orbe," (Coloniae, 1574,) a book largely consulted
and commended by subsequent historians. But the work of principal value in
our researches is his "Opus Epistolarum," being a collection of his
multifarious correspondence with the most considerable persons of his
time, whether in political or literary life. The letters are in Latin, and
extend from the year 1488 to the time of his death. Although not
conspicuous for elegance of diction, they are most valuable to the
historian, from the fidelity and general accuracy of the details, as well
as for the intelligent criticism in which they abound, for all which,
uncommon facilities were afforded by the writer's intimacy with the
leading actors, and the most recondite sources of information of the
period.

This high character is fully authorized by the judgments of those best
qualified to pronounce on their merits,--Martyr's own contemporaries.
Among these, Dr. Galindez de Carbajal, a counsellor of King Ferdinand, and
constantly employed in the highest concerns of state, commends these
epistles as "the work of a learned and upright man, well calculated to
throw light on the transactions of the period." (Anales, MS., prologo.)
Alvaro Gomez, another contemporary who survived Martyr, in the Life of
Ximenes, which he was selected to write by the University of Alcala,
declares, that "Martyr's Letters abundantly compensate by their fidelity
for the unpolished style in which they are written." (De Rebus Gestis,
fol. 6.) And John de Vergara, a name of the highest celebrity in the
literary annals of the period, expresses himself in the following emphatic
terms. "I know no record of the time more accurate and valuable. I myself
have often witnessed the promptness with which he put down things the
moment they occurred. I have sometimes seen him write one or two letters,
while they were setting the table. For, as he did not pay much attention
to style and mere finish of expression, his composition required but
little time, and experienced no interruption from his ordinary
avocations." (See his letter to Florian de Ocampo, apud Quintanilla y
Mendoza, Archetypo de Virtudes, Espejo de Prelados, el Venerable Padre y
Siervo de Dios, F. Francisco Ximenez de Cisneros, (Palermo, 1653,)
Archivo, p. 4.) This account of the precipitate manner in which the
epistles were composed, may help to explain the cause of the occasional
inconsistencies and anachronisms, that are to be found in them; and which
their author, had he been more patient of the labor of revision, would
doubtless have corrected. But he seems to have had little relish for this,
even in his more elaborate works, composed with a view to publication.
(See his own honest confessions in his book "De Rebus Oceanicis," dec. 8,
cap. 8, 9.) After all, the errors, such as they are, in his Epistles, may
probably be chiefly charged on the publisher. The first edition appeared
at Alcala de Henares, in 1530, about four years after the author's death.
It has now become exceedingly rare. The second and last, being the one
used in the present History, came out in a more beautiful form from the
Elzevir press, Amsterdam, in 1670, folio. Of this also but a small number
of copies were struck off. The learned editor takes much credit to himself
for having purified the work from many errors,