
been removed.  Now I have a fancy to leave it until later.  You
will not mind?"

"When you choose," Francis assented.  "Nothing will make any
difference.  We are past the days when fathers or even mothers
count seriously in the things that exist between two people like
you and me, who have felt life.  Whatever your father may be,
whatever he may turn out to be, you are the woman I love--you are
the woman who is going to be my wife."

She leaned towards him for a moment.

"You have an amazing gift," she whispered, "of saying just the
thing one loves to hear in the way that convinces."

Dinner was served to them in the smaller of the two dining-rooms,
an exquisite meal, made more wonderful still by the wine, which
Hedges himself dispensed with jealous care.  The presence of
servants, with its restraining influence upon conversation, was
not altogether unwelcome to Francis.  He and Margaret had had so
little opportunity for general conversation that to discuss other
than personal subjects in this pleasant, leisurely way had its
charm.  They spoke of music, of which she knew far more than he;
of foreign travel, where they met on common ground, for each had
only the tourist's knowledge of Europe, and each was anxious for
a more individual acquaintance with it.  She had tastes in books
which delighted him, a knowledge of games which promised a common
resource.  It was only whilst they were talking that he realised
with a shock how young she was, how few the years that lay
between her serene school-days and the tempestuous years of her
married life.  Her school-days in Naples were most redolent of
delightful memories.  She broke off once or twice into the
language, and he listened with delight to her soft accent.
Finally the time came when dessert was set upon the table.

"I have ordered coffee up in the little sitting-room again," she
said, a little shyly.  "Do you mind, or would you rather have it
here?"

"I much prefer it there," he assured her.

They sat before an open window, looking out upon some elm trees
in the boughs of which town sparrows twittered, and with a
background of roofs and chimneys.  Margaret's coffee was
untasted, even her cigarette lay unlit by her side.  There was a
touch of the old horror upon her face.  The fingers which he drew
into his were as cold as ice.

"You must have wondered sometimes," she began, "why I ever
married Oliver Hilditch."

"You were very young," he reminded her, with a little shiver,
"and very inexperienced.  I suppose he appealed to you in some
way or another."

"It wasn't that," she replied.  "He came to visit, me at
Eastbourne, and he certainly knew all the tricks of making
himself attractive and agreeable.  But he never won my heart--he
never even seriously took my fancy.  I married him because I
believed that by doing so I was obeying my father's wishes."

"Where was your father at the time, then?" Francis asked.

"In South America.  Oliver Hilditch was nothing more than a
discharged employé of his, discharged for dishonesty.  He had to
leave South America; within a week to escape prosecution, and on
the way to Europe he concocted the plot which very nearly ruined
my life.  He forged a letter from my father, begging me, if I
found it in any way possible,  to listen to Oliver Hilditch's
proposals, and hinting guardedly at a very serious financial
crisis which it was in his power to avert.  It never occurred to
me or to my chaperon to question his bona fides.  He had lived
under the same roof as my father, and knew all the intimate
details of his life.  He was very clever and I suppose I was a
fool.  I remember thinking I was doing quite a heroic action when
I went to the registrar with him.  What it led to you know."

There was a moment's throbbing silence.  Francis, notwithstanding
his deep pity, was conscious of an overwhelming sensation of
relief.  She had never cared for Oliver Hilditch!  She had never
pretended to!  He put the thought into words.

"You never cared for him, then?"

"I tried to," she replied simply, "but I found it impossible.
Within a week of our marriage I hated him."

Francis leaned back, his eyes half closed.  In his ears was the
sonorous roar of Piccadilly, the hooting of motor-cars, close at
hand the rustling of a faint wind in the elm trees.  It was a
wonderful moment.  The nightmare with which he had grappled so
fiercely, which he had overthrown, but whose ghost still
sometimes walked by his side, had lost its chief and most
poignant terror.  She had been tricked into the marriage.  She
had never cared or pretended to care.  The primal horror of that
tragedy which he had figured so often to himself, seemed to have
departed with the thought.  Its shadow must always remain, but in
time his conscience would acquiesce in the pronouncement of his
reason.  It was the hand of justice, not any human hand, which
had slain Oliver Hilditch.

"What did your father say when he discovered the truth?" he
asked.

"He did not know it until he came to England--on the day that
Oliver Hilditch was acquitted.  My husband always pretended that
he had a special mail bag going out to South America, so he took
away all the letters I wrote to my father, and he took care that
I received none except one or two which I know now were
forgeries.  He had friends in South America himself who helped
him--one a typist in my father's office, of whom I discovered
afterwards--but that really doesn't matter.  He was a wonderful
master of deceit."

Francis suddenly took her hands.  He had an overwhelming desire
to escape from the miasma of those ugly days, with their train of
attendant thoughts and speculations.

"Let us talk about ourselves," he whispered.

After that, the evening glided away incoherently, with no sustained
conversation, but with an increasing sense of well-being, of soothed
nerves and happiness, flaming seconds of passion, sign-posts of the
wonderful world which lay before them.  They sat in the cool silence
until the lights of the returning taxicabs and motor-cars became
more frequent, until the stars crept into the sky and the yellow
arc of the moon stole up over the tops of the houses.  Presently
they saw Sir Timothy's Rolls-Royce glide up to the front door below
and Sir Timothy himself enter the house, followed by another man
whose appearance was somehow familiar.

"Your father has changed his mind," Francis observed.

"Perhaps he has called for something," she suggested, "or he may
want to change his clothes before he goes down to the country."

Presently, however, there was a knock at the door.  Hedges made
his diffident appearance.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he began, addressing Francis.  "Sir
Timothy has been asking if you are still here.  He would be very
glad if you could spare him a moment in the library."

Francis rose at once to his feet.

"I was just leaving," he said.  "I will look in at the library
and see Sir Timothy on my way out."




CHAPTER XXV


Sir Timothy was standing upon the hearthrug of the very wonderful
apartment which he called his library.  By his side, on a black
marble pedestal, stood a small statue by Rodin.  Behind him, lit
by a shielded electric light, was a Vandyck, "A Portrait of a
Gentleman Unknown," and Francis, as he hesitated for a moment
upon the threshold, was struck by a sudden quaint likeness
between the face of the man in the picture, with his sunken
cheeks, his supercilious smile, his narrowed but powerful eyes,
to the face of Sir Timothy himself.  There was something of the
same spirit there--the lawless buccaneer, perhaps the criminal.

"You asked for me, Sir Timothy," Francis said.

Sir Timothy smiled.

"I was fortunate to find that you had not left," he answered.  "I
want you to be present at this forthcoming interview.  You are to
a certain extent in the game.  I thought it might amuse you."

Francis for the first time was aware that his host was not alone.
The room, with its odd splashes of light, was full of shadows,
and he saw now that in an easy-chair a little distance away from
Sir Timothy, a girl was seated.  Behind her, still standing, with
his hat in his hand, was a man.  Francis recognised them both
with surprise.

"Miss Hyslop!" he exclaimed.

She nodded a little defiantly.  Sir Timothy smiled.  "Ah!" he
said.  "You know the young lady, without a doubt.  Mr. Shopland,
your coadjutor in various works of philanthropy, you recognise,
of course?  I do not mind confessing to you, Ledsam, that I am
very much afraid of Mr. Shopland.  I am not at all sure that he
has not a warrant for my arrest in his pocket."

The detective came a little further into the light.  He was
attired in an ill-fitting dinner suit, a soft-fronted shirt of
unpleasing design, a collar of the wrong shape, and a badly
arranged tie.  He seemed, nevertheless, very pleased with
himself.

"I came on here, Mr. Ledsam, at Sir Timothy's desire," he said.
"I should like you to understand," he added, with a covert glance
of warning, "that I have been devoting every effort, during the
last few days, to the discovery of your friend's brother, Mr.
Reginald Wilmore."

"I am very glad to hear it," Francis replied shortly.  "The boy's
brother is one of my greatest friends."

"I have come to the conclusion," the detective pronounced, "that
the young man has been abducted, and is being detained at The
Walled House against his will for some illegal purpose."

"In other respects," Sir Timothy said, stretching out his hand
towards a cedar-wood box of cigarettes and selecting one, "this
man seems quite sane.  I have watched him very closely on the way
here, but I could see no signs of mental aberration.  I do not
think, at any rate, that he is dangerous."

"Sir Timothy," Shopland explained, with some anger in his tone,
"declines to take me seriously.  I can of course apply for a
search warrant, as I shall do, but it occurred to me to be one of
those cases which could be better dealt with, up to a certain
point, without recourse to the extremities of the law."

Sir Timothy, who had lit his cigarette, presented a wholly
undisturbed front.

"What I cannot quite understand," he said, "is the exact meaning
of that word 'abduction.'  Why should I be suspected of forcibly
removing a harmless and worthy young man from his regular
avocation, and, as you term it, abducting him, which I presume
means keeping him bound and gagged and imprisoned?  I do not eat
young men.  I do not even care for the society of young men.  I
am not naturally a gregarious person, but I think I would go so
far," he added, with a bow towards Miss Hyslop, "as to say that I
prefer the society of young women.  Satisfy my curiosity,
therefore, I beg of you.  For what reason do you suppose that I
have been concerned in the disappearance of this Mr. Reginald
Wilmore?"

Francis opened his lips, but Shopland, with a warning glance,
intervened.

"I work sometimes as a private person, sir," he said, "but it is
not to be forgotten that I am an officer of the law.  It is not
for us to state motives or even to afford explanations for our
behaviour.  I have watched your house at Hatch End, Sir Timothy,
and I have come to the conclusion that unless you are willing to
discuss this matter with me in a different spirit, I am justified
in asking the magistrates for a search warrant."

Sir Timothy sighed.

"Mr. Ledsam," he said, "I think, after all, that yours is the
most interesting end of this espionage business.  It is you who
search for motives, is it not, and pass them on to our more
automatic friend, who does the rest.  May I ask, have you
supplied the motive in the present case?"

"I have failed to discover any motive at all for Reginald
Wilmore's disappearance," Francis admitted, "nor have I at any
time been able to connect you with it.  Mr. Shopland's efforts,
however, although he has not seen well to take me into his entire
confidence, have my warmest approval and sympathy.  Although I
have accepted your very generous hospitality, Sir Timothy, I
think there has been no misunderstanding between us on this
matter."

"Most correct," Sir Timothy murmured.  "The trouble seems to be,
so far as I am concerned, that no one will tell me exactly of
what I am suspected?  I am to give Mr. Shopland the run of my
house, or he will make his appearance in the magistrate's court
and the evening papers will have placards with marvellous
headlines at my expense.  How will it run, Mr. Shopland--

  "'MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN.
    MILLIONAIRE'S HOUSE TO BE SEARCHED.'"

"We do not necessarily acquaint the press with our procedure,"
Shopland rejoined.

"Nevertheless," Sir Timothy continued, "I have known awkward
consequences arise from a search warrant too rashly applied for
or granted.  However, we are scarcely being polite.  So far, Miss
Hyslop has had very little to say."

The young lady was not altogether at her ease.

"I have had very little to say," she repeated, "because I did not
expect an audience."

Sir Timothy drew a letter from his pocket, opened it and adjusted
his eyeglass.

"Here we are," he said.  "After leaving my dinner-party tonight,
I called at the club and found this note.  Quite an inviting
little affair, you see young lady's writing, faint but very
delicate perfume, excellent stationery, Milan Court--the home of
adventures!"

  "DEAR SIR TIMOTHY BRAST:

  "Although I am not known to you personally, there is a
certain matter concerning which information has come into my
possession, which I should like to discuss with you.  Will
you call and see me as soon as possible?"
                              Sincerely yours,
                                 "DAISY HYSLOP."

"On receipt of this note," Sir Timothy continued, folding it up,
"I telephoned to the young lady and as I was fortunate enough to
find her at home I asked her to come here.  I then took the
liberty of introducing myself to Mr. Shopland, whose interest in
my evening has been unvarying, and whose uninvited company I have
been compelled to bear with, and suggested that, as I was on my
way back to Curzon Street, he had better come in and have a drink
and tell me what it was all about.  I arranged that he should
find Miss Hyslop here, and for a person of observation, which I
flatter myself to be, it was easy to discover the interesting
fact that Mr. Shopland and Miss Daisy Hyslop were not strangers.

"Now tell me, young lady," Sir Timothy went on.  "You see, I have
placed myself entirely in your hands.  Never mind the presence of
these two gentlemen. Tell me exactly what you wanted to say to me?"

"The matter is of no great importance," Miss Hyslop declared, "in
any case I should not discuss it before these two gentlemen."

"Don't go for a moment, please," Sir Timothy begged, as she
showed signs of departure.  "Listen.  I want to make a suggestion
to you.  There is an impression abroad that I was interested in
the two young men, Victor Bidlake and Fairfax, and that I knew
something of their quarrel.  You were an intimate friend of young
Bidlake's and presumably in his confidence.  It occurs to me,
therefore, that Mr. Shopland might very well have visited you in
search of information, linking me up with that unfortunate
affair.  Hence your little note to me."

Miss Hyslop rose to her feet.  She had the appearance of being
very angry indeed.

"Do you mean to insinuate--" she began.

"Madam, I insinuate nothing," Sir Timothy interrupted sternly.
"I only desire to suggest this.  You are a young lady whose
manner of living, I gather, is to a certain extent precarious.
It must have seemed to you a likelier source of profit to
withhold any information you might have to give at the
solicitation of a rich man, than to give it free gratis and for
nothing to a detective.  Now am I right?"

Miss Hyslop turned towards the door.  She had the air of a person
who had been entirely misunderstood.

"I wrote you out of kindness, Sir Timothy," she said in an
aggrieved manner.  "I shall have nothing more to say on the
matter--to you, at any rate."

Sir Timothy sighed.

"You see," he said, turning to the others, "I have lost my chance
of conciliating a witness.  My cheque-book remains locked up and
she has gone over to your side."

She turned around suddenly.

"You know that you made Bobby Fairfax kill Victor!" she almost
shouted.

Sir Timothy smiled in triumph.

"My dear young lady," he begged, "let us now be friends again.  I
desired to know your trump card.  For that reason I fear that I
have been a little brutal.  Now please don't hurry away.  You
have shot your bolt.  Already Mr. Shopland is turning the thing
over in his mind.  Was I lurking outside that night, Mr.
Shopland, to guide that young man's flabby arm?  He scarcely
seemed man enough for a murderer, did he, when he sat quaking on
that stool in Soto's Bar while Mr. Ledsam tortured him?  I beg
you again not to hurry, Miss Hyslop.  At any rate wait while my
servants fetch you a taxi.  It was clouding over when I came in.
We may even have a thunderstorm."

"I want to get out of this house," Daisy Hyslop declared.
"I think you are all horrible.  Mr. Ledsam did behave like
a gentleman when he came to see me, and Mr. Shopland asked
questions civilly.  But you--" she added, turning round to Sir
Timothy.

"Hush, my dear," he interrupted, holding out his hand.  "Don't
abuse me.  I am not angry with you--not in the least--and I am
going to prove it.  I shall oppose any search warrant which you
might apply for, Mr. Shopland, and I think I can oppose it with
success.  But I invite you two, Miss Hyslop and Mr. Ledsam, to my
party on Thursday night.  Once under my roof you shall have carte
blanche.  You can wander where you please, knock the walls for
secret hiding-places, stamp upon the floor for oubliettes.
Upstairs or down, the cellars and the lofts, the grounds and the
park, the whole of my domain is for you from midnight on Thursday
until four o'clock.  What do you say, Mr. Shopland?  Does my
offer satisfy you?"

The detective hesitated.

"I should prefer an invitation for myself," he declared bluntly.

Sir Timothy shook his head.

"Alas, my dear Mr. Shopland," he regretted, "that is impossible!
If I had only myself to consider I would not hesitate.
Personally I like you.  You amuse me more than any one I have met
for a long time.  But unfortunately I have my guests to consider!
You must be satisfied with Mr. Ledsam's report."

Shopland stroked his stubbly moustache.  It was obvious that he
was not in the least disconcerted.

"There are three days between now and then," he reflected.

"During those three days, of course," Sir Timothy said drily, "I
shall do my best to obliterate all traces of my various crimes.
Still, you are a clever detective, and you can give Mr. Ledsam a
few hints.  Take my advice.  You won't get that search warrant,
and if you apply for it none of you will be at my party."

"I accept," Shopland decided.

Sir Timothy crossed the room, unlocked the drawer of a
magnificent writing-table, and from a little packet drew out two
cards of invitation.  They were of small size but thick, and the
colour was a brilliant scarlet.  On one he wrote the name of
Francis, the other he filled in for Miss Hyslop.

"Miss Daisy Hyslop," he said, "shall we drink a glass of wine
together on Thursday evening, and will you decide that although,
perhaps, I am not a very satisfactory correspondent, I can at
least be an amiable host?"

The girl's eyes glistened.  She knew very well that the
possession of that card meant that for the next few days she
would be the envy of every one of her acquaintances.

"Thank you, Sir Timothy," she replied eagerly.  "You have quite
misunderstood me but I should like to come to your party."

Sir Timothy handed over the cards.  He rang for a servant and
bowed the others out.  Francis he detained for a moment.

"Our little duel, my friend, marches," he said.  "After Thursday
night we will speak again of this matter concerning Margaret.
You will know then what you have to face."

Margaret herself opened the door and looked in.

"What have those people been doing here?" she asked.  "What is
happening?"

Her father unlocked his drawer once more and drew out another of
the red cards.

"Margaret," he said, "Ledsam here has accepted my invitation for
Thursday night.  You have never, up till now, honoured me, nor
have I ever asked you.  I suggest that for the first part of the
entertainment, you give me the pleasure of your company."

"For the first part?"

"For the first part only," he repeated, as he wrote her name upon
the card.

"What about Francis?" she asked.  "Is he to stay all the time?"

Sir Timothy smiled.  He locked up his drawer and slipped the
key into his pocket.

"Ledsam and I," he said, "have promised one another a more
complete mutual understanding on Thursday night.  I may not be
able to part with him quite so soon."




CHAPTER XXVI


Bored and listless, like a tired and drooping lily in the arms of
her somewhat athletic partner, Lady Cynthia brought her dance to
a somewhat abrupt conclusion.

"There is some one in the lounge there to whom I wish to speak,"
she said.  "Perhaps you won't mind if we finish later.  The floor
seems sticky tonight, or my feet are heavy."

Her partner made the best of it, as Lady Cynthia's partners,
nowadays, generally had to.  She even dispensed with his escort,
and walked across the lounge of Claridge's alone.  Sir Timothy
rose to his feet.  He had been sitting in a corner, half
sheltered by a pillar, and had fancied himself unseen.

"What a relief!" she exclaimed.  "Another turn and I should have
fainted through sheer boredom."

"Yet you are quite wonderful dancing," he said.  "I have been
watching you for some time."

"It is one of my expiring efforts," she declared, sinking into
the chair by his side.  "You know whose party it is, of course?
Old Lady Torrington's.  Quite a boy and girl affair.  Twenty-four
of us had dinner in the worst corner of the room.  I can hear the
old lady ordering the dinner now.  Charles with a long menu.  She
shakes her head and taps him on the wrist with her fan.
'Monsieur Charles, I am a poor woman.  Give me what there is--a
small, plain dinner--and charge me at your minimum.'  The dinner
was very small and very plain, the champagne was horribly sweet.
My partner talked of a new drill, his last innings for the
Household Brigade, and a wonderful round of golf he played last
Sunday week.  I was turned on to dance with a man who asked me to
marry him, a year ago, and I could feel him vibrating with
gratitude, as he looked at me, that I had refused.  I suppose I
am very haggard."

"Does that matter, nowadays?" Sir Timothy asked.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I am afraid it does.  The bone and the hank of hair stuff is
played out.  The dairy-maid style is coming in.  Plump little
Fanny Torrington had a great success to-night, in one of those
simple white dresses, you know, which look like a sack with a
hole cut in the top.  What are you doing here by yourself?"

"I have an engagement in a few minutes," he explained.  "My car
is waiting now.  I looked in at the club to dine, found my
favourite table taken and nearly every man I ever disliked
sidling up to tell me that he hears I am giving a wonderful party
on Thursday.  I decided not to dine there, after all, and Charles
found me a corner here.  I am going in five minutes."

"Where to?" she asked.  "Can't I come with you?"

"I fear not," he answered.  "I am going down in the East End."

"Adventuring?"

"More or less," he admitted.

Lady Cynthia became beautiful.  She was always beautiful when she
was not tired.

"Take me with you, please," she begged.

He shook his head.

"Not to be done!"

"Don't shake your head like that," she enjoined, with a little
grimace.  "People will think I am trying to borrow money from you
and that you are refusing me!  Just take me with you some of the
way.  I shall scream if I go back into that dancing-room again."

Sir Timothy glanced at the clock.

"If there is any amusement to you in a rather dull drive
eastwards--"

She was on her feet with the soft, graceful speed which had made
her so much admired before her present listlessness had set in.

"I'll get my cloak," she said.

They drove along the Embankment, citywards.  The heat of the city
seemed to rise from the pavements.  The wall of the Embankment
was lined with people, leaning over to catch the languid breeze
that crept up with the tide.  They crossed the river and threaded
their way through a nightmare of squalid streets, where half-dressed
men and women hung from the top windows and were even to be seen
upon the roof, struggling for air.  The car at last pulled up at the
corner of a long street.

"I am going down here," Sir Timothy announced.  "I shall be gone
perhaps an hour.  The neighbourhood is not a fit one for you to
be left alone in.  I shall have time to send you home.  The car
will be back here for me by the time I require it."

"Where are you going?" she asked curiously.  "Why can't I come
with you?"

"I am going where I cannot take you," was the firm reply.  "I
told you that before I started."

"I shall sit here and wait for you," she decided.  "I rather like
the neighbourhood.  There is a gentleman in shirt-sleeves,
leaning over the rail of the roof there, who has his eye on me.
I believe I shall be a success here--which is more than I can say
of a little further westwards."

Sir Timothy smiled slightly.  He had exchanged his hat for a
tweed cap, and had put on a long dustcoat.

"There is no gauge by which you may know the measure of your
success," he said.  "If there were--"

"If there were?" she asked, leaning a little forward and looking
at him with a touch of the old brilliancy in her eyes.

"If there were," he said, with a little show of mock gallantry,
"a very jealously-guarded secret might escape me.  I think you
will be quite all right here," he continued.  "It is an open
thoroughfare, and I see two policemen at the corner.  Hassell, my
chauffeur, too, is a reliable fellow.  We will be back within the
hour."

"We?" she repeated.

He indicated a man who had silently made his appearance during
the conversation and was standing waiting on the sidewalk.

"Just a companion.  I do not advise you to wait.  If you insist
--au revoir!"

Lady Cynthia leaned back in a corner of the car.

Through half-closed eyes she watched the two men on their way
down the crowded thoroughfare--Sir Timothy tall, thin as a lath,
yet with a certain elegance of bearing; the man at his side
shorter, his hands thrust into the pockets of his coat, his
manner one of subservience.  She wondered languidly as to their
errand in this unsavoury neighbourhood.  Then she closed her eyes
altogether and wondered about many things.

Sir Timothy and his companion walked along the crowded, squalid
street without speech.  Presently they turned to the right and
stopped in front of a public-house of some pretensions.

"This is the place?" Sir Timothy asked.

"Yes, sir!"

Both men entered.  Sir Timothy made his way to the counter, his
companion to a table near, where he took a seat and ordered a
drink.  Sir Timothy did the same.  He was wedged in between a
heterogeneous crowd of shabby, depressed but apparently not
ill-natured men and women.  A man in a flannel shirt and pair of
shabby plaid trousers, which owed their precarious position to a
pair of worn-out braces, turned a beery eye upon the newcomer.

"I'll 'ave one with you, guvnor," he said.

"You shall indeed," Sir Timothy assented.

"Strike me lucky but I've touched first time!" the man exclaimed.
"I'll 'ave a double tot of whisky," he added, addressing the
barman.  "Will it run to it, guvnor?"

"Certainly," was the cordial reply, "and the same to your
friends, if you will answer a question."

"Troop up, lads," the man shouted.  "We've a toff 'ere.  He ain't
a 'tec--I know the cut of them.  Out with the question."

"Serve every one who desires it with drinks," Sir Timothy
directed the barman.  "My question is easily answered.  Is this
the place which a man whom I understand they call Billy the
Tanner frequents?"

The question appeared to produce an almost uncomfortable
sensation.  The enthusiasm for the free drinks, however, was only
slightly damped, and a small forest of grimy hands was extended
across the counter.

"Don't you ask no questions about 'im, guvnor," Sir Timothy's
immediate companion advised earnestly.  "He'd kill you as soon as
look at you.  When Billy the Tanner's in a quarrelsome mood, I've
see 'im empty this place and the whole street, quicker than if a
mad dog was loose.  'E's a fair and 'oly terror, 'e is.  'E about
killed 'is wife, three nights ago, but there ain't a living soul
as 'd dare to stand in the witness-box about it."

"Why don't the police take a hand in the matter if the man is
such a nuisance?" Sir Timothy asked.

His new acquaintance, gripping a thick tumbler of spirits and
water with a hand deeply encrusted with the stains of his trade,
scoffed.

"Police!  Why, 'e'd take on any three of the police round these
parts!" he declared.  "Police!  You tell one on 'em that Billy
the Tanner's on the rampage, and you'll see 'em 'op it.  Cheero,
guvnor and don't you get curious about Billy.  It ain't 'ealthy."

The swing-door was suddenly opened.  A touslehaired urchin shoved
his face in.

"Billy the Tanner's coming!" he shouted.  "Cave, all!  He's been
'avin' a rare to-do in Smith's Court."

Then a curious thing happened.  The little crowd at the bar
seemed somehow to melt away.  Half-a-dozen left precipitately by
the door.  Half-a-dozen more slunk through an inner entrance into
some room beyond.  Sir Timothy's neighbour set down his tumbler
empty.  He was the last to leave.

"If you're going to stop 'ere, guvnor," he begged fervently, "you
keep a still tongue in your 'ead.  Billy ain't particular who it
is.  'E'd kill 'is own mother, if 'e felt like it.  'E'll swing
some day, sure as I stand 'ere, but 'e'll do a bit more mischief
first.  'Op it with me, guvnor, or get inside there."

"Jim's right," the man behind the bar agreed.  "He's a very nasty
customer, Bill the Tanner, sir.  If he's coming down, I'd clear
out for a moment.  You can go in the guvnor's sitting-room, if
you like."

Sir Timothy shook his head.

"Billy the Tanner will not hurt me," he said.  "As a matter of
fact, I came down to see him."

His new friend hesitated no longer but made for the door through
which most of his companions had already disappeared.  The barman
leaned across the counter.

"Guvnor," he whispered hoarsely, "I don't know what the game is,
but I've given you the office.  Billy won't stand no truck from
any one.  He's a holy terror."

Sir Timothy nodded.

"I quite understand," he said.

There was a moment's ominous silence.  The barman withdrew to the
further end of his domain and busied himself cleaning some
glasses.  Suddenly the door was swung open.  A man entered whose
appearance alone was calculated to inspire a certain amount of
fear.  He was tall, but his height escaped notice by reason of
the extraordinary breadth of his shoulders.  He had a coarse and
vicious face, a crop of red hair, and an unshaven growth of the
same upon his face.  He wore what appeared to be the popular
dress in the neighbourhood--a pair of trousers suspended by a
belt, and a dirty flannel shirt.  His hands and even his chest,
where the shirt fell away, were discoloured by yellow stains.  He
looked around the room at first with an air of disappointment.
Then he caught sight of Sir Timothy standing at the counter, and
he brightened up.

"Where's all the crowd, Tom?" he asked the barman.

"Scared of you, I reckon," was the brief reply.  "There was
plenty here a few minutes ago."

"Scared of me, eh?" the other repeated, staring hard at Sir
Timothy.  "Did you 'ear that, guvnor?"

"I heard it," Sir Timothy acquiesced.

Billy the Tanner began to cheer up.  He walked all round this
stranger.

"A toff!  A big toff!  I'll 'ave a drink with you, guvnor," he
declared, with a note of incipient truculence in his tone.

The barman had already reached up for two glasses but Sir Timothy
shook his head.

"I think not," he said.

There was a moment's silence.  The barman made despairing signs
at Sir Timothy.  Billy the Tanner was moistening his lips with
his tongue.

"Why not?" he demanded.

"Because I don't know you and I don't like you," was the bland
reply.

Billy the Tanner wasted small time upon preliminaries.  He spat
upon his hands.

"I dunno you and I don't like you," he retorted.  "D'yer know wot
I'm going to do?"

"I have no idea," Sir Timothy confessed.

"I'm going to make you look so that your own mother wouldn't know
you--then I'm going to pitch you into the street," he added, with
an evil grin.  "That's wot we does with big toffs who come
'anging around 'ere."

"Do you?" Sir Timothy said calmly.  "Perhaps my friend may have
something to say about that."

The man of war was beginning to be worked up.

"Where's your big friend?" he shouted.  "Come on!  I'll take on
the two of you."

The man who had met Sir Timothy in the street had risen to his
feet.  He strolled up to the two.  Billy the Tanner eyed him
hungrily.

"The two of you, d'yer 'ear?" he shouted.  "And 'ere's just a
flick for the toff to be going on with!"

He delivered a sudden blow at Sir Timothy--a full, vicious,
jabbing blow which had laid many a man of the neighbourhood in
the gutter.  To his amazement, the chin at which he had aimed
seemed to have mysteriously disappeared.  Sir Timothy himself was
standing about half-a-yard further away.  Billy the Tanner was
too used to the game to be off his balance, but he received at
that moment the surprise of his life.  With the flat of his hand
full open, Sir Timothy struck him across the cheek such a blow
that it resounded through the place, a blow that brought both the
inner doors ajar, that brought peering eyes from every direction.
There was a moment's silence.  The man's fists were clenched now,
there was murder in his face.  Sir Timothy stepped on one side.

"I am not a fighter," he said coolly, leaning back against the
marble table.  "My friend will deal with you."

Billy the Tanner glared at the newcomer, who had glided in
between him and Sir Timothy.

"You can come and join in, too," he shouted to Sir Timothy.
"I'll knock your big head into pulp when I've done with this
little job!"

The bully knew in precisely thirty seconds what had happened to
him.  So did the crowds who pressed back into the place through
the inner door. So did the barman.  So did the landlord, who had
made a cautious appearance through a trapdoor.  Billy the Tanner,
for the first time in his life, was fighting a better man.  For
two years he had been the terror of the neighbourhood, and he
showed now that at least he had courage.  His smattering of
science, however, appeared only ridiculous.  Once, through sheer
strength and blundering force, he broke down his opponent's guard
and struck him in the place that had dispatched many a man
before--just over the heart.  His present opponent scarcely
winced, and Billy the Tanner paid the penalty then for his years
of bullying.  His antagonist paused for a single second, as though
unnerved by the blow.  Red fire seemed to stream from his eyes.
Then it was all over.  With a sickening crash, Billy the Tanner
went down upon the sanded floor.  It was no matter of a count for
him.  He lay there like a dead man, and from the two doors the
hidden spectators streamed into the room.  Sir Timothy laid some
money upon the table.

"This fellow insulted me and my friend," he said.  "You see, he
has paid the penalty.  If he misbehaves again, the same thing
will happen to him.  I am leaving some money here with your
barman.  I shall be glad for every one to drink with me.
Presently, perhaps, you had better send for an ambulance or a
doctor."

A little storm of enthusiastic excitement, evidenced for the most
part in expletives of a lurid note, covered the retreat of Sir
Timothy and his companion.  Out in the street a small crowd was
rushing towards the place.  A couple of policemen seemed to be
trying to make up their minds whether it was a fine night.  An
inspector hurried up to them.

"What's doing in 'The Rising Sun'?" he demanded sharply.

"Some one's giving Billy the Tanner a hiding," one of the
policemen replied.

"Honest?"

"A fair, ripe, knock-out hiding," was the emphatic confirmation.
"I looked in at the window."

The inspector grinned.

"I'm glad you had the sense not to interfere," he remarked.

Sir Timothy and his companion reached the car.  The latter took a
seat by the chauffeur.  Sir Timothy stepped in.  It struck him
that Lady Cynthia was a little breathless.  Her eyes, too, were
marvellously bright.  Wrapped around her knees was the
chauffeur's coat.

"Wonderful!" she declared.  "I haven't had such a wonderful five
minutes since I can remember!  You are a dear to have brought me,
Sir Timothy."

"What do you mean?" he demanded.

"Mean?" she laughed, as the car swung around and they glided
away.  "You didn't suppose I was going to sit here and watch you
depart upon a mysterious errand?  I borrowed your chauffeur's
coat and his cap, and slunk down after you.  I can assure you I
looked the most wonderful female apache you ever saw!  And I saw
the fight.  It was better than any of the prize fights I have
ever been to.  The real thing is better than the sham, isn't it?"

Sir Timothy leaned back in his place and remained silent.  Soon
they passed out of the land of tired people, of stalls decked out
with unsavoury provender, of foetid smells and unwholesome-looking
houses.  They passed through a street of silent warehouses on to
the Embankment.  A stronger breeze came down between the curving
arc of lights.

"You are not sorry that you brought me?" Lady Cynthia asked,
suddenly holding out her hand.

Sir Timothy took it in his.  For some reason or other, he made no
answer at all.




CHAPTER XXVII


The car stopped in front of the great house in Grosvenor Square.
Lady Cynthia turned to her companion.

"You must come in, please," she said.  "I insist, if it is only
for five minutes."

Sir Timothy followed her across the hall to a curved recess,
where the footman who had admitted them touched a bell, and a
small automatic lift came down.

"I am taking you to my own quarters," she explained.  "They are
rather cut off but I like them--especially on hot nights."

They glided up to the extreme top of the house.  She opened the
gates and led the way into what was practically an attic
sitting-room, decorated in black and white.  Wide-flung doors
opened onto the leads, where comfortable chairs, a small table and
an electric standard were arranged.  They were far above the tops
of the other houses, and looked into the green of the Park.

"This is where I bring very few people," she said.  "This is
where, even after my twenty-eight years of fraudulent life, I am
sometimes myself.  Wait."

There were feminine drinks and sandwiches arranged on the table.
She opened the cupboard of a small sideboard just inside the
sitting-room, however, and produced whisky and a syphon of soda.
There was a pail of ice in a cool corner.  From somewhere in the
distance came the music of violins floating through the window of
a house where a dance was in progress.  They could catch a
glimpse of the striped awning and the long line of waiting
vehicles with their twin eyes of fire.  She curled herself up on
a settee, flung a cushion at Sir Timothy, who was already
ensconced in a luxurious easy-chair, and with a tumbler of iced
sherbet in one hand, and a cigarette in the other, looked across
at him.

"I am not sure," she said, "that you have not to-night dispelled
an illusion."

"What manner of one?" he asked.

"Above all things," she went on, "I have always looked upon you
as wicked.  Most people do.  I think that is one reason why so
many of the women find you attractive.  I suppose it is why I
have found you attractive."

The smile was back upon his lips.  He bowed a little, and,
leaning forward, dropped a chunk of ice into his whisky and soda.

"Dear Lady Cynthia," he murmured, "don't tell me that I am going
to slip back in your estimation into some normal place."

"I am not quite sure," she said deliberately.  "I have always
looked upon you as a kind of amateur criminal, a man who loved
black things and dark ways.  You know how weary one gets of the
ordinary code of morals in these days.  You were such a
delightful antidote.  And now, I am not sure that you have not
shaken my faith in you."

"In what way?"

"You really seem to have been engaged to-night in a very sporting
and philanthropic enterprise.  I imagined you visiting some den
of vice and mixing as an equal with these terrible people who
never seem to cross the bridges.  I was perfectly thrilled when I
put on your chauffeur's coat and hat and followed you."

"The story of my little adventure is a simple one," Sir Timothy
said.  "I do not think it greatly affects my character.  I
believe, as a matter of fact, that I am just as wicked as you
would have me be, but I have friends in every walk of life, and,
as you know, I like to peer into the unexpected places.  I had
heard of this man Billy the Tanner.  He beats women, and has
established a perfect reign of terror in the court and
neighbourhood where he lives.  I fear I must agree with you that
there were some elements of morality--of conforming, at any rate,
to the recognised standards of justice--in what I did.  You know,
of course, that I am a great patron of every form of boxing,
fencing, and the various arts of self-defence and attack.  I just
took along one of the men from my gymnasium who I knew was equal
to the job, to give this fellow a lesson."

"He did it all right," Lady Cynthia murmured.

"But this is where I think I re-establish myself," Sir Timothy
continued, the peculiar nature of his smile reasserting itself.
"I did not do this for the sake of the neighbourhood.  I did not
do it from any sense of justice at all.  I did it to provide for
myself an enjoyable and delectable spectacle."

She smiled lazily.

"That does rather let you out," she admitted.  "However, on the
whole I am disappointed.  I am afraid that you are not so bad as
people think."

"People?" he repeated.  "Francis Ledsam, for instance--my son-in-law
in posse?"

"Francis Ledsam is one of those few rather brilliant persons who
have contrived to keep sane without becoming a prig," she
remarked.

"You know why?" he reminded her.  "Francis Ledsam has been a
tremendous worker.  It is work which keeps a man sane.
Brilliancy without the capacity for work drives people to the
madhouse."

"Where we are all going, I suppose," she sighed.

"Not you," he answered.  "You have just enough--I don't know what
we moderns call it--soul, shall I say?--to keep you from the
muddy ways."

She rose to her feet and leaned over the rails.  Sir Timothy
watched her thoughtfully.  Her figure, notwithstanding its
suggestions of delicate maturity, was still as slim as a young
girl's.  She was looking across the tree-tops towards an angry
bank of clouds--long, pencil-like streaks of black on a purple
background.  Below, in the street, a taxi passed with grinding of
brakes and noisy horn.  The rail against which she leaned looked
very flimsy.  Sir Timothy stretched out his hand and held her
arm.

"My nerves are going with my old age," he apologised.  "That
support seems too fragile."

She did not move.  The touch of his fingers grew firmer.

"We have entered upon an allegory," she murmured.  "You are
preserving me from the depths."

He laughed harshly.

"I!" he exclaimed, with a sudden touch of real and fierce
bitterness which brought the light dancing into her eyes and a
spot of colour to her cheeks.  "I preserve you!  Why, you can
never hear my name without thinking of sin, of crime of some
sort!  Do you seriously expect me to ever preserve any one from
anything?"

"You haven't made any very violent attempts to corrupt me," she
reminded him.

"Women don't enter much into my scheme of life," he declared.
"They played a great part once.  It was a woman, I think, who
first headed me off from the pastures of virtue."

"I know," she said softly.  "It was Margaret's mother."

His voice rang out like a pistol-shot.

"How did you know that?"

She turned away from the rail and threw herself back in her
chair.  His hand, however, she still kept in hers.

"Uncle Joe was Minister at Rio, you know, the year it all
happened," she explained.  "He told us the story years ago--how
you came back from Europe and found things were not just as they
should be between Margaret's mother and your partner, and how you
killed your partner."

His nostrils quivered a little.  One felt that the fire of
suffering had touched him again for a moment.

"Yes, I killed him," he admitted.  "That is part of my creed.
The men who defend their honour in the Law Courts are men I know
nothing of.  This man would have wronged me and robbed me of my
honour.  I bade him defend himself in any way he thought well.
It was his life or mine.  He was a poor fighter and I killed
him."

"And Margaret's mother died from the shock."

"She died soon afterwards."

The stars grew paler.  The passing vehicles, with their brilliant
lights, grew fewer and fewer.  The breeze which had been so
welcome at first, turned into a cold night wind.  She led the way
back into the room.

"I must go," he announced.

"You must go," she echoed, looking up at him.  "Good-bye!"

She was so close to him that his embrace, sudden and passionate
though it was, came about almost naturally.  She lay in his arms
with perfect content and raised her lips to his.

He broke away.  He was himself again, self-furious.

"Lady Cynthia," he said, "I owe you my most humble apologies.
The evil that is in me does not as a rule break out in this
direction."

"You dear, foolish person," she laughed, "that was good, not
evil.  You like me, don't you?  But I know you do.  There is one
crime you have always forgotten to develop--you haven't the
simplest idea in the world how to lie."

"Yes, I like you," he admitted.  "I have the most absurd feeling
for you that any man ever found it impossible to put into words.
We have indeed strayed outside the world of natural things," he
added.

"Why?" she murmured.  "I never felt more natural or normal in my
life.  I can assure you that I am loving it.  I feel like muslin
gowns and primroses and the scent of those first March violets
underneath a warm hedge where the sun comes sometimes.  I feel
very natural indeed, Sir Timothy."

"What about me?" he asked harshly.  "In three weeks' time I shall
be fifty years old."

She laughed softly.

"And in no time at all I shall be thirty--and entering upon a
terrible period of spinsterhood!"

"Spinsterhood!" he scoffed.  "Why, whenever the Society papers
are at a loss for a paragraph, they report a few more offers of
marriage to the ever-beautiful Lady Cynthia."

"Don't be sarcastic," she begged.  "I haven't yet had the offer
of marriage I want, anyhow."

"You'll get one you don't want in a moment," he warned her.

She made a little grimace.

"Don't!" she laughed nervously.  "How am I to preserve my
romantic notions of you as the emperor of the criminal world, if
you kiss me as you did just now--you kissed me rather well--and
then ask me to marry you?  It isn't your role.  You must light a
cigarette now, pat the back of my hand, and swagger off to
another of your haunts of vice."

"In other words, I am not to propose?" Sir Timothy said slowly.

"You see how decadent I am," she sighed.  "I want to toy with my
pleasures.  Besides, there's that scamp of a brother of mine
coming up to have a drink--I saw him get out of a taxi--and you
couldn't get it through in time, not with dignity."

The rattle of the lift as it stopped was plainly audible.  He
stooped and kissed her fingers.

"I fear some day," he murmured, "I shall be a great
disappointment to you."




CHAPTER XXVIII


There was a great deal of discussion, the following morning at
the Sheridan Club, during the gossipy half-hour which preceded
luncheon, concerning Sir Timothy Brast's forthcoming
entertainment.  One of the men, Philip Baker, who had been for
many years the editor of a famous sporting weekly, had a ticket
of invitation which he displayed to an envious little crowd.

"You fellows who get invitations to these parties," a famous
actor declared, "are the most elusive chaps on earth.  Half
London is dying to know what really goes on there, and yet, if by
any chance one comes across a prospective or retrospective guest,
he is as dumb about it as though it were some Masonic function.
We've got you this time, Baler, though.  We'll put you under the
inquisition on Friday morning."

"There a won't be any need," the other replied.  "One hears a
great deal of rot talked about these affairs, but so far as I
know, nothing very much out of the way goes on.  There are always
one or two pretty stiff fights in the gymnasium, and you get the
best variety show and supper in the world."

"Why is there this aroma of mystery hanging about the affair,
then?" some one asked.

"Well, for one or two reasons," Baker answered.  "One, no doubt,
is because Sir Timothy has a great idea of arranging the fights
himself, and the opponents actually don't know until the fight
begins whom they are meeting, and sometimes not even then.  There
has been some gossiping, too, about the rules, and the weight of
the gloves, but that I know, nothing about."

"And the rest of the show?" a younger member enquired.  "Is it
simply dancing and music and that sort of thing?"

"Just a variety entertainment," the proud possessor of the
scarlet-hued ticket declared.  "Sir Timothy always has something
up his sleeve.  Last year, for instance, he had those six African
girls over from Paris in that queer dance which they wouldn't
allow in London at all.  This time no one knows what is going to
happen.  The house, as you know, is absolutely surrounded by that
hideous stone wall, and from what I have heard, reporters who try
to get in aren't treated too kindly.  Here's Ledsam.  Very likely
he knows more about it."

"Ledsam," some one demanded, as Francis joined the group, "are
you going to Sir Timothy Brast's show to-morrow night?"

"I hope so," Francis replied, producing his strip of pasteboard.

"Ever been before?"

"Never."

"Do you know what sort of a show it's going to be?" the actor
enquired.

"Not the slightest idea.  I don't think any one does.  That's
rather a feature of the affair, isn't it?"

"It is the envious outsider who has never received an invitation,
like myself," some one remarked, "who probably spreads these
rumours, for one always hears it hinted that some disgraceful and
illegal exhibition is on tap there--a new sort of drugging party,
or some novel form of debauchery."

"I don't think," Francis said quietly, "that Sir Timothy is quite
that sort of man."

"Dash it all, what sort of man is he?" the actor demanded.  "They
tell me that financially he is utterly unscrupulous, although he
is rolling in money.  He has the most Mephistophelian expression
of any man I ever met--looks as though he'd set his heel on any
one's neck for the sport of it--and yet they say he has given at
least fifty thousand pounds to the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals, and that the whole of the park round that
estate of his down the river is full of lamed and decrepit beasts
which he has bought himself off the streets."

"The man must have an interesting personality," a novelist who
had joined the party observed.  "Of course, you know that he was
in prison for six months?"

"What for?" some one asked.

"Murder, only they brought it in manslaughter," was the terse
reply.  "He killed his partner.  It was many years ago, and no
one knows all the facts of the story."

"I am not holding a brief for Sir Timothy," Francis remarked, as
he sipped his cocktail.  "As a matter of fact, he and I are very
much at cross-purposes.  But as regards that particular instance,
I am not sure that he was very much to be blamed, any more than
you can blame any injured person who takes the law into his own
hands."

"He isn't a man I should care to have for an enemy," Baker
declared.

"Well, we'll shake the truth out of you fellows, somehow or
other," one of the group threatened.  "On Friday morning we are
going to have the whole truth--none of this Masonic secrecy which
Baker indulged in last year."

The men drifted in to luncheon and Francis, leaving them, took a
taxi on to the Ritz.  Looking about in the vestibule for
Margaret, he came face to face with Lady Cynthia.  She was
dressed with her usual distinction in a gown of yellow muslin and
a beflowered hat, and was the cynosure of a good many eyes.

"One would almost imagine, Lady Cynthia," he said, as they
exchanged greetings, "that you had found that elixir we were
talking about."

"Perhaps I have," she answered, smiling.  "Are you looking for
Margaret?  She is somewhere about.  We were just having a chat
when I was literally carried off by that terrible Lanchester
woman.  Let's find her."

They strolled up into the lounge.  Margaret came to meet them.
Her smile, as she gave Francis her left hand, transformed and
softened her whole appearance.

"You don't mind my having asked Cynthia to lunch with us?" she
said.  "I really couldn't get rid of the girl.  She came in to
see me this morning the most aggressively cheerful person I ever
knew.  I believe that she had an adventure last night.  All that
she will tell me is that she dined and danced at Claridge's with
a party of the dullest people in town."

A tall, familiar figure passed down the vestibule.  Lady Cynthia
gave a little start, and Francis, who happened to be watching
her, was amazed at her expression.

"Your father, Margaret!" she pointed out.  "I wonder if he is
lunching here."

"He told me that he was lunching somewhere with a South American
friend--one of his partners, I believe," Margaret replied.  "I
expect he is looking for him."

Sir Timothy caught sight of them, hesitated for a moment and came
slowly in their direction.

"Have you found your friend?" Margaret asked.

"The poor fellow is ill in bed," her father answered.  "I was
just regretting that I had sent the car away, or I should have
gone back to Hatch End."

"Stay and lunch with us," Lady Cynthia begged, a little
impetuously.

"I shall be very pleased if you will," Francis put in.  "I'll go
and tell the waiter to enlarge my table."

He hurried off.  On his way back, a page-boy touched him on the
arm.

"If you please, sir," he announced, "you are wanted on the
telephone."

"I?" Francis exclaimed.  "Some mistake, I should think.  Nobody
knows that I am here."

"Mr. Ledsam," the boy said.  "This way, sir."

Francis walked down the vestibule to the row of telephone boxes
at the further end.  The attendant who was standing outside,
indicated one of them and motioned the boy to go away.  Francis
stepped inside.  The man followed, closing the door behind him.

"I am asking your pardon, sir, for taking a great liberty," he
confessed.  "No one wants you on the telephone.  I wished to
speak to you."

Francis looked at him in surprise.  The man was evidently
agitated.  Somehow or other, his face was vaguely familiar.

"Who are you, and what do you want with me?" Francis asked.

"I was butler to Mr. Hilditch, sir," the man replied.  "I waited
upon you the night you dined there, sir--the night of Mr.
Hilditch's death."

"Well?"

"I have a revelation to make with regard to that night, sir," the
man went on, "which I should like to place in your hands.  It is
a very serious matter, and there are reasons why something must
be done about it at once.  Can I come and see you at your rooms,
sir?"

Francis studied the man for a moment intently.  He was evidently
agitated--evidently, too, in very bad health.  His furtive manner
was against him.  On the other hand, that might have arisen from
nervousness.

"I shall be in at half-past three, number 13 b, Clarges Street,"
Francis told him.

"I can get off for half-an-hour then, sir," the man replied.  "I
shall be very glad to come.  I must apologise for having troubled
you, sir."

Francis went slowly back to his trio of guests.  All the way down
the carpeted vestibule he was haunted by the grim shadow of a
spectral fear.  The frozen horror of that ghastly evening was
before him like a hateful tableau.  Hilditch's mocking words rang
in his cars: "My death is the one thing in the world which would
make my wife happy."  The Court scene, with all its gloomy
tragedy, rose before his eyes--only in the dock, instead of
Hilditch, he saw another!




CHAPTER XXIX


There were incidents connected with that luncheon which Francis
always remembered.  In the first place, Sir Timothy was a great
deal more silent than usual.  A certain vein of half-cynical,
half-amusing comment upon things and people of the moment, which
seemed, whenever he cared to exert himself, to flow from his lips
without effort, had deserted him.  He sat where the rather
brilliant light from the high windows fell upon his face, and
Francis wondered more than once whether there were not some
change there, perhaps some prescience of trouble to come, which
had subdued him and made him unusually thoughtful.  Another
slighter but more amusing feature of the luncheon was the number
of people who stopped to shake hands with Sir Timothy and made
more or less clumsy efforts to obtain an invitation to his coming
entertainment.  Sir Timothy's reply to these various hints was
barely cordial.  The most he ever promised was that he would
consult with his secretary and see if their numbers were already
full.  Lady Cynthia, as a somewhat blatant but discomfited Peer
of the Realm took his awkward leave of them, laughed softly.

"Of course, I think they all deserve what they get," she
declared.  "I never heard such brazen impudence in my life--from
people who ought to know better, too."

Lord Meadowson, a sporting peer, who was one of Sir Timothy's few
intimates, came over to the table.  He paid his respects to the
two ladies and Francis, and turned a little eagerly to Sir
Timothy.

"Well?" he asked.

Sir Timothy nodded.

"We shall be quite prepared for you," he said.  "Better bring
your cheque-book."

"Capital!" the other exclaimed.  "As I hadn't heard anything, I
was beginning to wonder whether you would be ready with your end
of the show."

"There will be no hitch so far as we are concerned," Sir Timothy
assured him.

"More mysteries?" Margaret enquired, as Meadowson departed with a
smile of satisfaction.

Her father shrugged his shoulders.

"Scarcely that," he replied.  "It is a little wager between Lord
Meadowson and myself which is to be settled to-morrow."

Lady Torrington, a fussy little woman, her hostess of the night
before, on her way down the room stopped and shook hands with
Lady Cynthia.

"Why, my dear," she exclaimed, "wherever did you vanish to last
night?  Claude told us all that, in the middle of a dance with
him, you excused yourself for a moment and he never saw you
again.  I quite expected to read in the papers this morning that
you had eloped."

"Precisely what I did," Lady Cynthia declared.  "The only trouble
was that my partner had had enough of me before the evening was
over, and deposited me once more in Grosvenor Square.  It is
really very humiliating," she went on meditatively, "how every
one always returns me."

"You talk such nonsense, Cynthia!" Lady Torrington exclaimed, a
little pettishly.  "However, you found your way home all right?"

"Quite safely, thank you.  I was going to write you a note this
afternoon.  I went away on an impulse.  All I can say is that I
am sorry.  Do forgive me."

"Certainly!" was the somewhat chilly reply.  "Somehow or other,
you seem to have earned the right to do exactly as you choose.
Some of my young men whom you had promised to dance with, were
disappointed, but after all, I suppose that doesn't matter."

"Not much," Lady Cynthia assented sweetly.  "I think a few
disappointments are good for most of the young men of to-day."

"What did you do last night, Cynthia?" Margaret asked her
presently, when Lady Torrington had passed on.

"I eloped with your father," Lady Cynthia confessed, smiling
across at Sir Timothy.  "We went for a little drive together and
I had a most amusing time.  The only trouble was, as I have been
complaining to that tiresome woman, he brought me home again."

"But where did you go to?" Margaret persisted.

"It was an errand of charity," Sir Timothy declared.

"It sounds very mysterious," Francis observed.  "Is that all we
are to be told?"

"I am afraid," Sir Timothy complained, "that very few people
sympathise with my hobbies or my prosecution of them.  That is
why such little incidents as last night's generally remain
undisclosed.  If you really wish to know what happened," he went
on, after a moment's pause, "I will tell you.  As you know, I
have a great many friends amongst the boxing fraternity, and I
happened to hear of a man down in the East End who has made
himself a terror to the whole community in which he lives.  I
took Peter Fields, my gymnasium instructor, down to the East End
last night, and Peter Fields--dealt with him."

"There was a fight?" Margaret exclaimed, with a little shudder.

"There was a fight," Sir Timothy repeated, "if you can call it
such.  Fields gave him some part of the punishment he deserved."

"And you were there, Cynthia?"

"I left Lady Cynthia in the car," Sir Timothy explained.  "She
most improperly bribed my chauffeur to lend her his coat and hat,
and followed me."

"You actually saw the fight, then?" Francis asked.

"I did," Lady Cynthia admitted.  "I saw it from the beginning to
the end."

Margaret looked across the table curiously.  It seemed to her
that her friend had turned a little paler.

"Did you like it?" she asked simply.

Lady Cynthia was silent for a moment.  She glanced at Sir
Timothy.  He, too, was waiting for her answer with evident
interest.

"I was thrilled," she acknowledged.  "That was the pleasurable
part of it I have been so, used to looking on at shows that bored
me, listening to conversations that wearied me, attempting
sensations which were repellent, that I just welcomed feeling,
when it came--feeling of any sort.  I was excited.  I forgot
everything else.  I was so fascinated that I could not look away.
But if you ask me whether I liked it, and I have to answer
truthfully, I hated it!  I felt nothing of the sort at the time,
but when I tried to sleep I found myself shivering.  It was
justice, I know, but it was ugly."

She watched Sir Timothy, as she made her confession, a little
wistfully.  He said nothing, but there was a very curious change
in his expression.  He smiled at her in an altogether unfamiliar
way.

"I suppose," she said, appealing to him, "that you are very
disappointed in me?"

"On the contrary," he answered, "I am delighted."

"You mean that?" she asked incredulously.

"I do," he declared.  "Companionship between our sexes is very
delightful so far as it goes, but the fundamental differences
between a man's outlook and tastes and a woman's should never be
bridged over.  I myself do not wish to learn to knit.  I do not
care for the womenkind in whom I am interested to appreciate and
understand fighting."

Margaret looked across the table in amazement.

"You are most surprising this morning, father," she declared.

"I am perhaps misunderstood," he sighed, "perhaps have acquired a
reputation for greater callousness than I possess.  Personally, I
love fighting.  I was born a fighter, and I should find no
happier way of ending my life than fighting, but, to put it
bluntly, fighting is a man's job."

"What about women going to see fights at the National Sporting
Club?" Lady Cynthia asked curiously.

"It is their own affair, but if you ask my opinion I do not
approve of it," Sir Timothy replied.  "I am indifferent upon the
subject, because I am indifferent upon the subject of the
generality of your sex," he added, with a little smile, "but I
simply hold that it is not a taste which should be developed in
women, and if they do develop it, it is at the expense of those
very qualities which make them most attractive."

Lady Cynthia took a cigarette from her case and leaned over to
Francis for a light.

"The world is changing," she declared.  "I cannot bear many more
shocks.  I fancied that I had written myself for ever out of Sir
Timothy's good books because of my confession just now."

He smiled across at her.  His words were words of courteous
badinage, but Lady Cynthia was conscious of a strange little
sense of pleasure.

"On the contrary," he assured her, "you found your way just a
little further into my heart."

"It seems to me, in a general sort of way," Margaret observed,
leaning back in her chair, "that you and my father are becoming
extraordinarily friendly, Cynthia."

"I am hopefully in love with your father," Lady Cynthia
confessed.  "It has been coming on for a long time.  I suspected
it the first time I ever met him.  Now I am absolutely certain."

"It's quite a new idea," Margaret remarked.  "Shall we like her
in the family, Francis?"

"No airs!" Lady Cynthia warned her.  "You two are not properly
engaged yet.  It may devolve upon me to give my consent."

"In that case," Francis replied, "I hope that we may at least
count upon your influence with Sir Timothy?"

"If you'll return the compliment and urge my suit with him," Lady
Cynthia laughed.  "I am afraid he can't quite make up his mind
about me, and I am so nice.  I haven't flirted nearly so much as
people think, and my instincts are really quite domestic."

"My position," Sir Timothy remarked, as he made an unsuccessful
attempt to possess himself of the bill which Francis had called
for, "is becoming a little difficult."

"Not really difficult," Lady Cynthia objected, "because the real
decision rests in your hands."

"Just listen to the woman!" Margaret exclaimed.  "Do you realise,
father, that Cynthia is making the most brazen advances to you?
And I was going to ask her if she'd like to come back to The
Sanctuary with us this evening!"

Lady Cynthia was suddenly eager.  Margaret glanced across at her
father.  Sir Timothy seemed almost imperceptibly to stiffen a
little.

"Margaret has carte blanche at The Sanctuary as regards her
visitors," he said.  "I am afraid that I shall be busy over at
The Walled House."

"But you'd come and dine with us?"

Sir Timothy hesitated.  An issue which had been looming in his
mind for many hours seemed to be suddenly joined.

"Please!" Lady Cynthia begged.

Sir Timothy followed the example of the others and rose to his
feet.  He avoided Lady Cynthia's eyes.  He seemed suddenly a
little tired.

"I will come and dine," he assented quietly.  "I am afraid that I
cannot promise more than that.  Lady Cynthia, as she knows, is
always welcome at The Sanctuary."




CHAPTER XXX


Punctual to his appointment that afternoon, the man who had
sought an interview with Francis was shown into the latter's
study in Clarges Street.

He wore an overcoat over his livery, and directly he entered the
room Francis was struck by his intense pallor.  He had been
trying feverishly to assure himself that all that the man
required was the usual sort of help, or assistance into a
hospital.  Yet there was something furtive in his visitor's
manner, something which suggested the bearer of a guilty secret.

"Please tell me what you want as quickly as you can," Francis
begged.  "I am due to start down into the country in a few
minutes."

"I won't keep you long, sir," the man replied.  "The matter is
rather a serious one."

"Are you ill?"

"Yes, sir!"

"You had better sit down."

The man relapsed gratefully into a chair.

"I'll leave out everything that doesn't count, sir," he said.
"I'll be as brief as I can.  I want you to go back to the night I
waited upon you at dinner the night Mr. Oliver Hilditch was found
dead.  You gave evidence.  The jury brought it in 'suicide.'  It
wasn't suicide at all, sir.  Mr. Hilditch was murdered."

The sense of horror against which he had been struggling during
the last few hours, crept once more through the whole being of
the man who listened.  He was face to face once more with that
terrible issue.  Had he perjured himself in vain?  Was the whole
structure of his dreams about to collapse, to fall about his
ears?

"By whom?" he faltered.

"By Sir Timothy Brast, sir."

Francis, who had been standing with his hand upon the table, felt
suddenly inclined to laugh.  Facile though his brain was, the
change of issues was too tremendous for him to readily assimilate
it.  He picked up a cigarette from an open box, with shaking
fingers, lit it, and threw himself into an easy-chair.  He was
all the time quite unconscious of what he was doing.

"Sir Timothy Brast?" he repeated.

"Yes, sir," the man reiterated.  "I wish to tell you the whole
story."

"I am listening," Francis assured him.

"That evening before dinner, Sir Timothy Brast called to see Mr.
Hilditch, and a very stormy interview took place.  I do not know
the rights of that, sir.  I only know that there was a fierce
quarrel.  Mrs. Hilditch came in and Sir Timothy left the house.
His last words to Mr. Hilditch were, 'You will hear from me again.'
As you know, sir--I mean as you remember, if you followed the
evidence--all the servants slept at the back of the house.  I
slept in the butler's room downstairs, next to the plate pantry.
I was awake when you left, sitting in my easy-chair, reading.
Ten minutes after you had left, there was a sound at the front
door as though some one had knocked with their knuckles.  I got
up, to open it but Mr. Hilditch was before me.  He admitted Sir
Timothy.  They went back into the library together.  It struck me
that Mr. Hilditch had had a great deal to drink, and there was a
queer look on Sir Timothy's face that I didn't understand.  I
stepped into the little room which communicates with the library
by folding doors.  There was a chink already between the two.  I
got a knife from the pantry and widened it until I could see
through.  I heard very little of the conversation but there was
no quarrel.  Mr. Hilditch took up the weapon which you know about,
sat in a chair and held it to his heart.  I heard him say something
like this.  'This ought to appeal to you, Sir Timothy.  You're a
specialist in this sort of thing.  One little touch, and there you
are.'  Mrs. Hilditch said something about putting it away.  My
master turned to Sir Timothy and said something in a low tone.
Suddenly Sir Timothy leaned over.  He caught hold of Mr. Hilditch's
hand which held the hilt of the dagger, and and--well, he just
drove it in, sir.  Then he stood away.  Mrs. Hilditch sprang up
and would have screamed, but Sir Timothy placed his hand over her
mouth.  In a moment I heard her say, 'What have you done?'  Sir
Timothy looked at Mr. Hilditch quite calmly.  'I have ridded the
world of a verminous creature,' he said.  My knees began to shake.
My nerves were always bad.  I crept back into my room, took off my
clothes and got into bed.  I had just put the light out when they
called for me."

Francis was himself again.  There was an immense relief, a joy in
his heart.  He had never for a single moment blamed Margaret, but
he had never for a single moment forgotten.  It was a closed
chapter but the stain was on its pages.  It was wonderful to tear
it out and scatter the fragments.

"I remember you at the inquest," he said.  "Your name is John
Walter."

"Yes, sir."

"Your evidence was very different."

"Yes, sir."

"You kept all this to yourself."

"I did, sir.  I thought it best."

"Tell me what has happened since?"

The man looked down at the table.

"I have always been a poor man, sir," he said.  "I have had bad
luck whenever I've made a try to start at anything.  I thought
there seemed a chance for me here.  I went to Sir Timothy and I
told him everything."

"Well?"

"Sir Timothy never turned a hair, sir.  When I had finished he
was very short with me, almost curt.  'You have behaved like a
man of sense, Walter,' he said.  'How much?'  I hesitated for
some time.  Then I could see he was getting impatient.  I doubled
what I had thought of first.  'A thousand pounds, sir,' I said.
Sir Timothy he went to a safe in the wall and he counted out a
thousand pounds in notes, there and then.  He brought them over
to me.  'Walter,' he said, 'there is your thousand pounds.  For
that sum I understand you promise to keep what you saw to
yourself?'  'Yes, sir,' I agreed.  'Take it, then,' he said, 'but
I want you to understand this.  There have been many attempts but
no one yet has ever succeeded in blackmailing me.  No one ever
will.  I give you this thousand pounds willingly.  It is what you
have asked for.  Never let me see your face again.  If you come
to me starving, it will be useless.  I shall not part with
another penny.'"

The man's simple way of telling his story, his speech, slow and
uneven on account of his faltering breath, seemed all to add to
the dramatic nature of his disclosure.  Francis found himself
sitting like a child who listens to a fairy story.

"And then?" he asked simply.

"I went off with the money," Walter continued, "and I had cruel
bad luck.  I put it into a pub.  I was robbed a little, I drank a
little, my wife wasn't any good.  I lost it all, sir.  I found
myself destitute.  I went back to Sir Timothy."

"Well?"

The man shifted his feet nervously.  He seemed to have come to
the difficult part of his story.

"Sir Timothy was as hard as nails," he said slowly.  "He saw me.
The moment I had finished, he rang the bell.  'Hedges,' he said
to the manservant who came in, 'this man has come here to try and
blackmail me.  Throw him out.  If he gives any trouble, send for
the police.  If he shows himself here again, send for the
police."'

"What happened then?"

"Well, I nearly blurted out the whole story," the man confessed,
"and then I remembered that wouldn't do me any good, so I went
away.  I got a job at the Ritz, but I was took ill a few days
afterwards.  I went to see a doctor.  From him I got my
death-warrant, sir."

"Is it heart?"

"It's heart, sir," the man acknowledged.  "The doctor told me I
might snuff out at any moment.  I can't live, anyway, for more
than a year.  I've got a little girl."

"Now just why have you come to see me?" Francis asked.

"For just this, sir," the man replied.  "Here's my account of
what happened," he went on, drawing some sheets of foolscap from
his pocket.  "It's written in my own hand and there are two
witnesses to my signature--one a clergyman, sir, and the other a
doctor, they thinking it was a will or something.  I had it in my
mind to send that to Scotland Yard, and then I remembered that I
hadn't a penny to leave my little girl.  I began to wonder--think
as meanly of me as you like, sir--how I could still make some
money out of this.  I happened to know that you were none too
friendly disposed towards Sir Timothy.  This confession of mine,
if it wouldn't mean hanging, would mean imprisonment for the rest
of his life.  You could make a better bargain with him than me,
sir.  Do you want to hold him in your power?  If so, you can have
this confession, all signed and everything, for two hundred
pounds, and as I live, sir, that two hundred pounds is to pay for
my funeral, and the balance for my little girl."

Francis took the papers and glanced them through.

"Supposing I buy this document from you," he said, "what is its
actual value?  You could write out another confession, get that
signed, and sell it to another of Sir Timothy's enemies, or you
could still go to Scotland Yard yourself."

"I shouldn't do that, sir, I assure you," the man declared
nervously, "not on my solemn oath.  I want simply to be quit of
the whole matter and have a little money for the child."

Francis considered for a moment.

"There is only one way I can see," he said, "to make this
document worth the money to me.  If you will sign a confession
that any statement you have made as to the death of Mr. Hilditch
is entirely imaginary, that you did not see Sir Timothy in the
house that night, that you went to bed at your usual time and
slept until you were awakened, and that you only made this charge
for the purpose of extorting money--if you will sign a confession
to that effect and give it me with these papers, I will pay you
the two hundred pounds and I will never use the confession unless
you repeat the charge."

"I'll do it, sir," the man assented.

Francis drew up a document, which his visitor read through and
signed.  Then he wrote out an open cheque.

"My servant shall take you to the bank in a taxi," he said.
"They would scarcely pay you this unless you were identified.  We
understand one another?"

"Perfectly, sir!"

Francis rang the bell, gave his servant the necessary orders, and
dismissed the two men.  Half-an-hour later, already changed into
flannels, he was on his way into the country.




CHAPTER XXXI


Sir Timothy walked that evening amongst the shadows.  Two hours
ago, the last of the workmen from the great furnishing and
catering establishments who undertook the management of his
famous entertainments, had ceased work for the day and driven off
in the motor-brakes hired to take them to the nearest town.  The
long, low wing whose use no one was able absolutely to divine,
was still full of animation, but the great reception-rooms and
stately hall were silent and empty.  In the gymnasium, an
enormous apartment as large as an ordinary concert hall, two or
three electricians were still at work, directed by the man who
had accompanied Sir Timothy to the East End on the night before.
The former crossed the room, his footsteps awaking strange
echoes.

"There will be seating for fifty, sir, and standing room for
fifty," he announced.  "I have had the ring slightly enlarged, as
you suggested, and the lighting is being altered so that the
start is exactly north and south."

Sir Timothy nodded thoughtfully.  The beautiful oak floor of the
place was littered with sawdust and shavings of wood.  Several
tiers of seats had been arranged on the space usually occupied by
swings, punching-balls and other artifices.  On a slightly raised
dais at the further end was an exact replica of a ring, corded
around and with sawdust upon the floor.  Upon the walls hung a
marvellous collection of weapons of every description, from the
modern rifle to the curved and terrible knife used by the most
savage of known tribes.

"How are things in the quarters?" Sir Timothy asked.

"Every one is well, sir.  Doctor Ballantyne arrived this
afternoon.  His report is excellent."

Sir Timothy nodded and turned away.  He looked into the great
gallery, its waxen floors shining with polish, ready for the feet
of the dancers on the morrow; looked into a beautiful concert-room,
with an organ that reached to the roof; glanced into the banquetting
hall, which extended far into the winter-garden; made his way up
the broad stairs, turned down a little corridor, unlocked a door and
passed into his own suite.  There was a small dining-room, a library,
a bedroom, and a bathroom fitted with every sort of device.  A
man-servant who had heard him enter, hurried from his own apartment
across the way.

"You are not dining here, sir? "he enquired.

Sir Timothy shook his head.

"No, I am dining late at The Sanctuary," he replied.  "I just
strolled over to see how the preparations were going on.  I shall
be sleeping over there, too.  Any prowlers?"

"Photographer brought some steps and photographed the horses in
the park from the top of the wall this afternoon, sir," the man
announced.  "Jenkins let him go.  Two or three pressmen sent in
their cards to you, but they were not allowed to pass the lodge."

Sir Timothy nodded.  Soon he left the house and crossed the park
towards The Sanctuary.  He was followed all the way by horses, of
which there were more than thirty in the great enclosure.  One
mare greeted him with a neigh of welcome and plodded slowly after
him.  Another pressed her nose against his shoulder and walked by
his side, with his hand upon her neck.  Sir Timothy looked a
little nervously around, but the park itself lay almost like a
deep green pool, unobserved, and invisible from anywhere except
the house itself.  He spoke a few words to each of the horses,
and, producing his key, passed through the door in the wall into
The Sanctuary garden, closing it quickly as he recognised Francis
standing under the cedar-tree.

"Has Lady Cynthia arrived yet?" he enquired.

"Not yet," Francis replied.  "Margaret will be here in a minute.
She told me to say that cocktails are here and that she has
ordered dinner served on the terrace."

"Excellent!" Sir Timothy murmured.  "Let me try one of your
cigarettes."

"Everything ready for the great show to-morrow night?" Francis
asked, as he served the cocktails.

"Everything is in order.  I wonder, really," Sir Timothy went on,
looking at Francis curiously, "what you expect to see?"

"I don't think we any of us have any definite idea," Francis
replied.  "We have all, of course, made our guesses."

"You will probably be disappointed," Sir Timothy warned him.
"For some reason or other--perhaps I have encouraged the idea
--people look upon my parties as mysterious orgies where things
take place which may not be spoken of.  They are right to some
extent.  I break the law, without a doubt, but I break it, I am
afraid, in rather a disappointing fashion."

A limousine covered in dust raced in at the open gates and came
to a standstill with a grinding of brakes.  Lady Cynthia stepped
lightly out and came across the lawn to them.

"I am hot and dusty and I was disagreeable," she confided, "but
the peace of this wonderful place, and the sight of that
beautiful silver thing have cheered me.  May I have a cocktail
before I go up to change?  I am a little late, I know," she went.
on, "but that wretched garden-party!  I thought my turn would
never come to receive my few words.  Mother would have been
broken-hearted if I had left without them.  What slaves we are to
royalty!  Now shall I hurry and change?  You men have the air of
wanting your dinner, and I am rather that way myself.  You look
tired, dear host," she added, a little hesitatingly.

"The heat," he answered.

"Why you ever leave this spot I can't imagine," she declared, as
she turned away, with a lingering glance around.  "It seems like
Paradise to come here and breathe this air.  London is like a
furnace."

The two men were alone again.  In Francis' pocket were the two
documents, which he had not yet made up his mind how to use.
Margaret came out to them presently, and he strolled away with
her towards the rose garden.

"Margaret," he said, "is it my fancy or has there been a change
in your father during the last few days?"

"There is a change of some sort," she admitted.  "I cannot
describe it.  I only know it is there.  He seems much more
thoughtful and less hard.  The change would be an improvement,"
she went on, "except that somehow or other it makes me feel
uneasy.  It is as though he were grappling with some crisis."

They came to a standstill at the end of the pergola, where the
masses of drooping roses made the air almost faint with their
perfume.  Margaret stretched out her hand, plucked a handful of
the creamy petals and held them against her cheek.  A thrush was
singing noisily.  A few yards away they heard the soft swish of
the river.

"Tell me," she asked curiously, "my father still speaks of you as
being in some respects an enemy.  What does he mean?"

"I will tell you exactly," he answered.  "The first time I ever
spoke to your father I was dining at Soto's.  I was talking to
Andrew Wilmore.  It was only a short time after you had told me
the story of Oliver Hilditch, a story which made me realise the
horror of spending one's life keeping men like that out of the
clutch of the law."

"Go on, please," she begged.

"Well, I was talking to Andrew.  I told him that in future I
should accept no case unless I not only believed in but was
convinced of the innocence of my client.  I added that I was at
war with crime.  I think, perhaps, I was so deeply in earnest
that I may have sounded a little flamboyant.  At any rate, your
father, who had overheard me, moved up to our table.  I think he
deduced from what I was saying that I was going to turn into a
sort of amateur crime-investigator, a person who I gathered later
was particularly obnoxious to him.  At any rate, he held out a
challenge.  'If you are a man who hates crime,' he said, or
something like it, 'I am one who loves it.'  He then went on to
prophesy that a crime would be committed close to where we were,
within an hour or so, and he challenged me to discover the
assassin.  That night Victor Bidlake was murdered just outside
Soto's."

"I remember!  Do you mean to tell me, then," Margaret went on,
with a little shiver, "that father told you this was going to
happen?"

"He certainly did," Francis replied.  "How his knowledge came I
am not sure--yet.  But he certainly knew."

"Have you anything else against him?" she asked.

"There was the disappearance of Andrew Wilmore's younger brother,
Reginald Wilmore.  I have no right to connect your father with
that, but Shopland, the Scotland Yard detective, who has charge
of the case, seems to believe that the young man was brought into
this neighbourhood, and some other indirect evidence which came
into my hands does seem to point towards your father being
concerned in the matter.  I appealed to him at once but he only
laughed at me.  That matter, too, remains a mystery."

Margaret was thoughtful for a moment.  Then she turned towards
the house.  They heard the soft ringing of the gong.

"Will you believe me when I tell you this?" she begged, as they
passed arm in arm down the pergola.  "I am terrified of my
father, though in many ways he is almost princely in his
generosity and in the broad view he takes of things.  Then his
kindness to all dumb animals, and the way they love him, is the
most amazing thing I ever knew.  If we were alone here to-night,
every animal in the house would be around his chair.  He has even
the cats locked up if we have visitors, so that no one shall see
it.  But I am quite honest when I tell you this--I do not believe
that my father has the ordinary outlook upon crime.  I believe
that there is a good deal more of the Old Testament about him
than the New."

"And this change which we were speaking about?" he asked,
lowering his voice as they reached the lawn.

"I believe that somehow or other the end is coming," she said.
"Francis, forgive me if I tell you this--or rather let me be
forgiven--but I know of one crime my father has committed, and it
makes me fear that there may be others.  And I have the feeling,
somehow, that the end is close at hand and that he feels it, just
as we might feel a thunder-storm in the air."

"I am going to prove the immemorial selfishness of my sex," he
whispered, as they drew near the little table.  "Promise me one
thing and I don't care if your father is Beelzebub himself.
Promise me that, whatever happens, it shall not make any
difference to us?"

She smiled at him very wonderfully, a smile which had to take the
place of words, for there were servants now within hearing, and
Sir Timothy himself was standing in the doorway.




CHAPTER XXXII


Lady Cynthia and Sir Timothy strolled after dinner to the bottom
of the lawn and watched the punt which Francis was propelling
turn from the stream into the river.

"Perfectly idyllic," Lady Cynthia sighed.

"We have another punt," her companion suggested.

She shook her head.

"I am one of those unselfish people," she declared, "whose idea
of repose is not only to rest oneself but to see others rest.  I
think these two chairs, plenty of cigarettes, and you in your
most gracious and discoursive mood, will fill my soul with
content."

"Your decision relieves my mind," her companion declared, as he
arranged the cushions behind her back.  "I rather fancy myself
with a pair of sculls, but a punt-pole never appealed to me.  We
will sit here and enjoy the peace.  To-morrow night you will find
it all disturbed--music and raucous voices and the stampede of my
poor, frightened horses in the park.  This is really a very
gracious silence."

"Are those two really going to marry?" Lady Cynthia asked, moving
her head lazily in the direction of the disappearing punt.

"I imagine so."

"And you?  What are you going to do then?"

"I am planning a long cruise.  I telegraphed to Southampton to-day.
I am having my yacht provisioned and prepared.  I think I shall go
over to South America."

She was silent for a moment.

"Alone?" she asked presently.

"I am always alone," he answered.

"That is rather a matter of your own choice, is it not?"

"Perhaps so.  I have always found it hard to make friends.
Enemies seem to be more in my line."

"I have not found it difficult to become your friend," she
reminded him.

"You are one of my few successes," he replied.

She leaned back with half-closed eyes.  There was nothing new
about their environment--the clusters of roses, the perfume of
the lilies in the rock garden, the even sweeter fragrance of the
trim border of mignonette.  Away in the distance, the night was
made momentarily ugly by the sound of a gramophone on a passing
launch, yet this discordant note seemed only to bring the perfection
of present things closer.  Back across the velvety lawn, through the
feathery strips of foliage, the lights of The Sanctuary, shaded and
subdued, were dimly visible.  The dining-table under the cedar-tree
had already been cleared.  Hedges, newly arrived from town to play
the major domo, was putting the finishing touches to a little array
of cool drinks.  And beyond, dimly seen but always there, the wall.
She turned to him suddenly.

"You build a wall around your life," she said, "like the wall
which encircles your mystery house.  Last night I thought that I
could see a little way over the top.  To-night you are different."

"If I am different," he answered quietly, "it is because, for the
first time for many years, I have found myself wondering whether
the life I had planned for myself, the things which I had planned
should make life for me, are the best.  I have had doubts--perhaps
I might say regrets."

"I should like to go to South America," Lady Cynthia declared
softly.

He finished the cigarette which he was smoking and deliberately
threw away the stump.  Then he turned and looked at her.  His
face seemed harder than ever, clean-cut, the face of a man able
to defy Fate, but she saw something in his eyes which she had
never seen before.

"Dear child," he said, "if I could roll back the years, if from
all my deeds of sin, as the world knows sin, I could cancel one,
there is nothing in the world would make me happier than to ask
you to come with me as my cherished companion to just whatever
part of the world you cared for.  But I have been playing pitch
and toss with fortune all my life, since the great trouble came
which changed me so much.  Even at this moment, the coin is in
the air which may decide my fate."

"You mean?" she ventured.

"I mean," he continued, "that after the event of which we spoke
last night, nothing in life has been more than an incident, and I
have striven to find distraction by means which none of you--not
even you, Lady Cynthia, with all your breadth of outlook and all
your craving after new things--would justify."

"Nothing that you may have done troubles me in the least," she
assured him.  "I do wish that you could put it all out of your
mind and let me help you to make a fresh start."

"I may put the thing itself out of my mind," he answered sadly,
"but the consequences remain."

"There is a consequence which threatens?" she asked.

He was silent for a moment.  When he spoke again, he had
recovered all his courage.

"There is the coin in the air of which I spoke," he replied.
"Let us forget it for a moment.  Of the minor things I will
make you my judge.  Ledsam and Margaret are coming to my party
to-morrow night.  You, too, shall be my guest.  Such secrets as
lie on the other side of that wall shall be yours.  After that,
if I survive your judgment of them, and if the coin which I have
thrown into the air comes, down to the tune I call--after that--I
will remind you of something which happened last night--of
something which, if I live for many years, I shall never forget."

She leaned towards him.  Her eyes were heavy with longing.  Her
arms, sweet and white in the dusky twilight, stole hesitatingly
out.

"Last night was so long ago.  Won't you take a later memory?"

Once again she lay in his arms, still and content.

As they crossed the lawn, an hour or so later, they were
confronted by Hedges--who hastened, in fact, to meet them.

"You are being asked for on the telephone, sir," he announced.
"It is a trunk call.  I have switched it through to the study."

"Any name?" Sir Timothy asked indifferently.

The man hesitated.  His eyes sought his master's respectfully but
charged with meaning.

"The person refuses to give his name, sir, but I fancied that I
recognised his voice.  I think it would be as well for you to
speak, sir."

Lady Cynthia sank into a chair.

"You shall go and answer your telephone call," she said, "and
leave Hedges to serve me with one of these strange drinks.  I
believe I see some of my favourite orangeade."

Sir Timothy made his way into the house and into the low,
oak-beamed study with its dark furniture and latticed windows.
The telephone bell began to ring again as he entered.  He took
up the receiver.

"Sir Timothy?" a rather hoarse, strained voice asked.

"I am speaking," Sir Timothy replied.  "Who is it?"

The man at the other end spoke as though he were out of breath.
Nevertheless, what he said was distinct enough.

"I am John Walter."

"Well?"

"I am just ringing you up," the voice went on, "to give you
what's called a sporting chance.  There's a boat from Southampton
midday tomorrow.  If you're wise, you'll catch it.  Or better
still, get off on your own yacht.  They carry a wireless now,
these big steamers.  Don't give a criminal much of a chance, does
it?"

"I am to understand, then," Sir Timothy said calmly, "that you
have laid your information?"

"I've parted with it and serve you right," was the bitter reply.
"I'm not saying that you're not a brave man, Sir Timothy, but
there's such a thing as being foolhardy, and that's what you are.
I wasn't asking you for half your fortune, nor even a dab of it,
but if your life wasn't worth a few hundred pounds--you, with all
that money--well, it wasn't worth saving.  So now you know.  I've
spent ninepence to give you a chance to hop it, because I met a
gent who has been good to me.  I've had a good dinner and I feel
merciful.  So there you are."

"Do I gather," Sir Timothy asked, in a perfectly level tone,
"that the deed is already done?"

"It's already done and done thoroughly," was the uncompromising
answer.  "I'm not ringing up to ask you to change your mind.  If
you were to offer me five thousand now, or ten, I couldn't stop
the bally thing.  You've a sporting chance of getting away if you
start at once.  That's all there is to it."

"You have nothing more to say?"

"Nothing!  Only I wish to God I'd never stepped into that Mayfair
agency.  I wish I'd never gone to Mrs. Hilditch's as a temporary
butler.  I wish I'd never seen any one of you!  That's all.  You
can go to Hell which way you like, only, if you take my advice,
you'll go by the way of South America.  The scaffold isn't every
man's fancy."

There was a burr of the instrument and then silence.  Sir Timothy
carefully replaced the receiver, paused on his way out of the
room to smell a great bowl of lavender, and passed back into the
garden.

"More applicants for invitations?" Lady Cynthia enquired lazily.

Her host smiled.

"Not exactly!  Although," he added, "as a matter of fact my party
would have been perhaps a little more complete with the presence
of the person to whom I have been speaking."

Lady Cynthia pointed to the stream, down which the punt was
slowly drifting.  The moon had gone behind a cloud, and Francis'
figure, as he stood there, was undefined and ghostly.  A thought
seemed to flash into her mind.  She leaned forward.

"Once," she said, "he told me that he was your enemy."

"The term is a little melodramatic," Sir Timothy protested.  "We
look at certain things from opposite points of view.  You see, my
prospective son-in-law, if ever he becomes that, represents the
law--the Law with a capital 'L'--which recognises no human errors
or weaknesses, and judges crime out of the musty books of the
law-givers of old.  He makes of the law a mechanical thing which
can neither bend nor give, and he judges humanity from the same
standpoint.  Yet at heart he is a good fellow and I like him."

"And you?"

"My weakness lies the other way," he confessed, "and my sympathy
is with those who do not fear to make their own laws."

She held out her hand, white and spectral in the momentary gloom.
At the other end of the lawn, Francis and Margaret were
disembarking from the punt.

"Does it sound too shockingly obvious," she murmured, "if I say
that I want to make you my law?"




CHAPTER XXXIII


It would have puzzled anybody, except, perhaps, Lady Cynthia
herself, to have detected the slightest alteration in Sir
Timothy's demeanour during the following day, when he made fitful
appearances at The Sanctuary, or at the dinner which was served a
little earlier than usual, before his final departure for the
scene of the festivities.  Once he paused in the act of helping
himself to some dish and listened for a moment to the sound of
voices in the hall, and when a taxicab drove up he set down his
glass and again betrayed some interest.

"The maid with my frock, thank heavens!" Lady Cynthia announced,
glancing out of the window.  "My last anxiety is removed.  I am
looking forward now to a wonderful night."

"You may very easily be disappointed," her host warned her.  "My
entertainments appeal more, as a rule, to men."

"Why don't you be thoroughly original and issue no invitations to
women at all?" Margaret enquired.

"For the same reason that you adorn your rooms and the dinner-table
with flowers," he answered.  "One needs them--as a relief.  Apart
from that, I am really proud of my dancing-room, and there again,
you see, your sex is necessary."

"We are flattered," Margaret declared, with a little bow.  "It
does seem queer to think that you should own what Cynthia's
cousin, Davy Hinton, once told me was the best floor in London,
and that I have never danced on it."

"Nor I," Lady Cynthia put in.  "There might have been some excuse
for not asking you, Margaret, but why an ultra-Bohemian like
myself has had to beg and plead for an invitation, I really
cannot imagine."

"You might find," Sir Timothy said, "you may even now--that some
of my men guests are not altogether to your liking."

"Quite content to take my risk," Lady Cynthia declared
cheerfully.  "The man with the best manners I ever met--it was at
one of Maggie's studio dances, too--was a bookmaker.  And a
retired prize-fighter brought me home once from an Albert Hall
dance."

"How did he behave?" Francis asked.

"He was wistful but restrained," Lady Cynthia replied, "quite the
gentleman, in fact."

"You encourage me to hope for the best," Sir Timothy said, rising
to his feet.  "You will excuse me now?  I have a few final
preparations to make."

"Are we to be allowed," Margaret enquired, "to come across the
park?"

"You would not find it convenient," her father assured her.  "You
had better order a car, say for ten o'clock.  Don't forget to
bring your cards of invitation, and find me immediately you
arrive.  I wish to direct your proceedings to some extent."

Lady Cynthia strolled across with him to the postern-gate and
stood by his side after he had opened it.  Several of the
animals, grazing in different parts of the park, pricked up their
ears at the sound.  An old mare came hobbling towards him; a
flea-bitten grey came trotting down the field, his head in the
air, neighing loudly.

"You waste a great deal of tenderness upon your animal friends,
dear host," she murmured.

He deliberately looked away from her.

"The reciprocation, at any rate, has its disadvantages," he
remarked, glancing a little disconsolately at the brown hairs
upon his coat-sleeve.  "I shall have to find another coat before
I can receive my guests--which is a further reason," he added,
"why I must hurry."

At the entrance to the great gates of The Walled House, two men
in livery were standing.  One of them examined with care the red
cards of invitation, and as soon as he was satisfied the gates
were opened by some unseen agency.  The moment the car had passed
through, they were closed again.

"Father seems thoroughly mediaeval over this business," Margaret
remarked, looking about her with interest.  "What a quaint
courtyard, too!  It really is quite Italian."

"It seems almost incredible that you have never been here!" Lady
Cynthia exclaimed.  "Curiosity would have brought me if I had had
to climb over the wall!"

"It does seem absurd in one way," Margaret agreed, "but, as a
matter of fact, my father's attitude about the place has always
rather set me against it.  I didn't feel that there was any
pleasure to be gained by coming here.  I won't tell you really
what I did think.  We must keep to our bargain.  We are not to
anticipate."

At the front entrance, under the covered portico, the white
tickets which they had received in exchange for their tickets of
invitation, were carefully collected by another man, who stopped
the car a few yards from the broad, curving steps.  After that,
there was no more suggestion of inhospitality.  The front doors,
which were of enormous size and height, seemed to have been
removed, and in the great domed hall beyond Sir Timothy was
already receiving his guests.  Being without wraps, the little
party made an immediate entrance.  Sir Timothy, who was talking
to one of the best-known of the foreign ambassadors, took a step
forward to meet them.

"Welcome," he said, "you, the most unique party, at least,
amongst my guests.  Prince, may I present you to my daughter,
Mrs. Hilditch?  Lady Cynthia Milton and Mr. Ledsam you know, I
believe."

"Your father has just been preparing me for this pleasure," the
Prince remarked, with a smile.  "I am delighted that his views as
regards these wonderful parties are becoming a little more--would
it be correct to say latitudinarian?  He has certainly been very
strict up to now."

"It is the first time I have been vouchsafed an invitation,"
Margaret confessed.

"You will find much to interest you," the Prince observed.  "For
myself, I love the sport of which your father is so noble a
patron.  That, without doubt, though, is a side of his
entertainment of which you will know nothing."

Sir Timothy, choosing a moment's respite from the inflowing
stream of guests, came once more across to them.

"I am going to leave you, my honoured guests from The Sanctuary,"
he said, with a faint smile, "to yourselves for a short time.  In
the room to your left, supper is being served.  In front is the
dancing-gallery.  To the right, as you see, is the lounge leading
into the winter-garden.  The gymnasium is closed until midnight.
Any other part of the place please explore at your leisure, but I
am going to ask you one thing.  I want you to meet me in a room
which I will show you, at a quarter to twelve."

He led them down one of the corridors which opened from the hall.
Before the first door on the right a man-servant was standing as
though on sentry duty.  Sir Timothy tapped the panel of the door
with his forefinger.

"This is my sanctum," he announced.  "I allow no one in here
without special permission.  I find it useful to have a place to
which one can come and rest quite quietly sometimes.  Williams
here has no other duty except to guard the entrance.  Williams,
you will allow this gentleman and these two ladies to pass in at
a quarter to twelve."

The man looked at them searchingly.

"Certainly, sir," he said.  "No one else?"

"No one, under any pretext."

Sir Timothy hurried back to the hall, and the others followed him
in more leisurely fashion.  They were all three full of
curiosity.

"I never dreamed," Margaret declared, as she looked around her,
"that I should ever find myself inside this house.  It has always
seemed to me like one great bluebeard's chamber.  If ever my
father spoke of it at all, it was as of a place which he intended
to convert into a sort of miniature Hell."

Sir Timothy leaned back to speak to them as they passed.

"You will find a friend over there, Ledsam," he said.

Wilmore turned around and faced them.  The two men exchanged
somewhat surprised greetings.

"No idea that I was coming until this afternoon," Wilmore
explained.  "I got my card at five o'clock, with a note from Sir
Timothy's secretary.  I am racking my brains to imagine what it
can mean."

"We're all a little addled," Francis confessed.  "Come and join
our tour of exploration.  You know Lady Cynthia.  Let me present
you to Mrs. Hilditch."

The introduction was effected and they all, strolled on together.
Margaret and Lady Cynthia led the way into the winter-garden, a
palace of glass, tall palms, banks of exotics, flowering shrubs
of every description, and a fountain, with wonderfully carved
water nymphs, brought with its basin from Italy.  Hidden in the
foliage, a small orchestra was playing very softly.  The
atmosphere of the place was languorous and delicious.

"Leave us here," Margaret insisted, with a little exclamation of
content.  "Neither Cynthia nor I want to go any further.  Come
back and fetch us in time for our appointment."

The two men wandered off.  The place was indeed a marvel of
architecture, a country house, of which only the shell remained,
modernised and made wonderful by the genius of a great architect.
The first room which they entered when they left the winter-garden,
was as large as a small restaurant, panelled in cream colour, with
a marvellous ceiling.  There were tables of various sizes laid for
supper, rows of champagne bottles in ice buckets, and servants
eagerly waiting for orders.  Already a sprinkling of the guests
had found their way here.  The two men crossed the floor to the
cocktail bar in the far corner, behind which a familiar face
grinned at them.  It was Jimmy, the bartender from Soto's, who
stood there with a wonderful array of bottles on a walnut table.

"If it were not a perfectly fatuous question, I should ask what
you were doing here, Jimmy?" Francis remarked.

"I always come for Sir Timothy's big parties, sir," Jimmy
explained.  "Your first visit, isn't it, sir?"

"My first," Francis assented.

"And mine," his companion echoed.

"What can I have the pleasure of making for you, sir?" the man
enquired.

"A difficult question," Francis admitted.  "It is barely an hour
and a half since we finished diner.  On the other hand, we are
certainly going to have some supper some time or other."

Jimmy nodded understandingly.

"Leave it to me, sir," he begged.

He served them with a foaming white concoction in tall glasses.
A genuine lime bobbed up and down in the liquid.

"Sir Timothy has the limes sent over from his own estate in South
America," Jimmy announced.  "You will find some things in that
drink you don't often taste."

The two men sipped their beverage and pronounced it delightful.
Jimmy leaned a little across the table.

"A big thing on to-night, isn't there, sir?" he asked cautiously.

"Is there?" Francis replied.  "You mean--?"

Jimmy motioned towards the open window, close to which the river
was flowing by.

"You going down, sir?"

Francis shook his head dubiously.

"Where to?"

The bartender looked with narrowed eyes from one to the other of
the two men.  Then he suddenly froze up.  Wilmore leaned a little
further over the impromptu counter.

"Jimmy," he asked, "what goes on here besides dancing and boxing
and gambling?"

"I never heard of any gambling," Jimmy answered, shaking his
head.  "Sir Timothy doesn't care about cards being played here at
all."

"What is the principal entertainment, then?" Francis demanded.
"The boxing?"

The bartender shook his head.

"No one understands very much about this house, sir," he said,
"except that it offers the most wonderful entertainment in
Europe.  That is for the guests to find out, though.  We servants
have to attend to our duties.  Will you let me mix you another
drink, sir?"

"No, thanks," Francis answered.  "The last was too good to spoil.
But you haven't answered my question, Jimmy.  What did you mean
when you asked if we were going down?"

Jimmy's face had become wooden.

"I meant nothing, sir," he said.  "Sorry I spoke."

The two men turned away.  They recognised many acquaintances in
the supper-room, and in the long gallery beyond, where many
couples were dancing now to the music of a wonderful orchestra.
By slow stages they made their way back to the winter-garden,
where Lady Cynthia and Margaret were still lost in admiration
of their surroundings.  They all walked the whole length of
the place.  Beyond, down a flight of stone steps, was a short,
paved way to the river.  A large electric launch was moored at
the quay.  The grounds outside were dimly illuminated with
cunningly-hidden electric lights shining through purple-coloured
globes into the cloudy darkness.  In the background, enveloping
the whole of the house and reaching to the river on either side,
the great wall loomed up, unlit, menacing almost in its suggestions.
A couple of loiterers stood within a few yards of them, looking
at the launch.

"There she is, ready for her errand, whatever it may be," one
said to the other curiously.  "We couldn't play the stowaway, I
suppose, could we?"

"Dicky Bell did that once," the other answered.  "Sir Timothy has
only one way with intruders.  He was thrown into the river and
jolly nearly drowned."

The two men passed out of hearing.

"I wonder what part the launch plays in the night's
entertainment," Wilmore observed.

Francis shrugged his shoulders.

"I have given up wondering," he said.  "Margaret, do you hear
that music?"

She laughed.

"Are we really to dance?" she murmured.  "Do you want to make a
girl of me again?"

"Well, I shouldn't be a magician, should I?" he answered.

They passed into the ballroom and danced for some time.  The
music was seductive and perfect, without any of the blatant notes
of too many of the popular orchestras.  The floor seemed to sway
under their feet.

"This is a new joy come back into life!" Margaret exclaimed, as
they rested for a moment.

"The first of many," he assured her.

They stood in the archway between the winter-garden and the
dancing-gallery, from which they could command a view of the
passing crowds.  Francis scanned the faces of the men and women
with intense interest.  Many of them were known to him by sight,
others were strangers.  There was a judge, a Cabinet Minister,
various members of the aristocracy, a sprinkling from the foreign
legations, and although the stage was not largely represented,
there were one or two well-known actors.  The guests seemed to
belong to no universal social order, but to Francis, watching
them almost eagerly, they all seemed to have something of the
same expression, the same slight air of weariness, of restless
and unsatisfied desires.

"I can't believe that the place is real, or that these people we
see are not supers," Margaret whispered.

"I feel every moment that a clock will strike and that it will
all fade away."

"I'm afraid I'm too material for such imaginings," Francis
replied, "but there is a quaintly artificial air about it all.
We must go and look for Wilmore and Lady Cynthia."

They turned back into the enervating atmosphere of the winter-garden,
and came suddenly face to face with Sir Timothy, who had escorted a
little party of his guests to see the fountain, and was now
returning alone.

"You have been dancing, I am glad to see," the latter observed.
"I trust that you are amusing yourselves?"

"Excellently, thank you," Francis replied.

"And so far," Sir Timothy went on, with a faint smile, "you find
my entertainment normal?  You have no question yet which you
would like to ask?"

"Only one--what do you do with your launch up the river on
moonless nights, Sir Timothy?"

Sir Timothy's momentary silence was full of ominous significance.

"Mr. Ledsam," he said, after a brief pause, "I have given you
almost carte blanche to explore my domains here.  Concerning the
launch, however, I think that you had better ask no questions at
present."

"You are using it to-night?" Francis persisted.

"Will you come and see, my venturesome guest?"

"With great pleasure," was the prompt reply.

Sir Timothy glanced at his watch.

"That," he said, "is one of the matters of which we will speak at
a quarter to twelve.  Meanwhile, let me show you something.  It
may amuse you as it has done me."

The three moved back towards one of the arched openings which led
into the ballroom.

"Observe, if you please," their host continued, "the third couple
who pass us.  The girl is wearing green--the very little that she
does wear.  Watch the man, and see if he reminds you of any one."

Francis did as he was bidden.  The girl was a well-known member
of the chorus of one of the principal musical comedies, and she
seemed to be thoroughly enjoying both the dance and her partner.
The latter appeared to be of a somewhat ordinary type, sallow,
with rather puffy cheeks, and eyes almost unnaturally dark.  He
danced vigorously and he talked all the time.  Something about
him was vaguely familiar to Francis, but he failed to place him.

"Notwithstanding all my precautions," Sir Timothy continued,
"there, fondly believing himself to be unnoticed, is an emissary
of Scotland Yard.  Really, of all the obvious, the dry-as-dust,
hunt-your-criminal-by-rule-of-three kind of people I ever met,
the class of detective to which this man belongs can produce the
most blatant examples."

"What are you going to do about him?" Francis asked.

Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders.

"I have not yet made up my mind," he said.  "I happen to know
that he has been laying his plans for weeks to get here,
frequenting Soto's and other restaurants, and scraping
acquaintances with some of my friends.  The Duke of Tadchester
brought him--won a few hundreds from him at baccarat, I suppose.
His grace will never again find these doors open to him."

Francis' attention had wandered.  He was gazing fixedly at the
man whom Sir Timothy had pointed out.

"You still do not fully recognise our friend," the latter
observed carelessly.  "He calls himself Manuel Loito, and he
professes to be a Cuban.  His real name I understood, when you
introduced us, to be Shopland."

"Great heavens, so it is!" Francis exclaimed.

"Let us leave him to his precarious pleasures," Sir Timothy
suggested.  "I am free for a few moments.  We will wander round
together."

They found Lady Cynthia and Wilmore, and looked in at the
supper-room, where people were waiting now for tables, a babel of
sound and gaiety.  The grounds and winter-gardens were crowded.
Their guide led the way to a large apartment on the other side of
the hall, from which the sound of music was proceeding.

"My theatre," he said.  "I wonder what is going on."

They passed inside.  There was a small stage with steps leading
down to the floor, easy-chairs and round tables everywhere, and
waiters serving refreshments.  A girl was dancing.  Sir Timothy
watched her approvingly.

"Nadia Ellistoff," he told them.  "She was in the last Russian
ballet, and she is waiting now for the rest of the company to
start again at Covent Garden.  You see, it is Metzger who plays
there.  They improvise.  Rather a wonderful performance, I
think."

They watched her breathlessly, a spirit in grey tulle, with great
black eyes now and then half closed.

"It is 'Wind before Dawn,'" Lady Cynthia whispered.  "I heard him
play it two days after he composed it, only there are variations
now.  She is the soul of the south wind."

The curtain went down amidst rapturous applause.  The dancer
had left the stage, floating away into some sort of
wonderfully-contrived nebulous background.  Within a few moments,
the principal comedian of the day was telling stories.  Sir Timothy
led them away.

"But how on earth do you get all these people?" Lady Cynthia
asked.

"It is arranged for me," Sir Timothy replied.  "I have an agent
who sees to it all.  Every man or woman who is asked to perform,
has a credit at Cartier's for a hundred guineas.  I pay no fees.
They select some little keepsake."

Margaret laughed softly.

"No wonder they call this place a sort of Arabian Nights!" she
declared.

"Well, there isn't much else for you to see," Sir Timothy said
thoughtfully.  "My gymnasium, which is one of the principal
features here, is closed just now for a special performance, of
which I will speak in a moment.  The concert hall I see they are
using for an overflow dance-room.  What you have seen, with the
grounds and the winter-garden, comprises almost everything."

They moved back through the hall with difficulty.  People were
now crowding in.  Lady Cynthia laughed softly.

"Why, it is like a gala night at the Opera, Sir Timothy!" she
exclaimed.  "How dare you pretend that this is Bohemia!"

"It has never been I who have described my entertainments," he
reminded her.  "They have been called everything--orgies,
debauches--everything you can think of.  I have never ventured
myself to describe them."

Their passage was difficult.  Every now and then Sir Timothy was
compelled to shake hands with some of his newly-arriving guests.
At last, however, they reached the little sitting-room.  Sir
Timothy turned back to Wilmore, who hesitated.

"You had better come in, too, Mr. Wilmore, if you will," he
invited.  "You were with Ledsam, the first day we met, and
something which I have to say now may interest you."

"If I am not intruding," Wilmore murmured.

They entered the room, still jealously guarded.  Sir Timothy
closed the door behind them.




CHAPTER XXXIV


The apartment was one belonging to the older portion of the
house, and had been, in fact, an annex to the great library.  The
walls were oak-panelled, and hung with a collection of old
prints.  There were some easy-chairs, a writing-table, and some
well-laden bookcases.  There were one or two bronze statues of
gladiators, a wonderful study of two wrestlers, no minor
ornaments.  Sir Timothy plunged at once into what he had to say.

"I promised you, Lady Cynthia, and you, Ledsam," he said, "to
divulge exactly the truth as regards these much-talked-of
entertainments here.  You, Margaret, under present circumstances,
are equally interested.  You, Wilmore, are Ledsam's friend, and
you happen to have an interest in this particular party.
Therefore, I am glad to have you all here together.  The
superficial part of my entertainment you have seen.  The part
which renders it necessary for me to keep closed doors, I shall
now explain.  I give prizes here of considerable value for boxing
contests which are conducted under rules of our own.  One is due
to take place in a very few minutes.  The contests vary in
character, but I may say that the chief officials of the National
Sporting Club are usually to be found here, only, of course, in
an unofficial capacity.  The difference between the contests
arranged by me, and others, is that my men are here to fight.
They use sometimes an illegal weight of glove and they sometimes
hurt one another.  If any two of the boxing fraternity have a
grudge against one another, and that often happens, they are
permitted here to fight it out, under the strictest control as
regards fairness, but practically without gloves at all.  You
heard of the accident, for instance, to Norris?  That happened in
my gymnasium.  He was knocked out by Burgin.  It was a wonderful
fight.

"However, I pass on.  There is another class of contest which
frequently takes place here.  Two boxers place themselves
unreservedly in my hands.  The details of the match are arranged
without their knowledge.  They come into the ring without knowing
whom they are going to fight.  Sometimes they never know, for my
men wear masks.  Then we have private matches.  There is one
to-night.  Lord Meadowson and I have a wager of a thousand
guineas.  He has brought to-night from the East End a boxer who,
according to the terms of our bet, has never before engaged in a
professional contest.  I have brought an amateur under the same
conditions.  The weight is within a few pounds the same, neither
has ever seen the other, only in this case the fight is with
regulation gloves and under Queensberry rules."

"Who is your amateur, Sir Timothy?" Wilmore asked harshly.

"Your brother, Mr. Wilmore," was the prompt reply.  "You shall
see the fight if I have your promise not to attempt in any way to
interfere."

Wilmore rose to his feet.

"Do you mean to tell me," he demanded, "that my brother has been
decoyed here, kept here against his will, to provide amusement
for your guests?"

"Mr. Wilmore, I beg that you will be reasonable," Sir Timothy
expostulated.  "I saw your brother box at his gymnasium in
Holborn.  My agent made him the offer of this fight.  One of my
conditions had to be that he came here to train and that whilst
he was here he held no communication whatever with the outside
world.  My trainer has ideas of his own and this he insists upon.
Your brother in the end acquiesced.  He was at first difficult to
deal with as regards this condition, and he did, in fact, I
believe, Mr. Ledsam, pay a visit to your office, with the object
of asking you to become an intermediary between him and his
relatives."

"He began a letter to me," Francis interposed, "and then
mysteriously disappeared."

"The mystery is easily explained," Sir Timothy continued.  "My
trainer, Roger Hagon, a Varsity blue, and the best heavyweight of
his year, occupies the chambers above yours.  He saw from the
window the arrival of Reginald Wilmore--which was according to
instructions, as they were to come down to Hatch End together
--went down the stairs to meet him, and, to cut a long story short,
fetched him out of your office, Ledsam, without allowing him to
finish his letter.  This absolute isolation seems a curious
condition, perhaps, but Hagon insists upon it, and I can assure
you that he knows his business.  The mystery, as you have termed
it, of his disappearance that morning, is that he went upstairs
with Hagon for several hours to undergo a medical examination,
instead of leaving the building forthwith."

"Queer thing I never thought of Hagon," Francis remarked.  "As a
matter of fact, I never see him in the Temple, and I thought that
he had left."

"May I ask," Wilmore intervened, "when my brother will be free to
return to his home?"

"To-night, directly the fight is over," Sir Timothy replied.
"Should he be successful, he will take with him a sum of money
sufficient to start him in any business he chooses to enter."

Wilmore frowned slightly.

"But surely," he protested, "that would make him a professional
pugilist?"

"Not at all," Sir Timothy replied.  "For one thing, the match is
a private one in a private house, and for another the money is a
gift.  There is no purse.  If your brother loses, he gets
nothing.  Will you see the fight, Mr. Wilmore?"

"Yes, I will see it," was the somewhat reluctant assent.

"You will give me your word not to interfere in any way?"

"I shall not interfere," Wilmore promised.  "If they are wearing
regulation gloves, and the weights are about equal, and the
conditions are what you say, it is the last thing I should wish
to do."

"Capital!" Sir Timothy exclaimed.  "Now to pass on.  There is one
other feature of my entertainments concerning which I have
something to say--a series of performances which takes place on
my launch at odd times.  There is one fixed for tonight.  I can
say little about it except that it is unusual.  I am going to ask
you, Lady Cynthia, and you, Ledsam, to witness it.  When you have
seen that, you know everything.  Then you and I, Ledsam, can call
one another's hands.  I shall have something else to say to you,
but that is outside the doings here."

"Are we to see the fight in the gymnasium?" Lady Cynthia
enquired.

Sir Timothy shook his head.

"I do not allow women there under any conditions," he said.  "You
and Margaret had better stay here whilst that takes place.  It
will probably be over in twenty minutes.  It will be time then
for us to find our way to the launch.  After that, if you have
any appetite, supper.  I will order some caviare sandwiches for
you," Sir Timothy went on, ringing the bell, "and some wine."

Lady Cynthia smiled.

"It is really a very wonderful party," she murmured.

Their host ushered the two men across the hall, now comparatively
deserted, for every one had settled down to his or her chosen
amusement--down a long passage, through a private door which he
unlocked with a Yale key, and into the gymnasium.  There were
less than fifty spectators seated around the ring, and Francis,
glancing at them hastily, fancied that he recognised nearly every
one of them.  There was Baker, a judge, a couple of actors, Lord
Meadowson, the most renowned of sporting peers, and a dozen who
followed in his footsteps; a little man who had once been amateur
champion in the bantam class, and who was now considered the
finest judge of boxing in the world; a theatrical manager, the
present amateur boxing champion, and a sprinkling of others.  Sir
Timothy and his companions took their chairs amidst a buzz of
welcome.  Almost immediately, the man who was in charge of the
proceedings, and whose name was Harrison, rose from his place.

"Gentlemen," he said, "this is a sporting contest, but one under
usual rules and usual conditions.  An amateur, who tips the
scales at twelve stone seven, who has never engaged in a boxing
contest in his life, is matched against a young man from a
different sphere of life, who intends to adopt the ring as his
profession, but who has never as yet fought in public.  Names,
gentlemen, as you know, are seldom mentioned here.  I will only
say that the first in the ring is the nominee of our friend and
host, Sir Timothy Brast; second comes the nominee of Lord
Meadowson."

Wilmore, notwithstanding his pre-knowledge, gave a little gasp.
The young man who stood now within a few yards of him, carelessly
swinging his gloves in his hand, was without a doubt his missing
brother.  He looked well and in the pink of condition; not only
well but entirely confident and at his ease.  His opponent, on
the other hand, a sturdier man, a few inches shorter, was nervous
and awkward, though none the less determined-looking.  Sir
Timothy rose and whispered in Harrison's ear.  The latter nodded.
In a very few moments the preliminaries were concluded, the fight
begun.




CHAPTER XXXV


Francis, glad of a moment or two's solitude in which to rearrange
his somewhat distorted sensations, found an empty space in the
stern of the launch and stood leaning over the rail.  His pulses
were still tingling with the indubitable excitement of the last
half-hour.  It was all there, even now, before his eyes like a
cinematograph picture--the duel between those two men, a duel of
knowledge, of strength, of science, of courage.  From beginning
to end, there had been no moment when Francis had felt that he
was looking on at what was in any way a degrading or immoral
spectacle.  Each man had fought in his way to win.  Young
Wilmore, graceful as a panther, with a keen, joyous desire of
youth for supremacy written in his face and in the dogged lines
of his mouth; the budding champion from the East End less
graceful, perhaps, but with even more strength and at least as
much determination, had certainly done his best to justify his
selection.  There were no points to be scored.  There had been no
undue feinting, no holding, few of the tricks of the professional
ring.  It was a fight to a finish, or until Harrison gave the
word.  And the better man had won.  But even that knock-out blow
which Reggie Wilmore had delivered after a wonderful feint, had
had little that was cruel in it.  There was something beautiful
almost in the strength and grace with which it had been
delivered--the breathless eagerness, the waiting, the end.

Francis felt a touch upon his arm and looked around.  A tall,
sad-faced looking woman, whom he had noticed with a vague sense
of familiarity in the dancing-room, was standing by his side.

"You have forgotten me, Mr. Ledsam," she said.

"For the moment," he admitted.

"I am Isabel Culbridge," she told him, watching his face.

"Lady Isabel?" Francis repeated incredulously.  "But surely--"

"Better not contradict me," she interrupted.  "Look again."

Francis looked again.

"I am very sorry," he said.  "It is some time, is it not, since
we met?"

She stood by his side, and for a few moments neither of them
spoke.  The little orchestra in the bows had commenced to play
softly, but there was none of the merriment amongst the handful
of men and women generally associated with a midnight river
picnic.  The moon was temporarily obscured, and it seemed as
though some artist's hand had so dealt with the few electric
lights that the men, with their pale faces and white shirt-fronts,
and the three or four women, most of them, as it happened, wearing
black, were like some ghostly figures in some sombre procession.
Only the music kept up the pretence that this was in any way an
ordinary excursion.  Amongst the human element there was an air
of tenseness which seemed rather to increase as they passed into
the shadowy reaches of the river.

"You have been ill, I am afraid?" Francis said tentatively.

"If you will," she answered, "but my illness is of the soul.  I
have become one of a type," she went on, "of which you will find
many examples here.  We started life thinking that it was clever
to despise the conventional and the known and to seek always for
the daring and the unknown.  New experiences were what we craved
for.  I married a wonderful husband.  I broke his heart and still
looked for new things.  I had a daughter of whom I was fond--she
ran away with my chauffeur and left me; a son whom I adored, and
he was killed in the war; a lover who told me that he worshipped
me, who spent every penny I had and made me the laughing-stock of
town.  I am still looking for new things."

"Sir Timothy's parties are generally supposed to provide them,"
Francis observed.

The woman shrugged her shoulders.

"So far they seem very much like anybody's else," she said.  "The
fight might have been amusing, but no women were allowed.  The
rest was very wonderful in its way, but that is all.  I am still
hoping for what we are to see downstairs."

They heard Sir Timothy's voice a few yards away, and turned to
look at him.  He had just come from below, and had paused
opposite a man who had been standing a little apart from the
others, one of the few who was wearing an overcoat, as though he
felt the cold.  In the background were the two servants who had
guarded the gangway.

"Mr. Manuel Loito," Sir Timothy said--"or shall I say Mr.
Shopland?--my invited guests are welcome.  I have only one method
of dealing with uninvited ones."

The two men suddenly stepped forward.  Shopland made no protest,
attempted no struggle.  They lifted him off his feet as though he
were a baby, and a moment later there was a splash in the water.
They threw a life-belt after him.

"Always humane, you see," Sir Timothy remarked, as he leaned over
the side.  "Ah!  I see that even in his overcoat our friend is
swimmer enough to reach the bank.  You find our methods harsh,
Ledsam?" he asked, turning a challenging gaze towards the latter.

Francis, who had been watching Shopland come to the surface,
shrugged his shoulders.  He delayed answering for a moment while
he watched the detective, disdaining the life-belt, swim to the
opposite shore.

"I suppose that under the circumstances," Francis said, "he was
prepared to take his risk."

"You should know best about that," Sir Timothy rejoined.  "I
wonder whether you would mind looking after Lady Cynthia?  I
shall be busy for a few moments."

Francis stepped across the deck towards where Lady Cynthia had
been sitting by her host's side.  They had passed into the mouth
of a tree-hung strip of the river.  The engine was suddenly shut
off.  A gong was sounded.  There was a murmur, almost a sob of
relief, as the little sprinkling of men and women rose hastily to
their feet and made their way towards the companion-way.
Downstairs, in the saloon, with its white satinwood panels and
rows of swing chairs, heavy curtains were drawn across the
portholes, all outside light was shut out from the place.  At the
further end, raised slightly from the floor, was a sanded circle.
Sir Timothy made his way to one of the pillars by its side and
turned around to face the little company of his guests.  His
voice, though it seemed scarcely raised above a whisper, was
extraordinarily clear and distinct.  Even Francis, who, with Lady
Cynthia, had found seats only just inside the door, could hear
every word he said.

"My friends," he began, "you have often before been my guests at
such small fights as we have been able to arrange in as
unorthodox a manner as possible between professional boxers.
There has been some novelty about them, but on the last occasion
I think it was generally observed that they had become a little
too professional, a little ultra-scientific.  There was something
which they lacked.  With that something I am hoping to provide
you to-night.  Thank you, Sir Edgar," he murmured, leaning down
towards his neighbour.

He held his cigarette in the flame of a match which the other had
kindled.  Francis, who was watching intently, was puzzled at the
expression with which for a moment, as he straightened himself,
Sir Timothy glanced down the room, seeking for Lady Cynthia's
eyes.  In a sense it was as though he were seeking for something
he needed--approbation, sympathy, understanding.

"Our hobby, as you know, has been reality," he continued.  "That
is what we have not always been able to achieve.  Tonight I offer
you reality.  There are two men here, one an East End coster, the
other an Italian until lately associated with an itinerant
vehicle of musical production.  These two men have not outlived
sensation as I fancy so many of us have.  They hate one another
to the death.  I forget their surnames, but Guiseppe has stolen
Jim's girl, is living with her at the present moment, and
proposes to keep her.  Jim has sworn to have the lives of both of
them.  Jim's career, in its way, is interesting to us.  He has
spent already six years in prison for manslaughter, and a year
for a brutal assault upon a constable.  Guiseppe was tried in his
native country for a particularly fiendish murder, and escaped,
owing, I believe, to some legal technicality.  That, however, has
nothing to do with the matter.  These men have sworn to fight to
the death, and the girl, I understand, is willing to return to
Jim if he should be successful, or to remain with Guiseppe if he
should show himself able to retain her.  The fight between these
men, my friends, has been transferred from Seven Dials for your
entertainment.  It will take place before you here and now."

There was a little shiver amongst the audience.  Francis, almost
to his horror, was unable to resist the feeling of queer
excitement which stole through his veins.  A few yards away, Lady
Isabel seemed to have become transformed.  She was leaning
forward in her chair, her eyes glowing, her lips parted,
rejuvenated, dehumanised.  Francis' immediate companion, however,
rather surprised him.  Her eyes were fixed intently upon Sir
Timothy's.  She seemed to have been weighing every word he had
spoken.  There was none of that hungry pleasure in her face
which shone from the other woman's and was reflected in the faces
of many of the others.  She seemed to be bracing herself for a
shock.  Sir Timothy looked over his shoulder towards the door
which opened upon the sanded space.

"You can bring your men along," he directed.

One of the attendants promptly made his appearance.  He was
holding tightly by the arm a man of apparently thirty years of
age, shabbily dressed, barefooted, without collar or necktie,
with a mass of black hair which looked as though it had escaped
the care of any barber for many weeks.  His complexion was
sallow; he had high cheekbones and a receding chin, which gave
him rather the appearance of a fox.  He shrank a little from the
lights as though they hurt his eyes, and all the time he looked
furtively back to the door, through which in a moment or two his
rival was presently escorted.  The latter was a young man of
stockier build, ill-conditioned, and with the brutal face of the
lowest of his class.  Two of his front teeth were missing, and
there was a livid mark on the side of his cheek.  He looked
neither to the right nor to the left.  His eyes were fixed upon
the other man, and they looked death.

"The gentleman who first appeared," Sir Timothy observed,
stepping up into the sanded space but still half facing the
audience, "is Guiseppe, the Lothario of this little act.  The
other is Jim, the wronged husband.  You know their story.  Now,
Jim," he added, turning towards the Englishman, "I put in your
trousers pocket these notes, two hundred pounds, you will
perceive.  I place in the trousers pocket of Guiseppe here notes
to the same amount.  I understand you have a little quarrel to
fight out.  The one who wins will naturally help himself to the
other's money, together with that other little reward which I
imagine was the first cause of your quarrel.  Now ... let them
go."

Sir Timothy resumed his seat and leaned back in leisurely
fashion.  The two attendants solemnly released their captives.
There was a moment's intense silence.  The two men seemed fencing
for position.  There was something stealthy and horrible about
their movements as they crept around one another.  Francis
realised what it was almost as the little sobbing breath from
those of the audience who still retained any emotion, showed him
that they, too, foresaw what was going to happen.  Both men had
drawn knives from their belts.  It was murder which had been let
loose.

Francis found himself almost immediately upon his feet.  His
whole being seemed crying out for interference.  Lady Cynthia's
death-white face and pleading eyes seemed like the echo of his
own passionate aversion to what was taking place.  Then he met
Sir Timothy's gaze across the room and he remembered his promise.
Under no conditions was he to protest or interfere.  He set his
teeth and resumed his seat.  The fight went on.  There were
little sobs and tremors of excitement, strange banks of silence.
Both men seemed out of condition.  The sound of their hoarse
breathing was easily heard against the curtain of spellbound
silence.  For a time their knives stabbed the empty air, but from
the first the end seemed certain.  The Englishman attacked
wildly.  His adversary waited his time, content with avoiding the
murderous blows struck at him, striving all the time to steal
underneath the other's guard.  And then, almost without warning,
it was all over.  Jim was on his back in a crumpled heap.  There
was a horrid stain upon his coat.  The other man was kneeling by
his side, hate, glaring out of his eyes, guiding all the time the
rising and falling of his knife.  There was one more shriek--then
silence only the sound of the victor's breathing as he rose
slowly from his ghastly task.  Sir Timothy rose to his feet and
waved his hand.  The curtain went down.

"On deck, if you please, ladies and gentlemen," he said calmly.

No one stirred.  A woman began to sob.  A fat, unhealthy-looking
man in front of Francis reeled over in a dead faint.  Two other
of the guests near had risen from their seats and were shouting
aimlessly like lunatics.  Even Francis was conscious of that
temporary imprisonment of the body due to his lacerated nerves.
Only the clinging of Lady Cynthia to his arm kept him from
rushing from the spot.

"You are faint?" he whispered hoarsely.

"Upstairs--air," she faltered.

They rose to their feet.  The sound of Sir Timothy's voice
reached them as they ascended the stairs.

"On deck, every one, if you please," he insisted.  "Refreshments
are being served there.  There are inquisitive people who watch
my launch, and it is inadvisable to remain here long."

People hurried out then as though their one desire was to escape
from the scene of the tragedy.  Lady Cynthia, still clinging to
Francis' arm, led him to the furthermost corner of the launch.
There were real tears in her eyes, her breath was coming in
little sobs.

"Oh, it was horrible!" she cried.  "Horrible!  Mr. Ledsam--I
can't help it--I never want to speak to Sir Timothy again!"

One final horror arrested for a moment the sound of voices.
There was a dull splash in the river.  Something had been thrown
overboard.  The orchestra began to play dance music.
Conversation suddenly burst out.  Every one was hysterical.  A
Peer of the Realm, red-eyed and shaking like an aspen leaf, was
drinking champagne out of the bottle.  Every one seemed to be
trying to outvie the other in loud conversation, in outrageous
mirth.  Lady Isabel, with a glass of champagne in her hand,
leaned back towards Francis.

"Well," she asked, "how are you feeling, Mr. Ledsam?"

"As though I had spent half-an-hour in Hell," he answered.

She screamed with laughter.

"Hear this man," she called out, "who will send any poor
ragamuffin to the gallows if his fee is large enough!  Of
course," she added, turning back to him, "I ought to remember you
are a normal person  and to-night's entertainment was not for
normal persons.  For myself I am grateful to Sir Timothy.  For a
few moments of this aching aftermath of life, I forgot."

Suddenly all the lights around the launch flamed out, the music
stopped.  Sir Timothy came up on deck.  On either side of him was
a man in ordinary dinner clothes.  The babel of voices ceased.
Everyone was oppressed by some vague likeness.  A breathless
silence ensued.

"Ladies and gentlemen," Sir Timothy said, and once more the smile
upon his lips assumed its most mocking curve, "let me introduce
you to the two artists who have given us to-night such a
realistic performance, Signor Guiseppe Elito and Signor Carlos
Marlini.  I had the good fortune," he went on, "to witness this
very marvellous performance in a small music-hall at Palermo, and
I was able to induce the two actors to pay us a visit over here.
Steward, these gentlemen will take a glass of champagne."

The two Sicilians raised their glasses and bowed expectantly to
the little company.  They received, however, a much greater
tribute to their performance than the applause which they had
been expecting.  There reigned everywhere a deadly, stupefied
silence.  Only a half-stifled sob broke from Lady Cynthia's lips
as she leaned over the rail, her face buried in her hands, her
whole frame shaking.




CHAPTER XXXVI


Francis and Margaret sat in the rose garden on the following
morning.  Their conversation was a little disjointed, as the
conversation of lovers in a secluded and beautiful spot should
be, but they came back often to the subject of Sir Timothy.

"If I have misunderstood your father," Francis, declared, "and I
admit that I have, it has been to some extent his own fault.  To
me he was always the deliberate scoffer against any code of
morals, a rebel against the law even if not a criminal in actual
deeds.  I honestly believed that The Walled House was the scene
of disreputable orgies, that your father was behind Fairfax in
that cold-blooded murder, and that he was responsible in some
sinister way for the disappearance of Reggie Wilmore.  Most of
these things seem to have been shams, like the fight last night."

She moved uneasily in her place.

"I am glad I did not see that," she said, with a shiver.

"I think," he went on, "that the reason why your father insisted
upon Lady Cynthia's and my presence there was that he meant it as
a sort of allegory.  Half the vices in life he claims are
unreal."

Margaret passed her arm through his and leaned a little towards
him.

"If you knew just one thing I have never told you," she confided,
"I think that you would feel sorry for him.  I do, more and more
every day, because in a way that one thing is my fault."

Notwithstanding the warm sunshine, she suddenly shivered.
Francis took her hands in his.  They were cold and lifeless.

"I know that one thing, dear," he told her quietly.

She looked at him stonily.  There was a questioning fear in her
eyes.

"You know--"

"I know that your fattier killed Oliver Hilditch."

She suddenly broke out into a stream of words.  There was passion
in her tone and in her eyes.  She was almost the accuser.

"My father was right, then!" she exclaimed.  "He told me this
morning that he believed that it was to you or to your friend at
Scotland Yard that Walter had told his story.  But you don't know
you don't know how terrible the temptation was how--you see I say
it quite coolly--how Oliver Hilditch deserved to die.  He was
trusted by my father in South America and he deceived him, he
forged the letters which induced me to marry him.  It was part of
his scheme of revenge.  This was the first time we had any of us
met since.  I told my father the truth that afternoon.  He knew
for the first time how my marriage came about.  My husband had
prayed me to keep silent.  I refused.  Then he became like a
devil.  We were there, we three, that night after you left, and
Francis, as I live, if my father had not killed him, I should
have!"

"There was a time when I believed that you had," he reminded her.
"I didn't behave like a pedagogic upholder of the letter of the
law then, did I?"

She drew closer to him.

"You were wonderful," she whispered.

"Dearest, your father has nothing to fear from me," he assured
her tenderly.  "On the contrary, I think that I can show him the
way to safety."

She rose impulsively to her feet.

"He will be here directly," she said.  "He promised to come
across at half-past twelve.  Let us go and meet him.  But,
Francis--"

For a single moment she crept into his arms.  Their lips met, her
eyes shone into his.  He held her away from him a moment later.
The change was amazing.  She was no longer a tired woman.  She
had become a girl again.  Her eyes were soft with happiness, the
little lines had gone from about her mouth, she walked with all
the spring of youth and happiness.

"It is marvellous," she whispered.  "I never dreamed that I
should ever be happy again."

They crossed the rustic bridge which led on to the lawn.  Lady
Cynthia came out of the house to meet them.  She showed no signs
of fatigue, but her eyes and her tone were full of anxiety.

"Margaret," she cried, "do you know that the hall is filled with
your father's luggage, and that the car is ordered to take him to
Southampton directly after lunch?"

Margaret and Francis exchanged glances.

"Sir Timothy may change his mind," the latter observed.  "I have
news for him directly he arrives."

On the other side of the wall they heard the whinnying of the old
mare, the sound of galloping feet from all directions.

"Here he comes!" Lady Cynthia exclaimed.  "I shall go and meet
him."

Francis laid his hand upon her arm.

"Let me have a word with him first," he begged.

She hesitated.

"You are not going to say anything--that will make him want to go
away?"

"I am going to tell him something which I think will keep him at
home."

Sir Timothy came through the postern-gate, a moment or two later.
He waved his hat and crossed the lawn in their direction.
Francis went alone to meet him and, as he drew near, was
conscious of a little shock.  His host, although he held himself
bravely, seemed to have aged in the night.

"I want one word with you, sir, in your study, please," Francis
said.

Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders and led the way.  He turned to
wave his hand once more to Margaret and Lady Cynthia, however,
and he looked with approval at the luncheon-table which a couple
of servants were laying under the cedar tree.

"Wonderful thing, these alfresco meals," he declared.  "I hope
Hedges won't forget the maraschino with the melons.  Come into my
den, Ledsam."

He led the way in courtly fashion.  He was the ideal host leading
a valued guest to his sanctum for a few moments' pleasant
conversation.  But when they arrived in the little beamed room
and the door was closed, his manner changed.  He looked
searchingly, almost challengingly at Francis.

"You have news for me?" he asked.

"Yes!" Francis answered.

Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders.  He threw himself a little
wearily into an easy-chair.  His hands strayed out towards a
cigarette box.  He selected one and lit it.

"I expected your friend, Mr. Shopland," he murmured.  "I hope he
is none the worse for his ducking."

"Shopland is a fool," Francis replied.  "He has nothing to do
with this affair, anyway.  I have something to give you, Sir
Timothy."

He took the two papers from his pocket and handed them over.

"I bought these from John Walter the day before yesterday," he
continued.  "I gave him two hundred pounds for them.  The money
was just in time.  He caught a steamer for Australia late in the
afternoon.  I had this wireless from him this morning."

Sir Timothy studied the two documents, read the wireless.  There
was little change in his face.  Only for a single moment his lips
quivered.

"What does this mean?" he asked, rising to his feet with the
documents in his hand.

"It means that those papers are yours to do what you like with.
I drafted the second one so that you should be absolutely secure
against any further attempt at blackmail.  As a matter of fact,
though, Walter is on his last legs.  I doubt whether he will live
to land in Australia."

"You know that I killed Oliver Hilditch?" Sir Timothy said, his
eyes fixed upon the other's.

"I know that you killed Oliver Hilditch," Francis repeated.  "If
I had been Margaret's father, I think that I should have done the
same."

Sir Timothy seemed suddenly very much younger.  The droop of his
lips was no longer pathetic.  There was a little humourous twitch
there.

"You, the great upholder of the law?" he murmured.

"I have heard the story of Oliver Hilditch's life," Francis
replied.  "I was partially responsible for saving him from the
gallows.  I repeat what I have said.  And if you will--"

He held out his hand.  Sir Timothy hesitated for one moment.
Instead of taking it, he laid his hand upon Francis' shoulder.

"Ledsam," he said, "we have thought wrong things of one another.
I thought you a prig, moral to your finger-tips with the morality
of the law and the small places.  Perhaps I was tempted for that
reason to give you a wrong impression of myself.  But you must
understand this.  Though I have had my standard and lived up to
it all my life, I am something of a black sheep.  A man stole my
wife.  I did not trouble the Law Courts.  I killed him."

"I have the blood of generations of lawyers in my veins," Francis
declared, "but I have read many a divorce case in which I think
it would have been better and finer if the two men had met as you
and that man met."

"I was born with the love of fighting in my bones," Sir Timothy
went on.  "In my younger days, I fought in every small war in the
southern hemisphere.  I fought, as you know, in our own war.  I
have loved to see men fight honestly and fairly."

"It is a man's hobby," Francis pronounced.

"I encouraged you deliberately to think," Sir Timothy went on,
"what half the world thinks that--my parties at The Walled House
were mysterious orgies of vice.  They have, as a matter of fact,
never been anything of the sort.  The tragedies which are
supposed to have taken place on my launch have been just as much
mock tragedies as last night's, only I have not previously chosen
to take the audiences into my confidence.  The greatest pugilists
in the world have fought in my gymnasium, often, if you will,
under illegal conditions, but there has never been a fight that
was not fair."

"I believe that," Francis said.

"And there is another matter for which I take some blame," Sir
Timothy went on, "the matter of Fairfax and Victor Bidlake.  They
were neither of them young men for whose loss the world is any
the worse.  Fairfax to some extent imposed upon me.  He was
brought to The Walled House by a friend who should have known
better.  He sought my confidence.  The story he told was exactly
that of the mock drama upon the launch.  Bidlake had taken his
wife.  He had no wish to appeal to the Courts.  He wished to
fight, a point of view with which I entirely sympathised.  I
arranged a fight between the two.  Bidlake funked it and never
turned up.  My advice to Fairfax was, whenever he met Bidlake, to
give him the soundest thrashing he could.  That night at Soto's I
caught sight of Fairfax some time before dinner.  He was talking
to the woman who had been his wife, and he had evidently been
drinking.  He drew me on one side.  'To-night,' he told me, 'I am
going to settle accounts with Bidlake.'  'Where?' I asked.
'Here,' he answered.  He went out to the theatre, I upstairs to
dine.  That was the extent of the knowledge I possessed which
enabled me to predict some unwonted happening that night.
Fairfax was a bedrugged and bedrunken decadent who had not the
courage afterwards to face what he had done.  That is all."

The hand slipped from Francis' shoulder.  Francis, with a smile,
held out his own.  They stood there for a moment with clasped
hands--a queer, detached moment, as it seemed to Francis, in a
life which during the last few months had been full of vivid
sensations.  From outside came the lazy sounds of the drowsy
summer morning--the distant humming of a mowing machine, the
drone of a reaper in the field beyond, the twittering of birds in
the trees, even the soft lapping of the stream against the stone
steps.  The man whose hand he was holding seemed to Francis to
have become somehow transformed.  It was as though he had dropped
a mask and were showing a more human, a more kindly self.
Francis wondered no longer at the halting gallop of the horses in
the field.

"You'll be good to Margaret?" Sir Timothy begged.  "She's had a
wretched time."

Francis smiled confidently.

"I'm going to make up for it, sir," he promised.  "And this South
American trip," he continued, as they turned towards the French
windows, "you'll call that off?"

Sir Timothy hesitated.

"I am not quite sure."

When they reached the garden, Lady Cynthia was alone.  She
scarcely glanced at Francis.  Her eyes were anxiously fixed upon
his companion.

"Margaret has gone in to make the cocktails herself," she
explained.  "We have both sworn off absinthe for the rest of our
lives, and we know Hedges can't be trusted to make one without."

"I'll go and help her," Francis declared.

Lady Cynthia passed her arm through Sir Timothy's.

"I want to know about South America," she begged.  "The sight of
those trunks worries me."

Sir Timothy's casual reply was obviously a subterfuge.  They
crossed the lawn and the rustic bridge, almost in silence,
passing underneath the pergola of roses to the sheltered garden
at the further end.  Then Lady Cynthia paused.

"You are not going to South America," she pleaded, "alone?"

Sir Timothy took her hands.

"My dear," he said, "listen, please, to my confession.  I am a
fraud.  I am not a purveyor of new sensations for a decadent
troop of weary, fashionable people.  I am a fraud sometimes even
to myself.  I have had good luck in material things. I have had
bad luck in the precious, the sentimental side of life.  It has
made something of an artificial character of me, on the surface
at any rate.  I am really a simple, elderly man who loves fresh
air, clean, honest things, games, and a healthy life.  I have no
ambitions except those connected with sport.  I don't even want
to climb to the topmost niches in the world of finance.  I think
you have looked at me through the wrong-coloured spectacles.  You
have had a whimsical fancy for a character which does not exist."

"What I have seen," Lady Cynthia answered, "I have seen through
no spectacles at all--with my own eyes.  But what I have seen,
even, does not count.  There is something else."

"I am within a few weeks of my fiftieth birthday," Sir Timothy
reminded her, "and you, I believe, are twenty-nine."

"My dear man," Lady Cynthia assured him fervently, "you are the
only person in the world who can keep me from feeling forty-nine."

"And your people--"

"Heavens!  My people, for the first time in their lives, will
count me a brilliant success," Lady Cynthia declared.  "You'll
probably have to lend dad money, and I shall be looked upon as
the fairy child who has restored the family fortunes."

Sir Timothy leaned a little towards her.

"Last of all," he said, and this time his voice was not quite so
steady, "are you really sure that you care for me, dear, because
I have loved you so long, and I have wanted love so badly, and it
is so hard to believe--"

It was the moment, it seemed to her, for which she had prayed.
She was in his arms, tired no longer, with all the splendid fire
of life in her love-lit eyes and throbbing pulses.  Around them
the bees were humming, and a soft summer breeze shook the roses
and brought little wafts of perfume from the carnation bed.

"There is nothing in life," Lady Cynthia murmured brokenly, "so
wonderful as this."

Francis and Margaret came out from the house, the former carrying
a silver tray.  They had spent a considerable time over their
task, but Lady Cynthia and Sir Timothy were still absent.  Hedges
followed them, a little worried.

"Shall I ring the gong, madam?" he asked Margaret.  "Cook has
taken such pains with her omelette."

"I think you had better, Hedges," Margaret assented.

The gong rang out--and rang again.  Presently Lady Cynthia and
Sir Timothy appeared upon the bridge and crossed the lawn.  They
were walking a little apart.  Lady Cynthia was looking down at
some roses which she had gathered.  Sir Timothy's unconcern
seemed a trifle overdone.  Margaret laughed very softly.

"A stepmother, Francis!" she whispered.  "Just fancy Cynthia as a
stepmother!"







End of Project Gutenberg's The Evil Shepherd, by E. Phillips Oppenheim





Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




EVOLUTION OF EXPRESSION

BY CHARLES WESLEY EMERSON

FOUNDER OF EMERSON COLLEGE OF ORATORY, BOSTON

A COMPILATION OF SELECTIONS ILLUSTRATING THE FOUR STAGES OF
DEVELOPMENT IN ART AS APPLIED TO ORATORY IN FOUR VOLUMES, WITH KEY
TO EACH CHAPTER

THIRTY-THIRD EDITION

VOLUME I--REVISED





TO MY STUDENTS Whose need has been my inspiration and whose
understanding my rich reward, these volumes are affectionately
DEDICATED





CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION
ANIMATION
ANALYSIS
SMOOTHNESS
VOLUME
FORMING THE ELEMENTS

CHAPTER I.

THE TEA-KETTLE AND THE CRICKET     Charles Dickens
THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN          Robert Browning
GROUP OF LYRICS:
  PIPPA PASSES                     Robert Browning
  THE SNOWDROP                     Alfred Tennyson
  THE THROSTLE                     Alfred Tennyson
  ONE MORNING, OH, SO EARLY           Jean Ingelow
FREEDOM                                John Ruskin
A LAUGHING CHORUS
THE CHEERFUL LOCKSMITH             Charles Dickens
HOME THOUGHTS FROM ABROAD          Robert Browning
LOCHINVAR                         Sir Walter Scott
THE POLISH WAR SONG              James G. Percival

CHAPTER II.

THE VILLAGE PREACHER              Oliver Goldsmith
TO THE DAISY                    William Wordsworth
PSALM XXIII                                  David
EXTRACT FROM EULOGY ON
 WENDELL PHILLIPS            George William Curtis
THE BROOK                          Alfred Tennyson
OLD AUNT MARY'S               James Whitcomb Riley

CHILD VERSE:
 MY SHADOW Robert Louis Stevenson
 THE SWING Robert Louis Stevenson
 THE LAMPLIGHTER Robert Louis Stevenson
WAITING John Burroughs

CHAPTER III.

 THE REVENGE Alfred Tennyson
 THE OCEAN Lord Byron
 SPARTACUS TO THE GLADIATORS
  AT CAPUA   Rev. Elijah Kellogg
 TELL TO HIS NATIVE MOUNTAINS, James Sheridan Knowles
 BATTLE HYMN Karl Theodor Korner
 SELF-RELIANCE Ralph Waldo Emerson
 ADAMS AND JEFFERSON Daniel Webster
 THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW Alfred Tennyson

SONNETS:

KEATS

WORDSWORTH

MILTON

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING
IS THERE FOR HONEST POVERTY Robert Burns

CHAPTER IV.

HAMLET TO THE PLAYERS William Shakespeare

THE BOY AND THE ANGEL Robert Browning

SPEECH AND SILENCE Thomas Carlyle
THE RICH MAN AND THE POOR
MAN Khemnitzer

GATHERING OF THE FAIRIES Joseph Rodman Drake

THE SONG OF THE RAIN Spectator

HEARTY READING Sidney Smith

IVRY Lord Macaulay

THE DAFFODILS William Wordsworth

CHEERFULNESS J. H. Friswell

APRIL IN THE HILLS Archibald Lampman





INTRODUCTION.

    Teach me, then,
    To fashion worlds in little, making form,
    As God does, one with spirit,--be the priest
    Who makes God into bread to feed the world.
    --Richard Hovey.

The revised edition of the "Evolution of Expression" is issued in
response to frequent requests from teachers and students for a
formulation of those principles upon which natural methods in the
teaching of expression are based. It is hoped that the brief
explanatory text introducing each chapter may aid teacher and
pupil to avoid arbitrary standards and haphazard efforts,
substituting in their place, psychological law. Growth in
expression is not a matter of chance; the teacher who understands
nature's laws and rests upon them, setting no limit to the
potentialities of his pupil, waits not in vain for results.

No printed text, however, can take the place of a discerning
teacher. A knowledge of the philosophy of education in expression
avails little without the ability to create the genial atmosphere
conducive to the development of the student. The teacher is the
gardener, his service--his full service--is to surround the young
plant with favorable conditions of light and soil and atmosphere;
then stand out of its way while it unfolds its full blossom and
final fruitage.

The tendency of modern education is towards the discovery and
perfection of methods. The thought of leading educators is turned
from the what to the how; to the development of systems of
progressive steps through which the pupil may be led to a
realization of himself. This trend is best shown in the
multiplicity and excellence of recent pedagogical treatises and in
the appearance of carefully graded and progressive text-books. The
ancients believed that their heroes were born of gods and
goddesses. They knew of no means by which the mind could be
developed to the compass of greatness. The ancient theory to
account for greatness was preternatural birth; the modern theory
is evolution. To-day the interest of the child is awakened, his
mind is aroused, and then led onward in regular steps.

The study of all forms of art, so far as methods are concerned,
should be progressive. For correct guidance in our search for the
best methods, we must understand the order of the development of
the human mind. A child, before he arrives at an age where he can
be taught definitely, is simply a little palpitating mass of
animation. Soon he begins to show an attraction toward surrounding
objects. Next he begins to show a greater attraction for some
things than for others. His hands clutch at and retain certain
objects. He now enters the period of development where he makes
selections, and thus is born the power of choice. Objects which,
at first, appeared to him as a mass now begin to stand out clearly
one from another; to become more and more differentiated, while
the child begins to separate and to compare. Thus the brain of the
child passes through the successive stages from simple animation
to attraction, to selection or choice, to separation or analysis.
This principle of evolution, operating along the same lines, is
found in the race as in the individual. In all man's work he has
but recorded his own life or evolution. All history, all
religions, all governments, all forms of art bring their testimony
to this truth, and in each the scholar may find these successive
stages of development.

In the age of Phidias the art of sculpture reached its maturity.
No race and no people have ever surpassed the consummate
achievements of that period. But this perfection was the result of
a process of evolution. There had been graduated steps, and those
same steps must to-day be taken in the education of the artist.
Art had passed into its second period before authentic Greek
history began. The first stage was shown in that nation so justly
called the "Mother of Arts and Sciences." In Egypt we find
probably the first real manifestations of mind in art forms. They
are colossal exhibitions of energy, such as the Temple of Thebes,
seven hundred feet in length, statues seventy feet tall, monuments
rearing their heads almost five hundred feet in air.

    "Those temples, palaces, and piles stupendous
    Of which the very ruins are tremendous."

To Assyria we turn in our search for the next step in the progress
of art. Here we find the artists making melodramatic efforts to
attract the attention and fascinate the mind with weird and
incongruous shapes of mongrel brutes and hydraheaded monsters.

Finding art at this point, the Greeks, true to their race
instinct, at once began to evolve from it higher forms. They soon
awoke to the perception that beauty itself is the true principle
of fascination. Reducing their new theory to practise, the Greek
artists turned their attention to perfecting the details of the
art they had borrowed. To works originally repellant from their
very crudeness, they supplied finish and perfection of the parts.
The ideal was still before them; the grotesque monsters might
fascinate the beholder, but, however skilfully executed, however
perfected in finish, the impression produced was but transitory,
and failed to satisfy the craving of the soul Beauty was found to
be the only abiding source of satisfaction. As the conceptions of
the past no longer satisfied the criterion which their own minds
had embraced, the Greek artists sought in nature herself for
models of that beauty, which, when placed in art forms, should be
a joy forever. The monsters of antiquity disappeared, and in their
places, came attempts to faithfully copy nature. To be sure, some
specimens of the art era from which the Greeks had just emerged
appeared at much later periods of their history; but these
creations, as in the case of the Centaur, were usually
representations of what were believed to be historical facts,
rather than fantastic creations designed by the artist to startle
the beholder. The Greek still gratified his passion for beauty of
detail, while he was pursuing his new-born purpose of copying
nature. It was not long before he found that nature, however
skilfully copied, could be perfectly mirrored to the eye of the
beholder only when presented as she appears to the mind of man.
This discovery budded and blossomed into the consummate flower of
true art, the fourth or suggestive era, which reached its acme in
the work of Phidias and his contemporaries. Every creation was the
expression of some state of mind. Everything was made as it
appeared to the eye of the poet, not as it might seem to the man
of no sentiment. The impression of the poetic mind found its
expression in art, and now the statues think, fear, hate, love.

The same general laws which have governed the rise of sculpture,
underlie the evolution of all forms of art. It is the purpose of
the present writing to hint at, rather than to trace, the four
stages of development in painting, music, and literature. To
follow the steps of progress in painting is somewhat more
difficult than to trace the evolution of sculpture or
architecture, on account of the perishable nature of the
materials. Music has unfolded with the unfolding of the human
mind, from the startling sounds of the savage,--exhibitions of
pure energy,--through efforts at fascination by the medium of
weird and unnatural combinations, and through attempts to
reproduce natural sounds, ever upward till it breathes the very
spirit of nature in a Haydn or a Beethoven.

We may follow the growth of the English drama through the same
process, from its dawning in the fantastic miracle plays with
their paraphernalia of heaven and hell, of gods, devils, angels,
and demons, to the creations' of "the thousand-souled
Shakespeare." In religion we see the same phases--from the worship
of life itself, of natural phenomena, through the panorama of
deities friendly and deities unfriendly, of gods many and of
devils many, until the human mind grasps the conception of Unity
in deity, and bows in worship before an Infinite Being of Love and
Providence.

In the history of government is written the same tale of
evolution, from manifestations of brute energy, seeking
gratification in subjugation for its own sake,--from the
government typified by the iron heel,--to the government which,
seeking the education and protection of all the people becomes a
school rather than a system of restraint.

Therefore the race, in its march from savagery to civilization,
may be considered as one man, showing, first, animation; next,
manifesting his objects of attraction; third, displaying his
purposes; and finally putting forth his wisdom in obedience to the
true, the beautiful, and the good.

These principles of natural evolution have been applied by the
writer to the study of oratory. The orator must illustrate in his
art the same steps of progress which govern the growth of other
arts. He may have developed the power of the painter, the
sculptor, the musician, yet if he would unfold the art of the
rhetorician, he must pass through the progressive gradations that
have marked the education of his powers in other departments. In a
single lifetime he may attain the highest art expression, yet he
cannot escape the necessity of cultivating his powers by the same
process of evolution which the race needed centuries to pass
through. It remains for the teacher, therefore, to so arrange the
methods of study as to enable the pupil to pursue the natural
order of education. In all things he must stimulate and not
repress normal growth.

There is an old notion sometimes found among theoretical educators
that the mind of a child is like a piece of paper upon which
anything may be written; a mould of clay upon which any impression
may be made; a block of stone in which the teacher, like the
famous sculptor of old, sees, in his poetic vision, an angel, and
then chips and hacks until that angel stands revealed. The theory
is absurdly and dangerously fallacious. Paper and clay are not
living organisms; the orator is not the statue chiselled from the
rough stone of human nature, or, if the teacher succeeds in so far
perverting nature as to hack and trim a human organism into the
semblance of a statue, the product of his work will stand forth a
living illustration of the difference between the genuine and the
spurious. The stone has no life. Life must be breathed into it,
and the sculptor may breathe into it such life as he chooses. The
gardener, on the other hand, must obey the laws of the life of the
plant he nurtures. He must so direct the forces of nature as to
help its inherent tendencies. A certain line of growth is written
in the structure of every species of plant. The plant may be
hindered or perverted in its development; it may be killed, but it
cannot be made to grow into the form of another plant.

The progress of the human mind can be illustrated only by that
which is vital, not by anything mechanical. Mind reacts upon
whatever is given to it according to the divine laws of its own
organism. The human mind, like the plant, must exhibit vitality in
abundance before it finds a higher and more complex manifestation.
The unskilled teacher, instead of inviting out the young pupil
along the line of his own organism, may, at the outset, paralyze
the unfolding mind by ill-advised dictation. There can be no true
teaching which does not involve growing, and growing in the way
intended by nature. The teacher must be something more than a
critic. The critic establishes criteria, protects the public, and,
in a measure, educates the public taste. When he is able to teach
others how to reach true criteria he becomes a teacher. Until he
can do this he has no place in the class room.

It will be observed that the four volumes of the "Evolution of
Expression" recognize the four general stages of man's
development: Volume I., representing the period when the
individual is engrossed with subjects or objects as a Whole, and
his passion for life is expressed through rude energy, size--the
Colossal; Volume II., when he delights in so presenting The Parts
to which he has been attracted, as to make them Effective in
attracting the attention of others; Volume III., when his
appreciation of the use or Service of the Parts carries him beyond
the melodramatic to the Realistic; and Volume IV., in which his
dawning perception of that higher service resulting from the
truthful Relationship of the Parts leads him beyond realism to
idealism, the Suggestive.

In choosing the selections for this and the accompanying volumes,
the aim has been to preserve the natural oneness between the study
of literature and that of expression, and to encourage the
appreciation of this unity in the minds of teacher and student. It
may be said that the greatest of the world's literature was
written for the ear, not for the eye, and its noblest influence is
felt only when it is adequately voiced by an intelligent and
sympathetic reader. It is the object of these volumes to foster in
the student a keener and deeper appreciation of the truth and
beauty of great prose and verse, and at the same time to enrich
his own and other lives by cultivating the power of expressing the
glories which are opened to his vision.

The arrangement of the selections is for the purpose of teaching
the art of reading according to the steps of natural evolution
hinted at in the foregoing pages, and in a way which experience
has found most prolific in practical results.

While no effort has been made to search for novelties, great care
has been taken to secure selections which, while of pure literary
merit, are especially adapted for drill in the several steps of
progress in reading. The power developed in the student through
carefully directed drill on these selections will enable him to
illuminate whatever other literature he may care to interpret. The
arrangement of the selections in small divisions or paragraphs has
been made for convenience in the work of the class room.

The "Evolution of Expression" does not offer art criteria by which
the work of an orator is to be measured; it presents rather a
system of education by which one may attain the plane of art in
expression. The teacher or student who desires a formulation of
laws which afford a standard of art criticism is referred to the
four volumes of "The Perfective Laws of Art," the text-book
succeeding the "Evolution of Expression."

The author wishes to express his sincere gratitude to George N.
Morang & Co., to Bobbs-Merrill Company, and to Houghton, Mifflin &
Co., for their courtesy in allowing him to reprint in this volume
selections from their publications.





THE WHOLE.

THE COLOSSAL PERIOD.

The body is one and hath many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many, are one body.--ST. PAUL.

How good is man's life, the mere living! How fit to employ
All the heart and the soul and the senses forever in joy!

--BROWNING.





CHAPTER I.

ANIMATION.


(NOTE.--Let the teacher and student remember that the headings of
the chapters name effects rather than causes, signs rather than
things signified. They are not, therefore, objects of thought for
the student while practising; they are finger points for the
teacher; the criteria by which he measures his pupil's
development.)

Reading is a communication of thought; a transference of ideas
from one mind to other minds so as to influence their thinking in
a definite manner. The process is distinctively communicative,
involving two parties, speaker and audience, equally
indispensable. As well might the student of manual training
attempt his work without materials, to paint without paper or
canvas, carve without wood or stone, model without clay, as the
student of expression to read or speak without an audience. For
this reason in all his private practice as well as class drill,
the student should hold in mind an audience to whom he directs his
attention. The office of the teacher is to hold constantly before
the pupil these two mental concepts, his thought and his audience,
or his thought in relation to his audience. The pupil must be
taught to respond to the author's thought as to his own, and at
the same time he must be inspired with the desire to give that
thought to others. In his endeavor to awaken other minds his own
will be quickened. This mental quickening reports itself in
animation of voice and manner. Herein is illustrated a fundamental
law of development; what we earnestly attempt to do for another
that we actually do for ourselves. The constant endeavor of the
teacher, therefore, must be to inspire the pupil to serve his
audience through truth, the truth of his discourse. His attempt to
gain the attention of his hearers and to concentrate their minds
on this truth will secure such concentration of his own mind as
will stimulate his interest, and interest is always vital.

Let no one mistake loudness for animation. A whisper may be more
vital, more animated than a shout. The slightest quiver of a
muscle may reveal greater intensity of thought than the most
violent gesticulation. Yet since freedom and abandon of the agents
of expression are necessary to their perfect service, let the
teacher invite that freedom and abandon without fear of
sacrificing good taste. He is not to be regarded as an artist yet;
nor is it now profitable to measure him by the criteria of art.
Let the form of his expression be as crude as it may, only let it
be born of the thought. The student is learning to think on his
feet; and the act of mental concentration upon his author's
thought in relation to his audience is not at first a simple task.
Do not hurry him in his development. Remember that expression to
be truthful, must be spontaneous. The teacher needs only to hold
the right objects of thought before the pupil's mind, then stand
aside and let him grow in nature's own way. No thought of the HOW
should be allowed to enter the student's mind while he is
speaking, it is only the WHAT that concerns him. Form is born of
spirit; the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

The requirement of the present chapter is met when the student is
able to fix the attention of those who listen upon the central
idea or theme of the selection. The WHOLE or unit of thought
should be held before the pupil's mind, and by him, before the
mind of the audience, attention not yet being directed
specifically to PARTS.

ANALYSIS.

The basis of intelligent vocal interpretation of literature is
careful analysis. One cannot express shades of meaning that are
not in the mind; until one clearly perceives the motives and
relationships of the selection, he cannot reflect them to others.
Too much cannot be said upon the importance of thorough thought
and study of a selection previous to any effort toward expression.
It is needless to explain that one cannot give what he does not
possess; and it is equally self-evident that one gains by giving.
Long and thoughtful quiescent concentration should precede the
concentration of mind while speaking. The author's words are like
a gold mine which must be searched by thorough digging for the
nuggets of thought beneath. The pupil must live with his author,
see through his eyes, think with his intellect, feel with his
heart, and choose with his will, picturing to himself every scene,
putting himself in the place of every character described.

Like every organism every true work of art has organic unity; it
represents a unit of thought, the WHOLE, made up of essential
PARTS. Each part is a part of the whole, because in its own way it
reflects the whole. The perfect unity of an organism or of a work
of art results from the service rendered by each part to every
other part.

Here, then, is the logical order of analysis: first, the WHOLE or
unit of thought; second, the PARTS; third, the SERVICE, OR THE USE
OF THE PARTS; fourth, the RELATIONSHIP OF THE PARTS which is the
highest service and results in revelation. In determining this
higher service we are reconstructing our whole from the unit of
the selection to the revelation of truth resulting from the
relationship of parts; the analysis must culminate in synthesis,
else it would defeat its purpose. The end of literature, as in
other forms of art, is revelation. The end of analysis is to lead
to the perception of this revelation. In the earlier stages of
development the pupil's attention should not be directed toward
minute analysis. At this period his mind is engrossed with the
principal thought or unit of the composition,--the dominant theme
which is developed in every organic literary composition. Let his
mind rest upon this until he lives in the spirit of the theme
through a passion for reflecting it to others.

Inasmuch as an attempt to define always limits, it is a question
how far it will be profitable to formulate definite statements of
the whole, parts, etc. Written expression, as well as oral, is
individual. Each pupil may have a different formulation. Inasmuch,
however, as every author is possessed by a definite purpose,
we may suggest, for the guidance of the student, a tentative
analysis of a selection which may aid him in reflecting its truth
to an audience.

It is hoped that this brief study of one selection from each
chapter may be acceptable as a working basis, a hint of the
logical method of procedure rather than an arbitrary model. The
elaboration of these principles is without limit and must be left
to the teacher. It is the purpose here to give only simple
statements intended to be suggestive rather than final.

Example: "The Cheerful Locksmith." (Page 46.)

The Unit, or Whole for working basis: The character of the
Cheerful Locksmith.

The Parts:

(a) The sound he makes. Paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 7.

(6) His personal appearance. Paragraph 4.

(c) The appearance of objects around him. Paragraphs 5, 6.

The Service of the Parts:

(a) Serves the Whole by engaging the interest at once in the
Cheerful Locksmith, whom it introduces, and whose nature it
reflects.

(b) Serves by presenting a definite picture of him, radiating
cheer.

(c) Serves by revealing further his cheerful personality through
its effect upon surrounding objects.

The Relationship of the Parts:

(a) Foreshadows (b) and (c).

(b) Fulfils the expectation awakened in (a) and helps to prepare
the mind for (c).

(c) Is a natural outgrowth from (a) and (b).

Synthesis:

The revelation of truth through these relationships gives us a
"New Whole" which maybe stated thus: The spirit of cheerfulness,
radiating from the Locksmith's personality and expressed through
his work, is reflected by all around him.

The above analysis is suggested as a guide for study. A tentative
analysis of each selection might be offered here; but it is better
that the student develop his own powers of discrimination by doing
this preliminary work himself, directed, as far as necessary, by
the teacher. However, it is not essential that a formal analysis
of every selection be made; indeed, as has been already implied,
minute analysis may even defeat the end of these opening chapters.
The question of formal analysis may be left to the discretion of
the teacher, who must determine how far it serves his purpose in
each individual instance.

The criterion of Chapter I. does not demand an interpretation
based upon the complete analysis given above, which is intended as
an illustration of all analysis; if all the relationships
suggested above be reflected through an oral reading of "The
Cheerful Locksmith," the reader has attained the steps of
development embodied in Volume IV. However, in drill on the
selections in Volume I., the teacher should never think of
limiting the pupil to the significance of that volume; every
student should be encouraged to reflect as much of the truth,
literal and suggestive, as his degree of discernment and of
freedom will allow.

The immediate aim of drill on "The Cheerful Locksmith" should be a
hearty response to the spirit of the Whole, however much beyond
that may be achieved. The student must be inspired by an ardent
desire to awaken the interest of his audience in "The Cheerful
Locksmith," as does one who through introductory remarks presents
the "speaker of the evening."

It is to be thoughtfully noted that all the selections in this and
the three succeeding chapters have been chosen for their easy
adaptability to use in the first natural period of art--
expression, the Colossal period. They are selections with an
easily distinguishable theme. Throughout these chapters the mind
of the student should be engaged with the motif of the selection
as it first catches the mind. Nothing in later study can make up
for the loss of the first glow, the undefined answering response
to the animating spirit of a writer's message. His differentiated
meanings, his elaborations of theme for the purpose of increased
force, intensity or suggestion are but useless lumber to a mind
that has not throbbed in sympathy, scarce knowing why. It is just
here that almost all teaching in both literature and its
expression fails; there is not enough browsing--knee-deep, waist-
deep,--for the pure joy of it.





CHAPTER II.

SMOOTHNESS.


At first, the student may find it difficult to concentrate the
minds of his hearers upon his theme steadily and continuously. His
ability to do this may come spasmodically. This irregular mental
activity reports itself in unevenness of delivery; life appears in
gleams not in steady shining. But with continued effort to
concentrate other minds upon his subject, this unevenness gives
place to ease in delivery, to smoothness of voice. Continuity of
thought impels smoothness of expression. When a thought is held
steadily in the mind of the pupil, together with a dominating
purpose to communicate that thought to others, the tones of his
voice become evenly sustained and smooth.

Smoothness may be said to result from a sense of oneness with the
audience. So long as there is a gulf between the speaker and
audience, there is conscious and apparent effort in the address.
It is a growing love, a vital sympathy with the audience that
manifests itself in smoothness.

This second step grows in natural sequence out of the first. Out
of the abundance of life comes sweetness. In all the successive
steps of the pupil's evolution, he is constantly to add, never to
discard or lay aside any power previously gained. Rather than
outgrow it, he will grow in it. All that he will outgrow will be
his faults, his mannerisms, his limitations. As he gains freedom,
transcending limitations, his mannerisms will fall away from him;
he need never be made conscious that he has had them.

Analysis. Example, "The Village Preacher." The Unit, or Working
Whole: A village preacher who radiates the spirit of love.

The student's endeavor must be to reflect continuously the
overflowing love of the preacher's nature, which blessed all with
whom he came in contact. The audience should feel the presence of
the great-hearted man throughout the reading of the entire
selection, even when he is not described. For instance, he may be
foreshadowed in the introduction.





CHAPTER III.

VOLUME.


Out of the effort toward continued concentration is born the
perception of values. Dwelling upon the thought and striving to
hold it steadily in the minds of those who listen, the pupil
begins to perceive its greater value, and to realize that the
expression of this value will aid him in holding the attention of
his audience. His will becomes more definitely aroused. Feeling
his new power, he should be inspired to direct it definitely
toward his hearers. This new element of will directed through the
perception of value expresses itself in the added quality called
volume of voice.

Here, as everywhere, the discernment of the teacher must be relied
upon to detect the difference between true and mechanical
expression. Failure on the part of the pupil to perceive what is
desired may lead him to offer, as a counterfeit of volume, force
or loudness. Volume of voice, free from both, is the expression of
the growing appreciation of values.

Analysis. Example: "Spartacus to the Gladiators."

The Unit, or Whole: The personality of Spartacus revealed through
his effort to inspire his fellows with the spirit of liberty.

The theme which Spartacus presents is of universal value--the
spirit of liberty, dear to all mankind. This value must be
realized by the student, who must make the effort of Spartacus his
own effort, throughout the entire selection. The value of the
theme must be behind every spoken word, felt, if not uttered.





CHAPTER IV.

FORMING THE ELEMENTS.


The life manifested in the three previous chapters now begins to
take more definite thought form. The intellect seeing more
clearly, appeals to the intellects of those who listen that they
may think with greater sharpness and distinctness the thoughts
presented. By aiming to present these thoughts so as to be clearly
understood, distinctness and precision of utterance are gained.
The elements of speech become more perfectly and beautifully
chiseled. Thus keener thinking and greater care in presentation
serve in forming the elements and perfecting the articulation,
which need not be made a matter of mechanical drill.

Careless enunciation, which so mars the beauty of a speaker's
discourse, is usually due to careless thinking. Clear speaking
comes from clear thinking. Exceptional cases of long confirmed bad
habits, faultily trained ears, or defects in the vocal apparatus,
sometimes make technical drill to meet individual cases, a
necessary supplement to the persistent practice in earnest
revelation of thought. But in ordinary cases the speaker's
endeavor to impress his hearers with the parts which make up his
discourse will result, in due time, in accurate, distinct
articulation. With continued practice this perfection of speech
will become habitual. Spirit moulds form; this law cannot be
overemphasized. In this new stage of the pupil's development, as
always, the desired result proceeds as an effect from an inner
psychological cause; it is a natural and spontaneous outgrowth,
rather than a dull and lifeless form.

Analysis. Example: "The Song of the Rain." UNIT, OR WHOLE: The
beneficence of rain after a drought. Here the student should hold
the attention of the audience upon the distinct features of the
picture presented. He should make his hearers see and enjoy the
rain and appreciate the response of nature and of people to its
refreshing influence.




CHAPTER I

ANIMATION.

THE TEA-KETTLE AND THE CRICKET.


1. It appeared as if there were a sort of match, or trial of
skill, you must understand, between the kettle and the cricket.
And this is what led to it, and how it came about.

2. The kettle was aggravating and obstinate. It wouldn't allow
itself to be adjusted on the top bar; it wouldn't hear of
accommodating itself kindly to the knobs of coal; it would lean
forward with a drunken air, and dribble--a very idiot of a kettle
--on the hearth. It was quarrelsome, and hissed and sputtered
morosely at the fire.

3. To sum up all, the lid, resisting Mrs. Peerybingle's fingers,
first of all turned topsy-turvy, and then, with an ingenious
pertinacity deserving of a better cause, dived sideways in, down
to the very bottom of the kettle; and the hull of the Royal George
has never made half of the monstrous resistance in coming out of
the water which the lid of the kettle employed against Mrs.
Peerybingle before she got it up again.

4. It looked sullen and pig-headed enough, even then, carrying its
handle with an air of defiance, and cocking its spout pertly and
mockingly at Mrs. Peerybingle, as if it said, "i won't boil.
Nothing shall induce me!"

5. But Mrs. Peerybingle, with restored good-humor, dusted her
chubby little hands against each other, and sat down before the
kettle laughing. Meantime the jolly blaze uprose and fell,
flashing and gleaming on the little haymaker at the top of the
Dutch clock, until one might have thought he stood stock still
before the Moorish palace, and nothing was in motion but the
flame.

6. Now it was, observe, that the kettle began to spend the
evening. Now it was that the kettle, growing mellow and musical,
began to have irrepressible gurglings in the throat, and to
indulge in short vocal snorts, which it checked in the bud, as if
it hadn't quite made up its mind yet to be good company. Now it
was that, after two or three such vain attempts to stifle its
convivial sentiments, it threw off all moroseness, all reserve,
and burst into a stream of song so cozy and hilarious as never
maudlin nightingale yet formed the least idea of.

7. So plain, too! Bless you, you might have understood it like a
book; better than some books you and I could name, perhaps. With
its warm breath gushing forth in a light cloud, which merrily and
gracefully ascended a few feet, then hung about the chimney
corner, as its own domestic heaven, it trolled its song with that
strong energy of cheerfulness that its iron body hummed and
stirred upon the fire; and the lid itself, the recently rebellious
lid--such is the influence of a bright example--performed a sort
of jig, and clattered like a deaf and dumb young cymbal that had
never known the use of its twin brother.

8. That this song of the kettle's was a song of invitation and
welcome to somebody out of doors, to somebody at that moment
coming on towards the snug, small home and the crisp fire, there
is no doubt whatever. Mrs. Peerybingle knew it perfectly, as she
sat musing before the hearth.

9. "It's a dark night," sang the kettle, "and the rotten leaves
are lying by the way, and above all is mist and darkness, and
below all is mire and clay, and there's only one relief in all the
sad and murky air; and I don't know that it is one, for its
nothing but a glare of deep and angry crimson, where the sun and
wind together set a brand upon the clouds, for being guilty of
such weather; and the widest open country is a long, dull streak
of black; and there's hoar-frost on the finger-post, and thaw upon
the track; and the ice isn't water, and the water isn't free; and
you couldn't say that anything is what it ought to be; but he's
coming, coming, coming!--"

10. And here, if you like, the cricket did chime in with chirrup,
chirrup, chirrup of such magnitude, by way of chorus, with a voice
so astoundingly disproportionate to its size, as compared with the
kettle (size, you couldn't see it!)--that if it had then and there
burst itself, like an overcharged gun, if it had fallen a victim
on the spot, and chirruped its little body into fifty pieces, it
would have seemed a natural and inevitable consequence, for which
it had expressly labored.

11. The kettle had had the last of its solo performances. It
persevered with undiminished ardor; but the cricket took first
fiddle, and kept it. Good heaven, how it chirped! Its shrill,
sharp, piercing voice resounded through the house, and seemed to
twinkle in the outer darkness like a star.

12. There was an indescribable little thrill and tremble in it, at
its loudest, which suggested its being carried off its legs, and
made to leap again, by its own intense enthusiasm. Yet they went
very well together, the cricket and the kettle. The burden of the
song was still the same; and louder, louder, louder still they
sang it in their emulation.

13. There was all the excitement of a race about it. Chirp, chirp,
chirp! cricket a mile ahead. Hum, hum, hum--m--m! kettle making
play in the distance, like a great top. Chirp, chirp, chirp!
cricket round the corner. Hum, hum, hum-m-m! kettle sticking to
him in his own way; no idea of giving in. Chirp, chirp, chirp,
cricket fresher than ever. Hum, hum, hum-m-m! kettle slow and
steady. Chirp, chirp, chirp! cricket going in to finish him. Hum,
hum, hum-m-m! kettle not to be finished.

14. Until at last they got so jumbled together, in the hurry-
scurry, helter-skelter of the match, that whether the kettle
chirped and the cricket hummed, or the cricket chirped and the
kettle hummed, or they both chirped and both hummed, it would have
taken a clearer head than yours or mine to have decided with
certainty.

15. Of this there is no doubt; that the kettle and the cricket, at
one and the same moment, and by some power of amalgamation best
known to themselves, sent each his fireside song of comfort
streaming into a ray of the candle that shone out through the
window, and a long way down the lane. And this light, bursting on
a certain person, who, on the instant, approached towards it
through the gloom, expressed the whole thing to him literally in a
twinkling, and cried, "Welcome home, old fellow! welcome home, my
boy!"

This end attained, the kettle, being dead beat, boiled over, and
was taken off the fire.

CHARLES DICKENS.

THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN.

I.

Hamelin Town's in Brunswick,
    By famous Hanover city;
The river Weser, deep and wide,
Washes its wall on the southern side;
A pleasanter spot you never spied;
    But, when begins my ditty,
Almost five hundred years ago,
To see the townsfolk suffer so
    From vermin was a pity.

II.

    Rats!
They fought the dogs, and killed the cats,
    And bit the babies in the cradles,
And ate the cheeses out of the vats,
    And licked the soup from the cook's own ladles,
Split open the kegs of salted sprats,
Made nests inside men's Sunday hats,
And even spoiled the women's chats,
    By drowning their speaking
    With shrieking and squeaking
In fifty different sharps and flats.

III.

At last the people in a body
    To the Town Hall came flocking;
"Tis clear," cried they, "our Mayor's a noddy;
    And as for our Corporation,--shocking
To think we buy gowns lined with ermine
For dolts that can't or won't determine
What's best to rid us of our vermin!
You hope, because you're old and obese,
To find in the furry, civic robe ease?
Rouse up, sirs! Give your brains a racking,
To find the remedy we're lacking,
Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing!"

IV.

At this the Mayor and Corporation
Quaked with a mighty consternation.
An hour they sat in council.

At length the Mayor broke silence:
"For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell;
I wish I were a mile hence.
It's easy to bid one rack one's brain,
I'm sure my poor head aches again,
I scratched it so, and all in vain.
Oh, for a trap, a trap, a trap!"
Just as he said this, what should hap
At the chamber door but a gentle tap.
"Bless us!" cried the Mayor, "what's that?
Anything like the sound of a rat
Makes my heart go pit-a-pat."

V.

"Come in," the Mayor cried, looking bigger;
And in did come the strangest figure;
His queer long coat from heels to head
Was half of yellow and half of red.
And he himself was tall and thin,
With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin,
And light, loose hair, yet swarthy skin--
No tuft on cheek, nor beard on chin,
But lips where smiles went out and in,
There was no guessing his kith or kin;
And nobody could enough admire
The tall man and his quaint attire.

VI.

Quoth one, "It's as my great-grand-sire,
Starting up at the trump of Doom's tone,
Had walked this way from his painted tomb-stone."
He advanced to the council-table:
And, "Please your honors," said he, "I'm able,
By means of a secret charm, to draw
All creatures living beneath the sun,
That creep, or swim, or fly, or run,
After me so as you never saw.

VII.

"And I chiefly use my charm
On creatures that do people harm,--
The mole, and toad, and newt, and viper,--
And people call me the Pied Piper;
Yet," said he, "poor Piper as I am,
In Tartary I freed the Cham
Last June from his huge swarm of gnats;
I eased in Asia the Nizam
Of a monstrous brood of vampire-bats;
And, as for what your brain bewilders,
If I can rid your town of rats,
Will you give me a thousand guilders?"
"One? fifty thousand!" was the exclamation
Of the astonished Mayor and corporation.

VIII.

Into the street the piper stept,
Smiling first a little smile,
As if he knew what magic slept
    In his quiet pipe the while;
And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered,
You heard as if an army muttered;
And the muttering grew to a grumbling,
And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling,
And out of the houses the rats came tumbling,--
Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats,
Brown rats, black rats, gray rats, tawny rats,
Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,
Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins,
Families by tens and dozens,
Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives,--
Followed the piper for their lives.
From street to street he piped advancing,
And step for step they followed dancing,
Until they came to the river Weser,
Wherein all plunged and perished.

IX.

You should have heard the Hamelin people
Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple.
"Go," cried the Mayor, "get long poles,
Poke out the nests, and block up the holes.
Consult with carpenters and builders,
And leave in our town not even a trace
Of the rats." When suddenly up the face
Of the Piper perked in the market place,
With, "First, if you please, my thousand guilders."
A thousand guilders; the Mayor looked blue
And so did the Corporation, too.

X.

"Beside," quoth the Mayor, with a knowing wink,
"Our business was done at the river brink;
We saw with our eyes the vermin sink,
And what's dead can't come to life, I think.
A thousand guilders? Come, take fifty."
The Piper's face fell, and he cried,
"No trifling. Folks who put me in a passion
May find me pipe to another fashion."

XI.

Once more he stepped into the street
And to his lips again
Laid his long pipe of smooth, straight cane;
And ere he blew three notes
There was a rustling that seemed like a bustling,
Of merry crowds justling at pitching and hustling,
Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering,
Little hands clapping, and little tongues chattering,
And, like fowls in a barnyard when barley is scattering,
Out came the children running.
All the little boys and girls,
With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls,
And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls,
Tripping and skipping ran merrily after
The wonderful music--with shouting and laughter.

XII.

When, lo! as they reached the mountain's side,
A wondrous portal opened wide,
As if a cavern were suddenly hollowed;
And the piper advanced and the children followed,
And when all were in to the very last
The door in the mountain side shut fast.
Alas, alas for Hamelin!

XIII.

There came into many a burgher's pate
    A text which says that heaven's gate
Opens to the rich at as easy rate
    As the needle's eye takes the camel in!
The mayor sent east, west, north, and south
To offer the Piper by word of mouth,
Wherever it was men's lot to find him,
Silver and gold to his heart's content,
If he'd only return the way he went,
And bring the children behind him.
But soon they saw 'twas a lost endeavor,
And piper and dancers were gone forever.

XIV.

And the better in memory to fix
The place of the children's last retreat,
They called it the Pied Piper's Street--
Where any one playing on pipe or tabor
Was sure for the future to lose his labor.
And opposite the place of the cavern
They wrote the story on a column,
And on the great church window painted
The same, to make the world acquainted
How their children were stolen away;
And there it stands to this very day.

ROBERT BROWNING.

GROUP OF LYRICS.

PIPPA PASSES.

The year's at the spring,
And day's at the morn;
Morning's at seven;
The hill-side's dew-pearled;
The lark's on the wing;
The snail's on the thorn;
God's in his heaven--
All's right with the world.

ROBERT BROWNING.

THE SNOWDROP.

Many, many welcomes
February fair-maid,
Ever as of old time,
Solitary firstling,
Coming in the cold time,
Prophet of the gay time,
Prophet of the May time,
Prophet of the roses,
Many, many welcomes
February fair-maid!

ALFRED TENNYSON.


THE THROSTLE.

I.

"Summer is coming, summer is coming.
    I know it, I know it, I know it.
Light again, leaf again, life again, love again,"
    Yes, my wild little Poet.

II.

Sing the new year in under the blue.
    Last year you sang it as gladly.
"New, new, new, new!" Is it then so new
    That you should carol so madly?

III.

"Love again, song again, nest again, young again,"
    Never a prophet so crazy!
And hardly a daisy as yet, little friend,
    See, there is hardly a daisy.

IV.

"Here again, here, here, here, happy year
    O warble unchidden, unbidden!
Summer is coming, is coming, my dear,
    And all the winters are hidden.

ALFRED TENNYSON


ONE MORNING, OH! SO EARLY!

I.

One morning, oh! so early, my beloved, my beloved,
All the birds were singing blithely, as if never they would cease;
'Twas a thrush sang in my garden, "Hear the story, hear the story!"
    And the lark sang, "Give us glory!"
    And the dove said, "Give us peace!"

II.

Then I listened, oh! so early, my beloved, my beloved,
To that murmur from the woodland of the dove, my dear, the dove;
When the nightingale came after, "Give us fame to sweeten duty!"
    When the wren sang, "Give us beauty!"
    She made answer, "Give us love!"

III.

Sweet is spring, and sweet the morning, my beloved, my beloved;
Now for us doth spring, doth morning, wait upon the year's increase,
And my prayer goes up, "Oh, give us, crowned in youth with marriage glory,
    Give for all our life's dear story,
    Give us love, and give us peace!"

JEAN INGELOW.

FREEDOM.

1. No quality of Art has been more powerful in its influence on
public mind; none is more frequently the subject of popular
praise, or the end of vulgar effort, than what we call "Freedom."
It is necessary to determine the justice or injustice of this
popular praise.

2. Try to draw a circle with the "free" hand, and with a single
line. You cannot do it if your hand trembles, nor if it hesitates,
nor if it is unmanageable, nor if it is in the common sense of the
word "free." So far from being free, it must be under a control as
absolute and accurate as if it were fastened to an inflexible bar
of steel. And yet it must move, under this necessary control, with
perfect, untormented serenity of ease.

3. I believe we can nowhere find a better type of a perfectly free
creature than in the common house-fly. Nor free only, but brave;
and irreverent to a degree which I think no human republican could
by any philosophy exalt himself to. There is no courtesy in him;
he does not care whether it is king or clown whom he teases; and
in every step of his swift mechanical march, and in every pause of
his resolute observation, there is one and the same expression of
perfect egotism, perfect independence and self-confidence, and
conviction of the world's having been made for flies.

4. Strike at him with your hand, and to him, the mechanical fact
and external aspect of the matter is, what to you it would be if
an acre of red clay, ten feet thick, tore itself up from the
ground in one massive field, hovered over you in the air for a
second, and came crashing down with an aim. That is the external
aspect of it; the inner aspect, to his fly's mind, is of a quite
natural and unimportant occurrence--one of the momentary
conditions of his active life. He steps out of the way of your
hand, and alights on the back of it.

5. You cannot terrify him, nor govern him, nor persuade him, nor
convince him. He has his own positive opinion on all matters; not
an unwise one, usually, for his own ends; and will ask no advice
of yours. He has no work to do--no tyrannical instinct to obey.
The earthworm has his digging; the bee her gathering and building;
the spider her cunning network; the ant her treasury and accounts.
All these are comparatively slaves, or people of vulgar business.

6. But your fly, free in the air, free in the chamber--a black
incarnation of caprice, wandering, investigating, flitting,
flirting, feasting at his will, with rich variety of choice in
feast, from the heaped sweets in the grocer's window to those of
the butcher's back yard, and from the galled place on your cab-
horse's back, to the brown spot in the road, from which, as the
hoof disturbs him, he rises with angry republican buzz--what
freedom is like his?

7. Indeed, the first point we have all to determine is not how
free we are, but what kind of creatures we are. It is of small
importance to any of us whether we get liberty; but of the
greatest that we deserve it. Whether we can win it, fate must
determine; but that we will be worthy of it we may ourselves
determine; and the sorrowfulest fate of all that we can suffer is
to have it WITHOUT deserving it.

8. I have hardly patience to hold my pen and go on writing, as I
remember the infinite follies of modern thought in this matter,
centered in the notion that liberty is good for a man,
irrespectively of the use he is likely to make of it. Folly
unfathomable! unspeakable! You will send your child, will you,
into a room where the table is loaded with sweet wine and fruit--
some poisoned, some not?--you will say to him, "Choose freely, my
little child! It is so good for you to have freedom of choice; it
forms your character--your individuality! If you take the wrong
cup or the wrong berry, you will die before the day is over, but
you will have acquired the dignity of a Free child."

9. You think that puts the case too sharply? I tell you, lover of
liberty, there is no choice offered to you, but it is similarly
between life and death. There is no act, nor option of act,
possible, but the wrong deed or option has poison in it which will
stay in your veins thereafter forever. Never more to all eternity
can you be as you might have been had you not done that--chosen
that.

10. You have "formed your character," forsooth! No; if you have
chosen ill, you have De-formed it, and that forever! In some
choices it had been better for you that a red-hot iron bar struck
you aside, scarred and helpless, than that you had so chosen. "You
will know better next time!" No. Next time will never come. Next
time the choice will be in quite another aspect--between quite
different things,--you, weaker than you were by the evil into
which you have fallen; it, more doubtful than it was, by the
increased dimness of your sight. No one ever gets wiser by doing
wrong, nor stronger. You will get wiser and stronger only by doing
right, whether forced or not; the prime, the one need is to do
THAT, under whatever compulsion, until you can do it without
compulsion. And then you are a Man.

11. "What!" a wayward youth might perhaps answer, incredulously,
"no one ever gets wiser by doing wrong? Shall I not know the world
best by trying the wrong of it, and repenting? Have I not, even as
it is, learned much by many of my errors?" Indeed, the effort by
which partially you recovered yourself was precious: that part of
your thought by which you discerned the error was precious. What
wisdom and strength you kept, and rightly used, are rewarded; and
in the pain and the repentance, and in the acquaintance with the
aspects of folly and sin, you have learned SOMETHING; how much
less than you would have learned in right paths can never be told,
but that it IS less is certain.

12. Your liberty of choice has simply destroyed for you so much
life and strength, never regainable. It is true, you now know the
habits of swine, and the taste of husks; do you think your father
could not have taught you to know better habits and pleasanter
tastes, if you had stayed in his house; and that the knowledge you
have lost would not have been more, as well as sweeter, than that
you have gained? But "it so forms my individuality to be free!"
Your individuality was given you by God, and in your race, and if
you have any to speak of, you will want no liberty.

13. In fine, the arguments for liberty may in general be summed in
a few very simple forms, as follows:

Misguiding is mischievous: therefore guiding is.

If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch: therefore,
nobody should lead anybody.

Lambs and fawns should be left free in the fields; much more bears
and wolves.

If a man's gun and shot are his own, he may fire in any direction
he pleases.

A fence across a road is inconvenient; much more one at the side
of it.

Babes should not be swaddled with their hands bound down to their
sides: therefore they should be thrown out to roll in the kennels
naked.

14. None of these arguments are good, and the practical issues of
them are worse. For there are certain eternal laws for human
conduct which are quite clearly discernible by human reason. So
far as these are discovered and obeyed, by whatever machinery or
authority the obedience is procured, there follow life and
strength. So far as they are disobeyed, by whatever good intention
the disobedience is brought about, there follow ruin and sorrow.

15. The first duty of every man in the world is to find his true
master, and, for his own good, submit to him; and to find his true
inferior, and, for that inferior's good, conquer him. The
punishment is sure, if we either refuse the reverence, or are too
cowardly and indolent to enforce the compulsion. A base nation
crucifies or poisons its wise men, and lets its fools rave and rot
in its streets. A wise nation obeys the one, restrains the other,
and cherishes all.

JOHN RUSKIN.

A LAUGHING CHORUS.

I.

Oh, such a commotion under the ground
 When March called "Ho, there! ho!"
Such spreading of rootlets far and wide,
 Such whispering to and fro.
And "Are you ready?" the Snowdrop asked;
 "'Tis time to start, you know."
"Almost, my dear, "the Scilla replied;
 "I'll follow as soon as you go."
Then, "Ha! ha! ha!" a chorus came
 Of laughter soft and low
From the millions of flowers under the ground--
 Yes--millions--beginning to grow.

II.

"I'll promise my blossoms," the Crocus said,
 "When I hear the bluebirds sing."
And straight thereafter Narcissus cried,
 "My silver and gold I'll bring."
"And ere they are dulled," another spoke,
 "The Hyacinth bells shall ring."
And the Violet only murmured, "I'm here,"
 And sweet grew the air of spring.
Then, "Ha! ha! ha!" a chorus came
 Of laughter soft and low
From the millions of flowers under the ground--
 Yes--millions--beginning to grow.

III.

Oh, the pretty, brave things! through the coldest days,
 Imprisoned in walls of brown,
They never lost heart, though the blast shrieked loud,
 And the sleet and the hail came down,
But patiently each wrought her beautiful dress,
 Or fashioned her beautiful crown;
And now they are coming to brighten the world,
 Still shadowed by winter's frown;
And well may they cheerily laugh, "Ha! ha!"
 In a chorus soft and low,
The millions of flowers hid under the ground--
 Yes--millions--beginning to grow.
 Yes--millions--beginning to grow.

THE CHEERFUL LOCKSMITH.

1. From the workshop of the Golden Key there issued forth a
tinkling sound, so merry and good-humored that it suggested the
idea of some one working blithely, and made quite pleasant music.
Tink, tink, tink--clear as a silver bell, and audible at every
pause of the streets' harsher noises, as though it said, "I don't
care; nothing puts me out; I am resolved to be happy."

2. Women scolded, children squalled, heavy carts went rumbling by,
horrible cries proceeded from the lungs of hawkers; still it
struck in again, no higher, no lower, no louder, no softer; not
thrusting itself on people's notice a bit the more for having been
outdone by louder sounds--tink, tink, tink, tink, tink.

3. It was a perfect embodiment of the still, small voice, free
from all cold, hoarseness, huskiness, or unhealthiness of any
kind. Foot-passengers slackened their pace, and were disposed to
linger near it; neighbors who had got up splenetic that morning,
felt good-humor stealing on them as they heard it, and by degrees
became quite sprightly; mothers danced their babies to its
ringing;--still the same magical tink, tink, tink came gaily from
the workshop of the Golden Key.

4. Who but the locksmith could have made such music? A gleam of
sun, shining through the unsashed window and checkering the dark
workshop with a broad patch of light, fell full upon him, as
though attracted by his sunny heart. There he stood working at his
anvil, his face radiant with exercise and gladness, his sleeves
turned up, his wig pushed off his shining forehead--the easiest,
freest, happiest man in all the world.

5. Beside him sat a sleek cat, purring and winking in the light,
and falling every now and then into an idle doze, as from excess
of comfort. The very locks that hung around had something jovial
in their rust, and seemed like gouty gentlemen of hearty natures,
disposed to joke on their infirmities.

6. There was nothing surly or severe in the whole scene. It seemed
impossible that any of the innumerable keys could fit a churlish
strong-box or a prison door. Storehouses of good things, rooms
where there were fires, books, gossip, and cheering laughter--
these were their proper sphere of action. Places of distrust, and
cruelty, and restraint they would have quadruple-locked forever.

7. Tink, tink, tink. No man who hammered on at a dull, monotonous
duty could have brought such cheerful notes from steel and iron;
none but a chirping, healthy, honest-hearted fellow, who made the
best of everything and felt kindly towards everybody, could have
done it for an instant. He might have been a coppersmith, and
still been musical. If he had sat in a jolting wagon, full of rods
of iron, it seemed as if he would have brought some harmony out of
it.

CHARLES DICKENS.

HOME THOUGHTS, FROM ABROAD.

Oh, to be in England now that April's there,
And whoever wakes in England sees, some morning, unaware,
That the lowest boughs and the brush-wood sheaf
Round the elm-tree bole are in tiny leaf,
While the chaffinch sings on the orchard bough
In England--now!
And after April, when May follows
And the white-throat builds, and all the swallows!
Hark, where my blossomed pear-tree in the hedge
Leans to the field and scatters on the clover
Blossoms and dewdrops--at the bent spray's edge--
That's the wise thrush: he sings each song twice over
Lest you should think he never could recapture
The first fine careless rapture!
And though the fields look rough with hoary dew,
All will be gay when noontide wakes anew
The buttercups, the little children's dower
--Far brighter than this gaudy melon-flower!

EOBEBT BKOWNING.

LOCHINVAR.

I.

Oh, young Lochinvar is come out of the West,--
Through all the wide border his steed was the best!
And, save his good broadsword, he weapon had none,--
He rode all unarmed, and he rode all alone.
So faithful in love, and so dauntless in war,
There never was knight like the young Lochinvar.

II.

He stayed not for brake, and he stopped not for stone;
He swam the Eske river where ford there was none.
But, ere he alighted at Netherby gate,
The bride had consented, the gallant came late;
For a laggard in love and a dastard in war
Was to wed the fair Ellen of brave Lochinvar.

III.

So boldly he entered the Netherby hall,
'Mong bridesmen, and kinsmen, and brothers, and all:
Then spoke the bride's father, his hand on his sword
(For the poor craven bridegroom said never a word),
"Oh, come ye in peace here, or come ye in war,
Or to dance at our bridal, young Lord Lochinvar?"

IV.

"I long wooed your daughter--my suit you denied;
Love swells like the Solway, but ebbs like its tide;
And now am I come, with this lost love of mine,
To lead but one measure, drink one cup of wine.
There are maidens in Scotland more lovely by far
That would gladly be bride to the young Lochinvar."

V.

The bride kissed the goblet; the knight took it up;
He quaffed off the wine, and he threw down the cup.
She looked down to blush, and she looked up to sigh,
With a smile on her lip, and a tear in her eye.
He took her soft hand, ere her mother could bar;
"Now tread we a measure?" said young Lochinvar.

VI.

So stately his form, and so lovely her face,
That never a hall such a galliard did grace;
While her mother did fret and her father did fume,
And the bridegroom stood dangling his bonnet and plume,
And the bride-maidens whispered, "'Twere better by far
To have matched our fair cousin with young Lochinvar."

VII.

One touch to her hand and one word in her ear,
When they reached the hall door, and the charger stood
 near;
So light to the croup the fair lady he swung,
So light to the saddle before her he sprung:
"She is won! we are gone! over bank, bush, and scar;
They'll have fleet steeds that follow," quoth young Lochinvar.

VIII.

There was mounting'mong Graemes of the Netherby clan;
Forsters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran;
There was racing and chasing on Cannobie Lee;
But the lost bride of Netherby ne'er did they see.
So daring in love, and so dauntless in war,
Have ye e'er heard of gallant like young Lochinvar?

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

POLISH WAR SONG.

I.

Freedom calls you! Quick, be ready,--
 Rouse ye in the name of God,--
Onward, onward, strong and steady,--
 Dash to earth the oppressor's rod.
  Freedom calls, ye brave!
  Rise and spurn the name of slave.

II.
Grasp the sword!--its edge is keen,
 Seize the gun!--its ball is true:
Sweep your land from tyrant clean,--
 Haste, and scour it through and through!
  Onward, onward! Freedom cries,
  Rush to arms,--the tyrant flies.

III.

By the souls of patriots gone,
 Wake,--arise,--your fetters break,
Kosciusko bids you on,--
 Sobieski cries awake!
  Rise, and front the despot czar,
  Rise, and dare the unequal war.

IV.

Freedom calls you! Quick, be ready,--
 Think of what your sires have been,
Onward, onward! strong and steady,
 Drive the tyrant to his den.
  On, and let the watchword be,
  Country, home, and liberty!

JAMES G. PERCIVAL.





CHAPTER II.

SMOOTHNESS.


THE VILLAGE PREACHER.

I.

Sweet was the sound, when oft, at evening's close,
Up yonder hill the village murmur rose;
There, as I passed with careless steps and slow,
The mingled notes came softened from below;
The swain responsive as the milkmaid sung,
The sober herd that lowed to meet their young;
The noisy geese that gabbled o'er the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school;
The watchdog's voice that bayed the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind,--
These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.

II.

Near yonder copse where once the garden smiled,
And still where many a garden flower grows wild,
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher's modest mansion rose.
A man he was to all the country dear,
And passing rich with forty pounds a year;
Remote from towns he ran his godly race,
Nor e'er had changed, nor wished to change, his place.
Unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power,
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More bent to raise the wretched than to rise.

III.

His house was known to all the vagrant train;
He chid their wanderings, but relieved their pain;
The long-remembered beggar was his guest,
Whose beard, descending, swept his aged breast;
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by his fire and talked the night away;
Wept o'er his wounds, or, tales of sorrow done,
Shouldered his crutch, and showed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe;
Careless their merits or their faults to scan,
His pity gave ere charity began.

IV.

Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,
And e'en his failings leaned to virtue's side;
But in his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt for all;
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,
To tempt his new-fledged offspring to the skies,
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.

V.

Beside the bed where parting life was laid,
And sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turns dismayed,
The reverend champion stood. At his control
Despair and anguish fled the struggling soul;
Comfort came down, the trembling wretch to raise,
And his last faltering accents whispered praise.

VI.

At church with meek and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools who came to scoff remained to pray.
The service past, around the pious man,
With ready zeal, each honest rustic ran;
E'en children followed, with endearing wile,
And plucked his gown to share the good man's smile.

VII.

His ready smile a parent's warmth expressed;
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distressed;
To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given,
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven:
As some tall cliff, that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm;
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

TO THE DAISY.

I.

With little here to do or see
Of things that in the great world be,
Sweet Daisy! oft I talk to thee
For thou art worthy,
Thou unassuming Common-place
Of Nature, with that homely face,
And yet with something of a grace
Which Love makes for thee!

II.

Oft on the dappled turf at ease
I sit and play with similes,
Loose types of things through all degrees,
Thoughts of thy raising;
And many a fond and idle name
I give to thee, for praise or blame
As is the humour of the game,
While I am gazing.

III.

A nun demure, of lowly port;
Or sprightly maiden, of Love's court,
In thy simplicity the sport
Of all temptations;
A queen in crown of rubies drest;
A starveling in a scanty vest;
Are all, as seems to suit thee best,
Thy appellations.

IV.

A little Cyclops, with one eye
Staring to threaten and defy,
That thought comes next--and instantly
  The freak is over,
The shape will vanish, and behold!
A silver shield with boss of gold
That spreads itself, some faery bold
  In fight to cover.

V.

I see thee glittering from afar--
And then thou art a pretty star,
Not quite so fair as many are
  In heaven above thee!
Yet like a star, with glittering crest,
Self-poised in air thou seem'st to rest;--
May peace come never to his nest
  Who shall reprove thee!

VI.

Sweet Flower! for by that name at last
When all my reveries are past
I call thee, and to that cleave fast,
  Sweet silent Creature!
That breath'st with me in sun and air,
Do thou, as thou art wont, repair
My heart with gladness, and a share
  Of thy meek nature!

WILLIAM WOBDSWORTH.

PSALM XXIII.

1. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie
down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.

2. He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of
righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art
with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

3. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine
enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runueth over.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever.

EXTRACT FROM EULOGY ON WENDELL PHILLIPS.

1. Like other gently nurtured Boston boys, Phillips began the
study of law; and, as it proceeded, doubtless the sirens sang to
him, as to the noble youth of every country and time. If, musing
over Coke and Blackstone, in the full consciousness of ample
powers and of fortunate opportunities, he sometimes forecast the
future, he doubtless saw himself succeeding Fisher Ames, and
Harrison Gray Otis, and Daniel Webster, rising from the bar to the
Legislature, from the Legislature to the Senate, from the Senate--
who knew whither?--the idol of society, the applauded orator, the
brilliant champion of the elegant repose and the cultivated
conservatism of Massachusetts.

2. The delight of social ease, the refined enjoyment of taste in
letters and art, opulent leisure, professional distinction,
gratified ambition--all these came and whispered to the young
student. And it is the force that can tranquilly put aside such
blandishments with a smile, and accept alienation, outlawry,
ignominy, and apparent defeat, if need be, no less than the
courage which grapples with poverty and outward hardship and
climbs over them to worldly prosperity, which is the test of the
finest manhood. Only he who fully knows the worth of what he
renounces gains the true blessing of renunciation.

3. When he first spoke at Faneuil Hall some of the most renowned
American orators were still in their prime. Webster and Clay were
in the Senate, Choate at the bar, Edward Everett upon the academic
platform. From all these orators Phillips differed more than they
differed from each other. Behind Webster, and Everett, and Clay
there was always a great organized party or an entrenched
conservatism of feeling and opinion. They spoke accepted views.
They moved with masses of men, and were sure of the applause of
party spirit, of political tradition, and of established
institutions. Phillips stood alone.

4. With no party behind him and appealing against established
order and acknowledged tradition, his speech was necessarily a
popular appeal for a strange and unwelcome cause, and the
condition of its success was that it should both charm and rouse
the hearer, while, under cover of the fascination, the orator
unfolded his argument and urged his plea. This condition the
genius of the orator instinctively perceived, and it determined
the character of his discourse.

5. He faced his audience with a tranquil mien and a beaming aspect
that was never dimmed. He spoke, and in the measured cadence of
his quiet voice there was intense feeling, but no declamation, no
passionate appeal, no superficial and feigned emotion. It was
simple colloquy--a gentleman conversing. Unconsciously and surely,
the ear and heart were charmed. How was it done? Ah! how did
Mozart do it, how Raphael? The secret of the rose's sweetness, of
the bird's ecstacy, of the sunset's glory--that is the secret of
genius and of eloquence.

6. What was heard, what was seen, was the form of noble manhood,
the courteous and self-possessed tone, the flow of modulated
speech, sparkling with matchless richness of illustration, with
apt illusion, and happy anecdote, and historic parallel, with wit
and pitiless invective, with melodious pathos, with stinging
satire, with crackling epigram and limpid humor, like the bright
ripples that play around the sure and steady prow of the
resistless ship. The divine energy of his conviction utterly
possessed him, and his

    "Pure and eloquent blood
    Spoke in his cheek, and so distinctly wrought
    That one might almost say his body thought."

7. Phillips cherished profound faith in the people, and because he
cherished it he never flattered the mob, nor hung upon its neck,
nor pandered to its passion, nor suffered its foaming hate or its
exulting enthusiasm to touch the calm poise of his regnant soul.
He moved in solitary majesty, and if from his smooth speech a
lightning flash of satire or of scorn struck a cherished lie, or
an honored character, or a dogma of the party creed, and the crowd
burst into a furious tempest of dissent, he beat it into silence
with uncompromising iteration. If it tried to drown his voice, he
turned to the reporters, and over the raging tumult calmly said,
"Howl on, I speak to 30,000,000 here."

8. There was another power in his speech sharper than in the
speech of any other American orator,--an unsparing invective. The
abolition appeal was essentially iconoclastic, and the method of a
reformer at close quarters with a mighty system of wrong cannot be
measured by the standards of cool and polite debate. Phillips did
not shrink from the sternest denunciation, or ridicule or scorn,
of those who seemed to him recreant to freedom and humanity. The
idols of a purely conventional virtue he delighted to shatter,
because no public enemy seemed to him more deadly than the
American who made moral cowardice respectable.

9. He knew that his ruthless words closed to him homes of
friendship and hearts of sympathy. He saw the amazement, he heard
the condemnation; but, like the great apostle preaching Christ, he
knew only humanity and humanity crucified. Tongue of the dumb,
eyes of the blind, feet of the impotent, his voice alone, among
the voices that were everywhere heard and heeded, was sent by God
to challenge every word, or look, or deed that seemed to him
possibly to palliate oppression or to comfort the oppressor.

10. I am not here to declare that the judgment of Wendell Phillips
was always sound, nor his estimate of men always just, nor his
policy always approved by the event. I am not here to eulogize the
mortal, but the immortal.

11. The plain house in which he lived--severely plain, because the
welfare of the suffering and the slave were preferred to book, and
picture, and every fair device of art; the house to which the
north star led the trembling fugitive, and which the unfortunate
and the friendless knew--the radiant figure passing swiftly
through these streets, plain as the house from which it came,
regal with, a royalty beyond that of kings--the ceaseless charity
untold--the strong, sustaining heart--the sacred domestic
affection that must not here be named--the eloquence which, like
the song of Orpheus, will fade from living memory into a doubtful
tale--the surrender of ambition, the consecration of a life hidden
with God in sympathy with man--these, all these, will live among
your immortal traditions, heroic even in your heroic story.

12. But not yours alone. As years go by, and only the large
outlines of lofty American characters and careers remain, the wide
republic will confess the benediction of a life like this, and
gladly own that if with perfect faith, and hope assured, America
would still stand and "bid the distant generations hail," the
inspiration of her national life must be the sublime moral
courage, the all-embracing humanity, the spotless integrity, the
absolutely unselfish devotion of great powers to great public
ends, which were the glory of Wendell Phillips.

GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.

THE BROOK.

I.

I come from haunts of coot and hern,
I make a sudden sally,
And sparkle out among the fern,
To bicker down a valley.

II.

By thirty hills I hurry down,
 Or slip between the ridges;
By twenty thorps, a little town,
 And half a hundred bridges.

III.

I chatter over stony ways,
 In little sharps and trebles,
I bubble into eddying bays,
 I babble on the pebbles.

IV.

With many a curve my banks I fret
 By many a field and fallow,
And many a fairy foreland set
 With willow-weed and mallow.

V.

I chatter, chatter, as I flow
 To join the brimming river,
For men may come, and men may go,
 But I go on for ever.

VI.

I wind about, and in and out,
 With here a blossom sailing,
And here and there a lusty trout,
 And here and there a grayling.

VII.

And here and there a foamy flake
Upon me as I travel,
With many a silvery water-break
Above the golden gravel.

VIII.

I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
I slide by hazel covers,
I move the sweet forget-me-nots
That grow for happy lovers.

IX.

I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
Among my skimming swallows;
I make the netted sunbeam dance
Against my sandy shallows.

X.

I murmur, under moon and stars
In brambly wildernesses,
I linger by my shingly bars,
I loiter round my cresses.

XI.

And out again I curve and flow
To join the brimming river;
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on for ever.

ALFRED TENNYSON.

OLD AUNT MARY'S.

Wasn't it pleasant, O, brother mine,
In those old days of the lost sunshine
Of youth--when the Saturday's chores were through,
And the "Sunday's wood" in the kitchen, too,
And we went visiting, "me and you,"
   Out to Old Aunt Mary's?

It all comes back so clear to-day!
Though I am as bald as you are gray--
Out by the barn-lot, and down the lane,
We patter along in the dust again,
As light as the tips of the drops of the rain,
   Out to Old Aunt Mary's!

We cross the pasture, and through the wood
Where the old gray snag of the poplar stood,
Where the hammering "red-heads" hopped awry,
And the buzzard "raised" in the "clearing" sky,
And lolled and circled, as we went by
   Out to Old Aunt Mary's.

And then in the dust of the road again;
And the teams we met, and the countrymen;
And the long highway, with sunshine spread
As thick as butter on country bread,
Our cares behind, and our hearts ahead
   Out to Old Aunt Mary's.

Why, I see her now in the open door,
Where the little gourds grew up the sides and o'er

The clapboard roof!--And her face--ah, me!
Wasn't it good for a boy to see
     Out to Old Aunt Mary's?

And, O, my brother, so far away,
This is to tell you she waits to-day
To welcome us:--Aunt Mary fell
Asleep this morning, whispering, "Tell
The boys to come!" And all is well
     Out to Old Aunt Mary's.
          JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY.


CHILD VERSE.

MY SHADOW.

I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
And what can be the use of him is more than I can see.
He is very, very like me from the heels up to the head;
And I see him jump before me, when I jump into my
bed.

The funniest thing about him is the way he likes to
     grow--
Not at all like proper children which is always very
     slow;
For he sometimes shoots up taller like an india-rubber
     ball,
And he sometimes gets so little that there's none of
     him at all.

He hasn't got a notion of how children ought to play,
And can only make a fool of me in every sort of way.
He stays so close beside me, he's a coward you can see;
I'd think shame to stick to nursie as that shadow sticks
to me!

One morning very early, before the sun was up,
I rose and found the shining dew on every buttercup;
But my lazy little shadow, like an arrant sleepy-head,
Had stayed at home behind me, and was fast asleep in
bed.

THE SWING.

How do you like to go up in a swing,
Up in the air so blue?
Oh, I do think it the pleasantest thing
Ever a child can do!

Up in the air and over the wall,
Till I can see so wide,
Rivers and trees and cattle and all
Over the country side.

Till I look down on the garden green,
Down on the roof so brown--
Up in the air I go flying again,
Up in the air and down!

THE LAMPLIGHTER.

My tea is nearly ready and the sun has left the sky;
It's time to take the window to see Leerie going by;
For every night at teatime and before you take your seat,
With lantern and with ladder he comes posting up the
street.

Now Tom would be a driver, and Maria go to sea,
And my papa's a banker and as rich as he can be;
But I, when I am stronger and can choose what I'm to do,
O Leerie, I'll go round at night and light the lamps
     with you!

For we are very lucky, with a lamp before the door,
And Leerie stops to light it as he lights so many more;
And Oh, before you hurry by with ladder and with light,
O Leerie, see a little child and nod to him to-night!

          ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

WAITING.

Serene, I fold my hands and wait,
Nor care for wind, or tide, or sea;
I rave no more 'gainst time or fate,
For lo! my own shall come to me.

I stay my haste, I make delays,
For what avails this eager pace?
I stand amid the eternal ways,
And what is mine shall know my face,

Asleep, awake, by night or day,
The friends I seek are seeking me;
No wind can drive my bark astray,
Nor change the tide of destiny.

What matter if I stand alone?
I wait with joy the coming years;
My heart shall reap where it has sown,
And garner up its fruit of tears.

The waters know their own, and draw
The brook that springs in yonder height;
So flows the good with equal law
Unto the soul of pure delight.

The stars come nightly to the sky;
The tidal wave unto the sea;
Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high,
Can keep my own away from me.

JOHN BURROUGHS.





CHAPTER III.

VOLUME.


THE REVENGE.

A BALLAD OF THE FLEET.

I.

At Flores in the Azores Sir Richard Grenville lay,
And a pinnance, like a flutter'd bird, came flying from
     far away:
"Spanish ships of war at sea! we have sighted fifty-
     three!"
Then sware Lord Thomas Howard: "'Fore God I am
     no coward;
But I cannot meet them here, for my ships are out of
     gear,
And the half my men are sick. I must fly, but follow
     quick.
We are six ships of the line; can we fight with fifty-
     three?"

II.

Then spake Sir Richard Grenville: "I know you are
     no coward;
You fly them for a moment to fight with them again.
But I've ninety men and more that are lying sick ashore.
I should count myself the coward if I left them, Lord Howard,
To these Inquisition dogs and the devildoms of Spain."

III.

So Lord Howard past away with five ships of war that day,
Till he melted like a cloud in the silent summer heaven;
But Sir Richard bore in hand all his sick men from the land
Very carefully and slow,
Men of Bideford in Devon,
And we laid them on the ballast down below;
For we brought them all aboard,
And they blest him in their pain, that they were not
  left to Spain,
To the thumbscrew and the stake, for the glory of the Lord.

IV.

He had only a hundred seamen to work the ship and to fight,
And he sailed away from Flores till the Spaniard came in
  sight,
With his huge sea-castles heaving upon the weather bow.
"Shall we fight or shall we fly?
Good Sir Richard, tell us now,
For to fight is but to die!
There'll be little of us left by the time this sun be set."
And Sir Richard said again: "We be all good English
     men.
Let us bang these dogs of Seville, the children of the
     devil,
For I never turn'd my back upon Don or devil yet."

V.

Sir Richard spoke and he laugh'd, and we roar'd a
     hurrah, and so
The little Revenge ran on sheer into the heart of the
     foe,
With her hundred fighters on deck, and her ninety sick
     below;
For half of their fleet to the right and half to the left
     were seen,
And the little Revenge ran on thro' the long sea-lane
     between.

VI.

Thousands of their soldiers look'd down from their
     decks and laugh'd,
Thousands of their seamen made mock at the mad little
     craft
Running on and on, till delay'd
By their mountain-like San Philip that, of fifteen hundred
     tons,
And up-shadowing high above us with her yawning
     tiers of guns,
Took the breath from our sails, and we stay'd.

VII.

And while now the great San Philip hung above us
     like a cloud
Whence the thunderbolt will fall
Long and loud,
Four galleons drew away
From the Spanish fleet that day,
And two upon the larboard and two upon the starboard
lay,
And the battle-thunder broke from them all.

VIII.

But anon the great San Philip, she bethought herself
  and went
Having that within her womb that had left her ill
  content;
And the rest they came aboard us, and they fought us
  hand to hand,
For a dozen times they came with their pikes and
  musqueteers,
And a dozen times we shook 'em off as a dog that
  shakes his ears
When he leaps from the water to the land.

IX.

And the sun went down, and the stars came out far
  over the summer sea,
But never a moment ceased the fight of the one and
  the fifty-three.
Ship after ship, the whole night long, their high-built
  galleons came,
Ship after ship, the whole night long, with her battle-
  thunder and flame;
Ship after ship, the whole night long, drew back with
  her dead and her shame.
For some were sunk and many were shattered, and so
     could fight us no more--
God of battles, was ever a battle like this in the world
     before?

X.

For he said "Fight on! fight on!"
Tho' his vessel was all but a wreck;
And it chanced that, when half of the short summer
     night was gone,
With a grisly wound to be drest he had left the deck,
But a bullet struck him that was dressing it suddenly
     dead,
And himself he was wounded again in the side and the
     head,
And he said "Fight on! fight on!"

XI.

And the night went down, and the sun smiled out far
     over the summer sea,
And the Spanish fleet with broken sides lay round us
     all in a ring;
But they dared not touch us again, for they fear'd that
     we still could sting,
So they watch'd what the end would be.
And we had not fought them in vain,
But in perilous plight were we,
Seeing forty of our poor hundred were slain,
And half of the rest of us maim'd for life
In the crash of the cannonades and the desperate strife;
And the sick men down in the hold were most of them
     stark and cold,
And the pikes were all broken or bent, and the powder
was all of it spent;
And the masts and the rigging were lying over the side;
But Sir Richard cried in his English pride,
"We have fought such a fight for a day and a night
As may never be fought again!
We have won great glory, my men!
And a day less or more
At sea or ashore,
We die--does it matter when?
Sink me the ship, Master Gunner--sink her, split her
  in twain!
Fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of
  Spain!"

XII.

And the gunner said "Ay, ay," but the seaman made
  reply:
"We have children, we have wives,
And the Lord hath spared our lives.
We will make the Spaniard promise, if we yield, to let
  us go;
We shall live to fight again and to strike another blow."
And the lion there lay dying, and they yielded to the
  foe.

XIII.

And the stately Spanish men to their flagship bore
  him then,
Where they laid him by the mast, old Sir Richard
  caught at last,
And they praised him to his face with their courtly foreign
  grace;
But he rose upon their decks, and he cried:
"I have fought for Queen and Faith like a valiant man
     and true;
I have only done my duty as a man is bound to do:
With a joyful spirit I Sir Richard Grenville die!"
And he fell upon their decks, and he died.

XIV.

And they stared at the dead that had been so valiant
     and true,
And had holden the power and glory of Spain so cheap
That he dared her with one little ship and his English
     few;
Was he devil or man? He was devil for aught they
     knew,
But they sank his body with honor down into the deep,
And they mann'd the Revenge with a swarthier alien crew,
And away she sail'd with her loss and long'd for her
     own;
When a wind from the lands they had ruin'd awoke
     from sleep,
And the water began to heave and the weather to moan,
And or ever that evening ended a great gale blew,
And a wave like the wave that is raised by an earthquake grew,
Till it smote on their hulls and their sails and their
     masts and their flags,
And the whole sea plunged and fell on the shot-shatter'd
     navy of Spain,
And the little Revenge herself went down by the island
     crags
To be lost evermore in the main.

          ALFRED TENNYSON.

THE OCEAN.

I.

There is a pleasure in the pathless woods,
There is a rapture on the lonely shore;
There is society, where none intrudes,
By the deep sea, and music in its roar;
I love not man the less, but nature more,
From these our interviews in which I steal
From all I may be, or have been before,
To mingle with the universe, and feel
What I can ne'er express, yet cannot all conceal.

II.

Roll on, thou deep and dark-blue ocean--roll!
Ten thousand fleets sweep over thee in vain;
Man marks the earth with ruin--his control
Stops with the shore;--upon the watery plain
The wrecks are all thy deed, nor doth remain
A shadow of man's ravage, save his own,
When for a moment like a drop of rain,
He sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan,
Without a grave, unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown.

III.

The armaments which thunderstrike the walls
Of rock-built cities, bidding nations quake,
And monarchs tremble in their capitals;
The oak leviathans, whose huge ribs make
Their clay creator the vain title take
Of lord of thee, and arbiter of war,--
These are thy toys, and, as the snowy flake,
They melt into thy yeast of waves, which mar
Alike the Armada's pride, or spoils of Trafalgar.

IV.

Thy shores are empires, changed in all save thee--
Assyria, Greece, Rome, Carthage,--what are they?
Thy waters wasted them while they were free,
And many a tyrant since; their shores obey
The stranger, slave or savage; their decay
Has dried up realms to deserts;--not so thou,
Unchangeable, save to thy wild waves' play-
Time writes no wrinkle on thine azure brow--
Such as creation's dawn beheld, thou rollest now.

V.

Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty's form
Glasses itself in tempests; in all time,
Calm or convulsed--in breeze, or gale, or storm,
Icing the pole, or in the torrid clime
Dark-heaving;--boundless, endless, and sublime--
The image of Eternity--the throne
Of the Invisible; even from out thy slime
The monsters of the deep are made; each zone
Obeys thee: thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.

VI.

And I have loved thee, Ocean! and my joy
Of youthful sport was on thy breast to be
Borne, like thy bubbles, onward: from a boy
I wantoned with thy breakers--they to me
Were a delight; and if thy freshening sea
Made them a terror, 'twas a pleasing fear;
For I was, as it were, a child of thee,
And trusted to thy billows far and near,
And laid my hand upon thy mane--as I do here.

LORD BYRON.

SPARTACUS TO THE GLADIATORS AT CAPUA.

1. Ye call me chief; and ye do well to call him chief who for
twelve long years has met upon the arena every shape of man or
beast the broad Empire of Rome could furnish, and who never yet
lowered his arm. If there be one among you who can say that ever,
in public fight or private brawl, my actions did belie my tongue,
let him stand forth and say it. If there be three of all your
company dare face me on the bloody sand, let them come on.

2. And yet I was not always thus,--a hired butcher, a savage chief
of still more savage men. My ancestors came from old Sparta, and
settled among the vine-clad rocks and citron groves of Syrasella.
My early life ran quiet as the brooks by which I sported; and
when, at noon, I gathered the sheep beneath the shade, and played
upon the shepherd's flute, there was a friend, the son of a
neighbor, to join me in the pastime. We led our flocks to the same
pasture, and partook together our rustic meal.

3. One evening, after the sheep were folded, and we were all
seated beneath the myrtle which shaded our cottage, my grandsire,
an old man, was telling of Marathon and Leuctra; and how, in
ancient times, a little band of Spartans, in a defile of the
mountains, had withstood a whole army. I did not then know what
war was; but my cheeks burned, I know not why, and I clasped the
knees of that venerable man, until my mother, parting the hair
from off my forehead, kissed my throbbing temples, and bade me go
to rest, and think no more of those old tales and savage wars.

4. That very night the Romans landed on our coast. I saw the
breast that had nourished me trampled by the hoof of the war
horse--the bleeding body of my father flung amidst the blazing
rafters of our dwelling! Today I killed a man in the arena; and,
when I broke his helmet-clasps, behold! he was my friend! He knew
me, smiled faintly, gasped, and died;--the same sweet smile upon
his lips that I had marked, when, in adventurous boyhood, we
scaled the lofty cliff to pluck the first ripe grapes, and bear
them home in childish triumph!

5. I told the praetor that the dead man had been my friend,
generous and brave; and I begged that I might bear away the body,
to burn it on a funeral pile, and mourn over its ashes. Ay! upon
my knees, amid the dust and blood of the arena, I begged that poor
boon, while all the assembled maids and matrons, and the holy
virgins they call vestals, and the rabble, shouted in derision,
deeming it rare sport, forsooth, to see Rome's fiercest gladiator
turn pale and tremble at sight of that piece of bleeding clay! And
the praetor drew back as if I were pollution, and sternly said,
"Let the carrion rot! There are no noble men but Romans."

6. And so, fellow gladiators, must you, and so must I, die like
dogs! O Rome! Rome! thou hast been a tender nurse to me. Ay! thou
hast given to that poor, gentle, timid shepherd lad, who never
knew a harsher tone than a flute-note, muscles of iron and a heart
of flint; taught him to drive the sword through plaited mail and
links of rugged brass, and warm it in the marrow of his foe;--to
gaze into the glaring eyeballs of the fierce Numidian lion, even
as a boy upon a laughing girl! And he shall pay thee back, until
the yellow Tiber is red as frothing wine, and in its deepest ooze
thy life-blood lies curdled!

7. Ye stand here now like giants, as ye are! The strength of brass
is in your toughened sinews; but to-morrow some Roman Adonis,
breathing sweet perfume from his curly locks, shall with his lily
fingers pat your red brawn, and bet his sesterces upon your blood.
Hark! hear ye yon lion roaring in his den? 'Tis three days since
he has tasted flesh; but to-morrow he shall break his fast upon
yours,--and a dainty meal for him ye will be!

8. If ye are beasts, then stand here like fat oxen, waiting for
the butcher's knife! If ye are men, follow me! Strike down yon
guard, gain the mountain passes, and then do bloody word, as did
your sires at old Thermopylae! Is Sparta dead? Is the old Grecian
spirit frozen in your veins, that you do crouch and cower like a
belabored hound beneath his master's lash? O comrades! warriors!
Thracians! if we must fight, let us fight for ourselves! If we
must slaughter, let us slaughter our oppressors! If we must die,
let it be under the clear sky, by the bright waters, in noble,
honorable battle.

REV. ELIJAH KELLOGG.

TELL TO HIS NATIVE MOUNTAINS.

I.

Ye crags and peaks, I'm with you once again!
I hold to you the hands you first beheld,
To show they still are free. Methinks I hear
A spirit in your echoes answer me,
And bid your tenant welcome home again!

II.

O sacred forms, how proud you look!
How high you lift your heads into the sky!
How huge you are! how mighty and how free!
How do you look, for all your bared brows,
More gorgeously majestical than kings
Whose loaded coronets exhaust the mine.

III.

Ye are the things that tower, that shine; whose smile
Makes glad--whose frown is terrible; whose forms,
Robed or unrobed, do all the impress wear
Of awe divine; whose subject never kneels
In mockery, because it is your boast
To keep him free!

IV.

     Ye guards of liberty,
I'm with you once again! I call to you
With all my voice! I hold my hands to you
To show they still are free. I rush to you
As though I could embrace you!

V.

     The hour
Will soon be here. Oh, when will Liberty
Once more be here? Scaling yonder peak,
I saw an eagle wheeling near its brow,
O'er the abyss his broad-expanded wings
Lay calm and motionless upon the air
As if he floated there without their aid,
By the sole act of his unlorded will,
That buoyed him proudly up.

VI.

     Instinctively
I bent my bow; yet kept he rounding still
His airy circle, as in the delight
Of measuring the ample range beneath
And round about; absorbed, he heeded not
The death that threatened him. I could not shoot.
'Twas liberty. I turned my bow aside,
And let him soar away.

JAMES SHERIDAN KNOWLES.


BATTLE HYMN.

I.

Father of earth and heaven! I call thy name!
Round me the smoke and shout of battle roll;
My eyes are dazzled with the rustling flame;
Father, sustain an untried soldier's soul!
Or life or death, whatever be the goal
That crowns or closes round this struggling hour,
Thou knowest, if ever from my spirit stole
One deeper prayer,'twas that no cloud might lower
On my young fame! Oh, hear, God of eternal power!

II.

God! thou art merciful--the wintry storm,
The cloud that pours the thunder from its womb,
But show the sterner grandeur of thy form;
The lightnings glancing through the midnight
  gloom,
To Faith's raised eye as calm, as lovely come,
As splendors of the autumnal evening star,
As roses shaken by the breeze's plume,
When like cool incense comes the dewy air,
And on the golden wave the sunset burns afar.

III.

God! thou art mighty!--at thy footstool bound,
     Lie gazing to thee Chance, and Life, and Death;
Nor in the Angel-circle flaming round,
     Nor in the million worlds that blaze beneath
     Is one that can withstand thy wrath's hot breath--
Woe in thy frown--in thy smile, victory!
     Hear my last prayer--I ask no mortal wreath;
Let but these eyes my rescued country see,
Then take my spirit, All-Omnipotent, to thee.

IV.

Now for the fight--now for the cannon-peal--
     Forward--through blood and toil, and cloud and
          fire!
Glorious the shout, the shock, the crash of steel,
     The volley's roll, the rocket's blasting spire;
     They shake--like broken waves their squares
          retire,--
On, them, hussars!--now give them rein and heel;
     Think of the orphaned child, the murdered sire:--
Earth cries for blood--in thunder on them wheel!
This hour to Europe's fate shall set the triumph seal.

          KARL THEODORE KORNER.

SELF-RELIANCE.

1. To believe your own thought, to believe that what is true for
you in your private heart is true for all men,--that is genius.
Speak your latent conviction, and it shall be the universal sense;
for the inmost in due time becomes the outmost, and our first
thought is rendered back to us by the trumpets of the Last
Judgment. Familiar as the voice of the mind is to each, the
highest merit we ascribe to Moses, Plato and Milton is that they
set at naught books and traditions, and spoke not what men, but
what THEY thought.

2. A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light
which flashes across his mind from within, more than the lustre of
the firmament of bards and sages. Yet he dismisses without notice
his thought, because it is his. In every work of genius we
recognize our own rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a
certain alienated majesty.

3. Great works of art have no more affecting lesson for us than
this. They teach us to abide by our spontaneous impression with
good-humored inflexibility then most when the whole cry of voices
is on the other side. Else to-morrow a stranger will say with
masterly good sense precisely what we have thought and felt all
the time, and we shall be forced to take with shame our own
opinion from another.

4. There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the
conviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that
he must take himself for better for worse as his portion; that
though the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing
corn can come to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of
ground which is given to him to till. The power which resides in
him is new in nature, and none but he knows what that is which he
can do, nor does he know until he has tried. 5. Not for nothing
one face, one character, one fact, makes much impression on him,
and another none. This sculpture in the memory is not without pre-
established harmony. The eye was placed where one ray should fall,
that it might testify of that particular ray.

6. We but half express ourselves, and are ashamed of that divine
idea which each of us represents. It may be safely trusted as
proportionate and of good issues, so it be faithfully imparted,
but God will not have his work made manifest by cowards. A man is
relieved and gay when he has put his heart into his work and done
his best; but what he has said or done otherwise shall give him no
peace. It is a deliverance which does not deliver. In the attempt
his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; no invention, no hope.

7. Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string. Accept
the place the divine providence has found for you, the society of
your contemporaries, the connection of events. Great men have
always done so, and confided themselves childlike to the genius of
their age, betraying their perception that the Eternal was
stirring at their heart, working through their hands,
predominating in all their being.

8. And we are now men, and must accept in the highest mind the
same transcendent destiny; and not minors and invalids pinched in
a corner, not cowards fleeing before a revolution, but guides,
redeemers and benefactors, pious aspirants to be noble clay under
the Almighty effort, let us advance on Chaos and the Dark.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

ADAMS AND JEFFERSON.

1. Adams and Jefferson, I have said, are no more. As human beings,
indeed, they are no more. They are no more, as in 1776, bold and
fearless advocates of independence; no more, as on subsequent
periods, the head of the government; no more, as we have recently
seen them, aged and venerable objects of admiration and regard.
They are no more. They are dead.

2. But how little is there of the great and good which can die? To
their country they yet live, and live forever. They live in all
that perpetuates the remembrance of men on earth; in the recorded
proofs of their own great actions, in the offspring of their
intellect, in the deep engraved lines of public gratitude, and in
the respect and homage of mankind. They live in their example; and
they live, emphatically, and will live, in the influence which
their lives and efforts, their principles and opinions, now
exercise, and will continue to exercise, on the affairs of men,
not only in their own country, but throughout the civilized world.

3. A superior and commanding human intellect, a truly great man,--
when heaven vouchsafes so rare a gift,--is not a temporary flame,
burning bright for awhile, and then expiring, giving place to
returning darkness. It is rather a spark of fervent heat, as well
as radiant light, with power to enkindle the common mass of human
mind; so that, when it glimmers in its own decay, and finally goes
out in death, no night follows; but it leaves the world all light,
all on fire, from the potent contact of its own spirit.

4. Bacon died; but the human understanding, roused by the torch of
his miraculous mind to a perception of the true philosophy and the
just mode of inquiring after truth, has kept on its course
successfully and gloriously. Newton died; yet the courses of the
spheres are still known, and they yet move on, in the orbits which
he saw and described for them, in the infinity of space.

5. No two men now live--perhaps it may be doubted whether any two
men have ever lived in one age,--who, more than those we now
commemorate, have impressed their own sentiments, in regard to
politics and government, on mankind; infused their own opinions
more deeply into the opinions of others; or given a more lasting
direction to the current of human thought. Their work doth not
perish with them. The tree which they assisted to plant will
flourish, although they water it and protect it no longer; for it
has struck its roots deep; it has sent them to the very center; no
storm, not of force to burst the orb, can overturn it; its
branches spread wide; they stretch their protecting arms broader
and broader, and its top is destined to reach the heavens.

6. We are not deceived. There is no delusion here. No age will
come, in which the American Revolution will appear less than it
is--one of the greatest events in human history. No age will come,
in which in it will cease to be seen and felt, on either
continent, that a mighty step, a great advance, not only in
American affairs, but in human affairs, was made on the 4th of
July, 1776. And no age will come, we trust, so ignorant, or so
unjust, as not to see and acknowledge the efficient agency of
these we now honor, in producing that momentous event.

DANIEL WEBSTER.

THE DEFENCE OF LUCKNOW.

I.

Banner of England, not for a season, O banner of
     Britain, hast thou
Floated in conquering battle or flapt to the battle cry!
Never with mightier glory than when we had reared
     thee on high,
Flying at top of the roofs in the ghastly siege at Lucknow--
Shot through the staff or the halyard, but ever we raised
 thee anew,
And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of England blew.

II.

Frail were the works that defended the hold that we
  held with our lives--
Women and children among us--God help them, our
  children and wives!
Hold it we might--and for fifteen days or for twenty at most.
"Never surrender, I charge you, but every man die at his
  post!"
Voice of the dead whom we loved, our Lawrence the
  best of the brave;
Cold were his brows when we kissed him--we laid
  him that night in his grave.

III.

"Every man die at his post!" and there hailed on our
   houses and halls
Death from their rifle bullets, and death from their cannon
   balls,
Death in our innermost chamber, and death at our slight
   barricade,
Death while we stood with the musket, and death while
   we stoopt to the spade,
Death to the dying, and wounds to the wounded, for
  often there fell,
Striking the hospital wall, crashing through it, their
  shot and their shell,

IV.

Death--for their spies were among us, their marksman
  were told of our best,
So that the brute bullet broke through the brain that
  could think for the rest;
Bullets would sing by our foreheads, and bullets would
  rain at our feet--
Fire from ten thousand at once of the rebels that girdled
  us round;
Death at the glimpse of a finger from over the breadth
  of a street,
Death from the heights of the mosque and the palace--
  and death in the ground!

V.

Mine? yes, a mine! Countermine! down, down! and
  creep through the hole,
Keep the revolver in hand! You can hear him--the
  murderous mole.
Quiet! ah! quiet--wait till the point of the pickaxe
  be through!
Click with the pick, coming nearer and nearer again
  than before--
Now let it speak, and you fire, and the dark pioneer is
  no more;
And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of England
  blew.

VI.

Ay, but the foe sprung his mine many times, and it
            chanced on a day,
Soon as the blast of that underground thunder-clap
            echoed away,
Dark through the smoke and the sulphur, like so many
            fiends in their hell--
Cannon-shot, musket-shot, volley on volley, and yell
            upon yell--
Fiercely on all the defences our myriad enemies fell.

VII.

What have they done? where is it? Out yonder.
           Guard the Redan!
Storm at the Water-gate, storm at the Bailey-gate!
           storm, and it ran
Surging and swaying all round us, as ocean on every
           side
Plunges and heaves at a bank that is daily drowned by
           the tide--
So many thousands that if they be bold enough, who
           shall escape?
Kill or be killed, live or die, they shall know we are
           soldiers and men.

VIII.

Ready! take aim at their leaders--their masses are
           gapped with our grape--
Backward they reel like the wave, like the wave
           flinging forward again,
Flying and foiled at the last by the handful they could
            not subdue;
And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of England
           blew.

IX.

Handful of men as we were, we were English in heart
          and in limb,
Strong with the strength of the race to command, to
          obey, to endure,
Each of us fought as if hope for the garrison hung but
          on him--
Still, could we watch at all points? We were every
          day fewer and fewer.

X.

There was a whisper among us, but only a whisper
          that passed--
"Children and wives--if the tigers leap into the folds
          unawares,
Every man die at his post--and the foe may outlive
          us at last,
Better to fall by the hands that they love, than to fall
         into theirs."

XI.

Roar upon roar--in a moment two mines, by the
          enemy sprung,
Clove into perilous chasms our walls and our poor palisades.
Riflemen, true is your heart, but be sure that your hand
           be as true.
Sharp is the fire of assault, better aimed are your flank
          fusilades;
Twice do we hurl them to earth from the ladders to
          which they had clung,
Twice from the ditch where they shelter we drive them
          with hand grenades--,
And ever upon the topmost roof our banner of England
          blew.

XII.

Then on another wild morning another wild earthquake
          out-tore
Clean from our lines of defence ten or twelve good
          paces or more.
Riflemen, high on the roof, hidden there from the light
          of the sun--
One has leapt up on the breach, crying out, "Follow
          me, follow me!"
Mark him--he falls! then another, and him, too, and
          down goes he.

XIII.

Had they been bold enough then, who can tell but that
          the traitors had won?
Boardings, and raftings, and doors--an embrasure;
          make way for the gun!
Now, double charge it with grape! It is charged, and
          we fire, and they run.
Praise to our Indian brothers, and let the dark face
          have his due.
Thanks to the kindly dark faces who fought with us,
           faithful and few,
Fought with the bravest among us, and drove them,
           and smote them, and slew--
That ever upon the topmost roof our banner in India
           blew.

XIV.

Hark! cannonade! fusilade! is it true that was told
           by the scout?
Outram and Havelock breaking their way through the
           fell mutineers?

Surely, the pibroch of Europe is ringing again in our ears!
All on a sudden the garrison utter a jubilant shout;
Havelock's glorious Highlanders answer with conquering
           cheers.

XV.

Forth from their holes and their hidings our women
           and children come out,
Blessing the wholesome white faces of Havelock's good
           fusileers,
Kissing the war-hardened hand of the Highlander wet
           with their tears.
Dance to the pibroch! saved! we are saved! is it you?
           is it you?
Saved by the valor of Havelock, saved by the blessing
           of Heaven!
"Hold it for fifteen days!" we have held it for eighty-
           seven!
And ever aloft on the palace roof the old banner of
           England blew.

ALFRED TENNYSON.

SONNETS.

To one who has been long in city pent,
'Tis very sweet to look into the fair
And open face of heaven,--to breathe a prayer
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.

Who is more happy, when, with heart's content,
Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair
Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair
And gentle tale of love and languishment?

Returning home at evening, with an ear
Catching the notes of Philomel,--an eye
Watching the sailing cloudlet's bright career,

He mourns that day so soon has glided by:
E'en like the passage of an angel's tear
That falls through the clear ether silently.

J. KEATS.


The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers:
Little we see in Nature that is ours;
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
The Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
The winds that will be howling at all hours,
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers;
For this, for everything, we are out of tune;
It moves us not.--Great God! I'd rather be
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn,
Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.


When I consider how my light is spent
Ere half my days in this dark world and wide,
And that one talent which is death to hide,
Lodg'd with me useless, though my soul more bent
To serve therewith my Maker, and present
My true account, lest he returning chide.
Doth God exact day labor, light deny'd,
I fondly ask? but patience to prevent
That murmur soon replies, God doth not need
Either man's work or his own gifts; who best
Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best: his state
Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed,
And post o'er land and ocean without rest;
They also serve who only stand and wait.

JOHN MILTON.


How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
For the ends of Being and Ideal Grace.
I love thee to the level of every day's
Most quiet need, by sun and candlelight.
I love thee freely, as men strive for Right;
I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise;
I love thee with the passion put to use
In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith;
I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
With my lost saints,--I love thee with the breath,
Smiles, tears, of all my life!--and, if God choose,
I shall but love thee better after death.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BBOWNING.


IS THERE, FOR HONEST POVERTY.

I.

Is there, for honest poverty,
That hangs his head, and a' that?
The coward slave, we pass him by,
We dare be poor for a' that!
For a' that, and a' that,
Our toils obscure, and a' that;
The rank is but the guinea-stamp,
The man's the gowd for a' that.

II.

What though on hamely fare we dine.
Wear hodden gray and a' that,
Gie fools their silks, and knaves their wine,
A man's a man, for a' that!
For a' that, and a' that,
Their tinsel show, and a' that;
The honest man, though e'er sae poor,
Is king o' men for a' that!

III.

Ye see yon birkie, ca'd a lord,
Wha struts, and stares, and a' that;
Though hundreds worship at his word,
He's but a coof for a' that:
For a' that, and a' that,
His riband, star, and a' that;
The man of independent mind,
He looks and laughs at a' that!

IV.

A king can mak a belted knight,
A marquis, duke, and a' that;
But an honest man's aboon his might,
Guid faith he maunna fa' that!
For a' that, and a' that,
Their dignities, and a' that,
The pith o' sense, and pride o' worth,
Are higher rank than a' that.

V.

Then let us pray that come it may--
As come it will for a' that--
That sense and worth, o'er a' the earth
May bear the gree, and a' that;
For a' that, and a' that,
It's coming yet for a' that,
That man to man, the warld o'er,
Shall brothers be for a' that.

ROBERT BURNS.





CHAPTER IV.

FORMING THE ELEMENTS.

HAMLET TO THE PLAYERS.


1. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of our
players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do
not saw the air too much with your hand, thus; but use all gently:
for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say) whirlwind of
your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance, that may
give it smoothness.

2. Oh, it offends me to the soul, to hear a robustious periwig-
pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the
ears of the groundlings, who, for the most part, are capable of
nothing but inexplicable dumb shows, and noise: I would have such
a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod:
pray you, avoid it.

3. Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your
tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature; for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
whose end, both at the first, and now, was, and is, to hold, as
'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,
scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time, his
form and pressure.

4. Now this, overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the
unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure
of which one, must, in your allowance, o'erweigh a whole theatre
of others. Oh, there be players, that I have seen play, and heard
others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that,
neither having the accent of Christians, nor the gait of
Christian, Pagan, nor man, have so strutted, and bellowed, that I
have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men, and not
made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.

THE BOY AND THE ANGEL.

Morning, evening, noon and night,
"Praise God!" sang Theocrite.
Then to his poor trade he turned,
Whereby the daily meal was earned.
Hard he labored, long and well;
O'er his work the boy's curls fell.
But ever, at each period,
He stopped and sang, "Praise God!"

II.

Then back again his curls he threw,
And cheerful turned to work anew.
Said Blaise, the listening monk, "Well done;
I doubt not thou art heard, my son:
As well as if thy voice to-day
Were praising God, the Pope's great way.
This Easter Day, the Pope at Rome
Praises God from Peter's dome."

III.

Said Theocrite, "Would God that I
Might praise him, that great way, and die!"
Night passed, day shone,
And Theocrite was gone.
With God a day endures alway,
A thousand years are but a day.
God said in heaven, "Nor day nor night
Now brings the voice of my delight."

IV.

Then Gabriel, like a rainbow's birth,
Spread his wings and sank to earth;
Entered, in flesh, the empty cell,
Lived there, and played the craftsman well;
And morning, evening, noon and night,
Praised God in place of Theocrite.
And from a boy, to youth he grew:
The man put off the stripling's hue:

V.

The man matured and fell away
Into the season of decay:
And ever o'er the trade he bent,
And ever lived on earth content.
(He did God's will; to him, all one
If on the earth or in the sun.)
God said, "A praise is in mine ear;
There is no doubt in it, no fear:

VI.

"So sing old worlds, and so
New worlds that from my footstool go.
Clearer loves sound other ways;
I miss my little human praise."
Then forth sprang Gabriel's wings, off fell
The flesh disguise, remained the cell.
'Twas Easter Day: he flew to Rome,
And paused above Saint Peter's dome.

VII.

In the tiring-room close by
The great outer gallery,
With his holy vestments dight,
Stood the new Pope, Theocrite;
And all his past career
Came back upon him clear,
Since when, a boy, he plied his trade,
Till on his life the sickness weighed;

VIII.

And in his cell, when death drew near,
An angel in a dream brought cheer:
And rising from the sickness drear,
He grew a priest, and now stood here.
To the East with praise he turned,
And on his sight the angel burned.
"I bore thee from thy craftsman's cell,
And set thee here; I did not well,

IX.

"Vainly I left my angel-sphere,
Vain was thy dream of many a year.
Thy voice's praise seemed weak: it dropped--
Creation's chorus stopped!
Go back and praise again
The early way, while I remain.
With that weak voice of our disdain,
Take up creation's pausing strain.

X.

"Back to the cell and poor employ;
Resume the craftsman and the boy!"
Theocrite grew old at home;
A new Pope dwelt at Peter's dome.
One vanished as the other died:
They sought God side by side.

ROBERT BROWNING.

SPEECH AND SILENCE.

1. He who speaks honestly cares not, needs not care, though his
words be preserved to remotest time. The dishonest speaker, not he
only who purposely utters falsehoods, but he who does not
purposely, and with sincere heart, utter Truth, and Truth alone;
who babbles he knows not what, and has clapped no bridle on his
tongue, but lets it run racket, ejecting chatter and futility--is
among the most indisputable malefactors omitted, or inserted, in
the Criminal Calendar.

2. To him that will well consider it, idle speaking is precisely
the beginning of all Hollowness, Halfness, Infidelity (want of
Faithfulness); it is the genial atmosphere in which rank weeds of
every kind attain the mastery over noble fruits in man's life, and
utterly choke them out: one of the most crying maladies of these
days, and to be testified against, and in all ways to the
uttermost withstood.

3. Wise, of a wisdom far beyond our shallow depth, was that old
precept, "Watch thy tongue; out of it are the issues of Life!" Man
is properly an incarnated word: the word that he speaks is the man
himself. Were eyes put into our head, that we might see, or that
we might fancy, and plausibly pretend, we had seen? Was the tongue
suspended there, that it might tell truly what we had seen, and
make man the soul's brother of man; or only that it might utter
vain sounds, jargon, soul-confusing, and so divide man, as by
enchanting walls of Darkness, from union with man?

4. Thou who wearest that cunning, heaven-made organ, a Tongue,
think well of this. Speak not, I passionately entreat thee, till
thy thought have silently matured itself, till thou have other
than mad and mad-making noises to emit: hold thy tongue till some
meaning lie behind, to set it wagging.

5. Consider the significance of SILENCE: it is boundless, never by
meditating to be exhausted, unspeakably profitable to thee! Cease
that chaotic hubbub, wherein thy own soul runs to waste, to
confused suicidal dislocation and stupor; out of Silence comes thy
strength. "Speech is silvern, silence is golden; speech is human,
silence is divine."

6. Fool! thinkest thou that because no one stands near with
parchment and blacklead to note thy jargon, it therefore dies and
is harmless? Nothing dies, nothing can die. No idlest word thou
speakest but is a seed cast into Time, and grows through all
Eternity! The Recording Angel, consider it well, is no fable, but
the truest of truths: the paper tablets thou canst burn; of the
"iron leaf" there is no burning.

THOMAS CARLYLE.

THE RICH MAN AND THE POOR MAN.

I.

So goes the world;--if wealthy, you may call
THIS friend, THAT brother;--friends and brothers all;
Though you are worthless--witless--never mind it:
You may have been a stable-boy--what then?
'Tis wealth, good sir, makes HONORABLE MEN.
You seek respect, no doubt, and YOU will find it.

II.

But if you are poor, Heaven help you! though your sire
Had royal blood within him, and though you
Possess the intellect of angels, too,
'Tis all in vain;--the world will ne'er inquire
On such a score:--Why should it take the pains?
'Tis easier to weigh purses, sure, than brains.

III.

I once saw a poor fellow, keen and clever,
Witty and wise:--he paid a man a visit,
And no one noticed him, and no one ever
Gave him a welcome. "Strange!" cried I, "whence is
  it?"
    He walked on this side, then on that,
    He tried to introduce a social chat;
Now here, now there, in vain he tried;
Some formally and freezingly replied,
                                    And some
Said by their silence--"Better stay at home."

IV.

A rich man burst the door;
As Croesus rich, I'm sure
He could not pride himself upon his wit,
And as for wisdom, he had none of it;
He had what's better; he had wealth.
What a confusion!--all stand up erect--
These crowd around to ask him of his health;
These bow in HONEST duty and respect;
And these arrange a sofa or a chair,
And these conduct him there.
"Allow me, sir, the honor;"--Then a bow
Down to the earth--Is't possible to show
Meet gratitude for such kind condescension?

V.

The poor man hung his head,
And to himself he said,
"This is indeed beyond my comprehension;"
Then looking round,
One friendly face he found,
And said, "Pray tell me why is wealth preferred
To wisdom?"--"That's a silly question, friend!"
Replied the other--"have you never heard,
A man may lend his store
Of gold or silver ore,
But wisdom none can borrow, none can lend?"

KHEMNITZER.

THE GATHERING OF THE FAIRIES.

I.

'Tis the middle watch of a summer's night--
The earth is dark, but the heavens are bright;
Naught is seen in the vault on high
But the moon, and the stars, and the cloudless sky,
And the flood which rolls its milky hue,
A river of light on the welkin blue.
The moon looks down on old Cro'nest;
She mellows the shades on his craggy breast;
And seems his huge gray form to throw
In a silver cone on the waves below.
His sides are broken by spots of shade,
By the walnut-bough and the cedar made,
And through their clustering branches dark
Glimmers and dies the fire-fly's spark,
Like starry twinkles that momently peak
Through the rifts of the gathering tempest's rack.

II.

The stars are on the moving stream,
And fling, as its ripples gently flow,
A burnished length of wavy beam
In an eel-like, spiral line below;
The winds are whist, and the owl is still,
The bat in the shelvy rock is hid.
And naught is heard on the lonely hill
But the cricket's chirp, and the answer shrill
Of the gauze-winged katy-did,
And the plaint of the wailing whippoorwill,
         Who moans unseen, and ceaseless sings,
Ever a note of wail and woe,
         Till the morning spreads her rosy wings,
And earth and sky in her glances glow.

III.

'Tis the hour of fairy ban and spell;--
The wood-tick has kept the minutes well;
He has counted them all with click and stroke
Deep in the heart of the mountain-oak;
And he has awakened the sentry Elve
       Who sleeps with him in the haunted tree,
To bid him ring the hour of twelve,
       And call the Fays to their revelry;
Twelve small strokes on his tinkling bell--
'Twas made of the white snail's pearly shell.
"Midnight comes, and all is well!
Hither, hither wing your way!
'Tis the dawn of the fairy-day!"

IV.

They come from beds of lichen green,
They creep from the mullein's velvet screen,
        Some on the backs of beetles fly
From the silver tops of moon-touched trees,
       Where they swing in their cobweb hammocks
           high,
And rocked about in the evening breeze;
       Some from the hum-bird's downy nest--
They had driven him out by elfin power,
       And, pillowed on plumes of his rainbow breast,
Had slumbered there till the charmed hour;
Some had lain in the scoop of the rock,
        With glittering rising-stars inlaid;
And some had opened the four-o'clock,
        And stole within its purple shade.
       And now they throng the moonlight glade,
Above--below--on every side,
       Their little minim forms arrayed
In the tricksy pomp of fairy pride.

V.

They come not now to print the lea,
In freak and dance around the tree,
Or at the mushroom board to sup,
And drink the dew from the buttercup;--
A scene of sorrow waits them now.
For an Ouphe has broken his vestal vow;
He has loved an earthly maid,
And left for her his woodland shade;
He has lain upon her lip of dew,
And sunned him in her eyes of blue,
Fanned her cheek with his wing of air,
Played in the ringlets of her hair,
And, nestling on her snowy breast,
Forgot the Lily-King's behest,--
For this the shadowy tribes of air
       To the Elfin Court must haste away!--
And now they stand expectant there,
      To hear the doom of the Culprit Fay.

VI.

The throne was reared upon the grass,
       Of spice-wood and of sassafras;
On pillars of mottled tortoise-shell
        Hung the burnished canopy,
And o'er it gorgeous curtains fell
       Of the tulip's crimson drapery.
The monarch sat on his judgment-seat,
       On his brow the crown imperial shone,
The prisoner Fay was at his feet,
       And his Peers were ranged around the throne.

JOSEPH RODMAN DRAKE.

THE SONG OF THE RAIN.

Lo! the long, slender spears, bow they quiver and flash
    Where the clouds send their cavalry down!
Rank and file by the million the rain-lancers dash
    Over mountain and river and town:
Thick the battle-drops fall--but they drip not in blood;
    The trophy of war is the green fresh bud:
 Oh, the rain, the plentiful rain!

II.

The pastures lie baked, and the furrow is bare,
    The wells they yawn empty and dry;
But a rushing of waters is heard in the air,
    And a rainbow leaps out in the sky.
Hark! the heavy drops pelting the sycamore leaves,
How they wash tha wide pavement, and sweep from
        the eaves!
             Oh, the rain, the plentiful rain!

III.

See, the weaver throws wide his own swinging pane,
    The kind drops dance in on the floor;
And his wife brings her flower-pots to drink the sweet
       rain
On the step by her half-open door;
At the tune on the skylight, far over his head,
Smiles their poor crippled lad on his hospital bed.
            Oh, the rain, the plentiful rain!

IV.

And away, far from men, where high mountains tower,
   The little green mosses rejoice,
And the bud-heated heather nods to the shower,
    And the hill-torrents lift up their voice:
And the pools in the hollows mimic the fight
Of the rain, as their thousand points dart up in the
       light;
            Oh, the rain, the plentiful rain!

V.

And deep in the fir-wood below, near the plain,
     A single thrush pipes full and sweet,
How days of clear shining will come after rain,
    Waving meadows, and thick growing wheat;
So the voice of Hope sings, at the heart of our fears,
Of the harvest that springs from a great nation's tears:
            Oh, the rain, the plentiful rain!

SPECTATOR.

HEARTY READING.

1. Curiosity is a passion very favorable to the love of study, and
a passion very susceptible of increase by cultivation. Sound
travels so many feet in a second; and light travels so many feet
in a second. Nothing more probable: but you do not care how light
and sound travel. Very likely: but make yourself care; get up,
shake yourself well, pretend to care, make believe to care, and
very soon you will care, and care so much that you will sit for
hours thinking about light and sound, and be extremely angry with
any one who interrupts you in your pursuits; and tolerate no other
conversation but about light and sound; and catch yourself
plaguing everybody to death who approaches you, with the
discussion of these subjects.

2. I am sure that a man ought to read as he would grasp a nettle:
do it lightly, and you get molested; grasp it with all your
strength, and you feel none of its asperities. There is nothing so
horrible as languid study, when you sit looking at the clock,
wishing the time was over, or that somebody would call on you and
put you out of your misery. The only way to read with any efficacy
is to read so heartily that dinner-time comes two hours before
you expected it.

3. To sit with your Livy before you, and hear the geese cackling
that saved the Capitol: and to see with your own eyes the
Carthaginian sutlers gathering up the rings of the Roman knights
after the battle of Cannae, and heaping them into bushels; and to
be so intimately present at the actions you are reading of that
when anybody knocks at the door it will take you two or three
seconds to determine whether you are in your own study, or in the
plains of Lombardy, looking at Hannibal's weather-beaten face, and
admiring the splendor of his single eye.

4. This is the only kind of study which is not tiresome; and
almost the only kind which is not useless: this is the knowledge
which gets into the system, and which a man carries about and uses
like his limbs, without perceiving that it is extraneous, weighty,
or inconvenient.

SYDNEY SMITH.

IVRY.

I.

Now glory to the Lord of Hosts, from whom all glories
are!
And glory to our sovereign liege, King Henry of
Navarre!
Now let there be the merry sound of music and of
dance,
Through the corn-fields green, and sunny vines, O
pleasant land of France!
And thou Rochelle, our own Rochelle, proud city of
the waters,
Again let rapture light the eyes of all thy murmuring
            daughters;
As thou wert constant in our ills, be joyous in our joy;
For cold and stiff and still are they who wrought thy
            walls annoy.
Hurrah! hurrah! a single field hath turned the chance
           of war!
Hurrah! hurrah! for Ivry, and Henry of Navarre!

II.

Oh! how our hearts were beating, when, at the dawn
           of day,
We saw the army of the League drawn out in long
          array;
With all its priest-led citizens, and all its rebel peers,
And Appenzel's stout infantry, and Egmont's Flemish
          spears,
There rode the brood of false Lorraine, the curses of our
           land;
And dark Mayenne was in the midst, a truncheon in his
           hand;
And, as we looked on them, we thought of Seine's
         empurpled flood,
And good Coligni's hoary hair all dabbled with his blood;
And we cried unto the living God, who rules the fate
         of war,
To fight for his own holy name, and Henry of Navarre.

III.

The king is come to marshal us, in all his armor dressed;
And he has bound a snow white plume upon his gallant
            crest.
He looked upon his people, and a tear was in his eye,
He looked upon the traitors, and his glance was stern
and high.
Right graciously he smiled on us, as rolled from wing
to wing,

Down all our line, a deafening shout, "God save our
Lord the King!"
"And if my standard bearer fall, as fall full well he
may--
For never I saw promise yet of such a bloody fray--
Press where you see my white plume shine amidst the
ranks of war,
And be your oriflamme to-day the helmet of Navarre."

IV.

Hurrah! the foes are moving. Hark to the mingled din,
Of fife, and steed, and trump, and drum, and roaring
culverin.
The fiery duke is pricking fast across Saint-Andre's
plain,
With all the hireling chivalry of Guelders and Almayne
Now by the lips of those ye love, fair gentlemen of
France,
Charge for the golden lilies--upon them with the lance!
A thousand spurs are striking deep, a thousand spears
in rest,
A thousand knights are pressing close behind the snow-
white crest;
And in they burst, and on they rushed, while, like a
guiding  star,
Amidst the thickest carnage blazed the helmet of
Navarre.

V.

Now God be praised, the day is ours; Mayenne hath
 turned his rein;
D'Aumale hath cried for quarter; the Flemish count is
 slain;
Their ranks are breaking like thin clouds before a Biscay
 gale;
The field is heaped with bleeding steeds, and flags, and
 cloven mail.
And then we thought on vengeance, and all along our
 van,
Remember Saint Bartholomew! was passed from man
 to man.
But out spake gentle Henry--"No Frenchman is my
 foe;
Down, down with every foreigner, but let your brethren
 go."
Oh! was there ever such a knight, in friendship or in war,
As our sovereign lord, King Henry, the soldier of
 Navarre?

VI.

Right well fought all the Frenchmen who fought for
 France to-day;
And many a lordly banner God gave them for a prey.
But we of the religion have borne us best in fight;
And the good Lord of Rosny hath ta'en the cornet
 white--
Our own true Maximilian the cornet white hath ta'en,
The cornet white with crosses black, the flag of false
 Lorraine,
Up with it high; unfurl it wide--that all the host
may know
How God hath humbled the proud house which wrought
his church such woe.
Then on the ground, while trumpets sound their loudest
point of war,
Fling the red shreds, a foot-cloth meet for Henry of
Navarre.

VII.

Ho! maidens of Vienna! ho! matrons of Lucerne--
Weep, weep, and rend your hair for those who never
shall return.
Ho! Philip, send, for charity, thy Mexican pistoles,
That Antwerp monks may sing a mass for thy poor
spearmen's souls.
Ho! gallant nobles of the league, look that your arms
be bright;
Ho! burghers of St. Genevieve, keep watch and ward
to-night;
For our God hath crushed the tyrant, our God hath
raised the slave,
And mocked the counsel of the wise, and the valor of
the brave.
Then glory to His holy name, for whom all glories are;
And glory to our sovereign lord, King Henry of Navarre!

LORD MACAULAY

THE DAFFODILS.

I.

I wandered lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils;
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

II.

Continuous as the stars that shine
And twinkle on the milky way,
They stretch'd in never-ending line
Along the margin of the bay;
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

III.

The waves beside them danced; but they
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee;
A poet could not but be gay,
In such a jocund company;
I gazed--and gazed--but little thought
What wealth the show to me had brought;

IV.

For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude;
And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils.

WORDSWORTH

CHEERFULNESS.

1. A cheerful man is pre-eminently a useful man. He knows that
there is much misery, but that misery is not the rule of life. He
sees that in every state people may be cheerful; the lambs skip,
birds sing and fly joyously, puppies play, kittens are full of
joy, the whole air is full of careering and rejoicing insects--
that everywhere the good outbalances the bad, and that every evil
that there is has its compensating balm.

2. Then the brave man, as our German cousins say, possesses the
world, whereas the melancholy man does not even possess his share
of it.

Exercise, or continued employment of some kind, will make a man
cheerful; but sitting at home, brooding and thinking, or doing
little, will bring gloom. The reaction of this feeling is
wonderful. It arises from a sense of duty done, and it also
enables us to do our duty.

3. Cheerful people live long in our memory. We remember joy more
readily than sorrow, and always look back with tenderness on the
brave and cheerful.

We can all cultivate our tempers, and one of the employments of
some poor mortals is to cultivate, cherish, and bring to
perfection, a thoroughly bad one; but we may be certain that to do
so is a very grave error and sin, which, like all others, brings
its own punishment; though, unfortunately, it does not punish
itself only.

4. Addison says of cheerfulness, that it lightens sickness,
poverty, affliction; converts ignorance into an amiable
simplicity, and renders deformity itself agreeable; and he says no
more than the truth.

5. "Give us, therefore, oh! give us"--let us cry with Carlyle--
"the man who sings at his work! He will do more in the same time,
--he will do it better,--he will persevere longer. One is scarcely
sensible of fatigue whilst he marches to music. The very stars are
said to make harmony as they revolve in their spheres.

6. "Wondrous is the strength of cheerfulness, altogether past
calculation its powers of endurance. Efforts, to be permanently
useful, must be uniformly joyous,--a spirit all sunshine,
graceful from very gladness, beautiful because bright."

7. Such a spirit is within everybody's reach. Let us but get out
into the light of things. The morbid man cries out that there is
always enough wrong in the world to make a man miserable.
Conceded; but wrong is ever being righted; there is always enough
that is good and right to make us joyful.

8. There is ever sunshine somewhere; and the brave man will go on
his way rejoicing, content to look forward if under a cloud, not
bating one jot of heart or hope if for a moment cast down:
honoring his occupation, whatever it may be; rendering even rags
respectable by the way he wears them; and not only being happy
himself, but causing the happiness of others.

J. H. FRISWELL.

"APRIL IN THE HILLS."

I.

To-day the world is wide and fair
With sunny fields of lucid air,
And waters dancing everywhere;
The snow is almost gone;
The noon is builded high with light,
And over heaven's liquid height,
In steady fleets serene and white,
The happy clouds go on.

II.

The channels run, the bare earth steams,
And every hollow rings and gleams
With jetting falls and dashing streams;
The rivers burst and fill;
The fields are full of little lakes,
And when the romping wind awakes
The water ruffles blue and shakes,

And the pines roar on the hill.

III.

The crows go by, a noisy throng;
About the meadows all day long
The shore-lark drops his brittle song;
And up tihe leafless tree
The nut-hatch runs, and nods, and clings;
The bluebird dips with flashing wings,
The robin flutes, the sparrow sings,
And the swallows float and flee.

IV.

I break the spirit's cloudy bands,
A wanderer in enchanted lands,
I feel the sun upon my hands;

And far from care and strife
The broad earth bids me forth, I rise
With lifted brow and upward eyes.
I bathe my spirit in blue skies,

And taste the springs of life

V.

I feel the tumult of new birth;
I waken with the wakening earth;
I match the bluebird in her mirth;

And wild with wind and sun,
A treasurer of immortal days,
I roam the glorious world with praise,
The hillsides and the woodland ways,

Till the earth and I are one.

ARCHIBALD LAMPMAN.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Evolution of Expression Vol. I
by Charles Wesley Emerson





Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






VANDRAD THE VIKING

or

The Feud and the Spell

by

J. STORER CLOUSTON



WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS BY HUBERT PATON





CONTENTS.

I. THE WEST SEA SAILING

II. THE BAIRN-SLAYERS

III. THE HOLY ISLE

IV. THE ISLAND SPELL

V. ANDREAS THE HERMIT

VI. THE HALL OF LIOT

VII. THE VERDICT OF THE SWORD

VIII. IN THE CELL BY THE ROOST

IX. THE MESSAGE OF THE RUNES

X. KING BUE'S FEAST

XI. THE HOUSE IN THE FOREST

XII. THE MAGICIAN

XIII. ARROW AND SHIELD

XIV. THE MIDNIGHT GUEST

XV. THE LAST OF THE LAWMAN

XVI. KING ESTEIN

XVII. THE END OF THE STORY




CHAPTER I.

THE WEST SEA SAILING.


Long after King Estein had joined his fathers on the little holm
beyond Hernersfiord, and Helgi, Earl of Askland, had become but a
warlike memory, the skalds of Sogn still sang this tale of Vandrad
the Viking. It contained much wonderful magic, and some
astonishingly hard strokes, as they told it; but reading between
their lines, the magic bears a strong resemblance to many spells
cast even at this day, and as for the sword strokes, there was
need for them to be hard in Norway then. For that was the age of
the making of many kingdoms, and the North was beginning to do its
share.

One May morning, more than a thousand years ago, so the story
runs, an old man came slowly along a woodland track that uncoiled
itself from the mountain passes and snow-crowned inlands of
Norway. Presently the trees grew thinner, and grass and wild
flowers spread on either hand, and at last, just where the path
dipped down to the water-side at Hernersfiord, the traveller
stopped. For a while he remained there in the morning sunshine,
watching the scene below, and now and then speaking out his
thoughts absently in the rapt manner of a visionary.

Though his clothes were old and weather-stained, and bare of any
ornament, his face and bearing were such as strike the mind at
once and stay in the memory. He was tall and powerfully framed,
and bore his years and the white volume of his beard in an
altogether stately fashion; but his eyes were most indelible, pale
blue and singularly cold in repose, very bright and keen and
searching when his face was animated.

They saw much to stir them that morning. On the slope above
Hernersfiord stood the royal hall of Hakonstad, the seat of the
kings of Sogn; and all about the house, and right down to the
water's edge, there was a great bustle and movement of men. From
the upland valley at the fiord head, warriors trooped down to the
ships that lay by the long stone pier. The morning sun glanced on
their helmets and coats of mail, and in the still air the clash of
preparation rang far up the pine-clad hillside. He could see some
bringing weapons and provisions down to the shore, and others
busily lading the ships. Women mingled in the crowd, and every
here and there a gay cloak and gilded helm marked a leader of
rank.

"Ay, the season has come for Vikings to put to sea again," he
said. "Brave and gay are the warriors of Sogn, and lightly they
leave. When a man is young, all roads are pleasant, and all lead
home again. Many have I seen set sail these last sixty years, and
their sailing led them--where?"

And then again, as the stir increased, and he could see the men
beginning to troop on board the long ships,--

"This voyage shall be as the falling of snowflakes into the sea;
but what man can escape his fate?"

Meanwhile a party of men had just left the woods, and were coming
down the path to the fiord, ten or twelve in all, headed by an
exceedingly broad, black-bearded man, clad in a leather coat
closely covered all over with steel scales, and bearing on his
shoulder a ponderous halberd.

The path was very narrow at that point, and he of the black beard
called out gruffly,--

"Make way, old man! Give room to pass."

Roused abruptly from his reverie, the dreamer turned quietly, but
made no movement to the side. The party by this time were so close
that they had perforce to halt, with some clash of armour, and
again their captain cried,--

"Are you deaf? Make way!"

Yet there was something daunting in the other's pale eye, and
though the Viking moved the halberd uneasily on his shoulder, his
own glance shifted. With the slightest intonation of contempt, the
traveller asked,--

"Who bids me make way?"

The black-bearded man looked at him with an air of some
astonishment, and then answered shortly,--

"They call me Ketill; but what is that to you?"

Without heeding the other's gruffness, the old man asked,--

"Does King Hakon sail from Hernersfiord to-day?"

"King Hakon has not sailed for many a day. His son leads this
force."

"Ay, I had forgotten, we are both old men now. Then Estein sails
to-day?"

"Ay, and I sail with him. My ship awaits me, so make way, old
man," replied Ketill.

"Whither do ye sail?"

"To the west seas. I have no time for talking more. Do you hear?"

"Go on then," replied the old man, stepping to one side;
"something tells me that Estein will have need of all his men
before this voyage is over."

Without stopping for further words, the black-bearded captain and
his men pushed past and continued their way to the fiord, while
the old man slowly followed them.

As he went down the hillside he talked again aloud to himself:--

"Ay, this then is the meaning of my warning dreams--danger in the
south lands, danger on the seas. Little heed will Estein Hakonson
pay to the words of an old man, yet I am fain to see the youth
again, and what the gods reveal to me I must speak."

Down below, near the foot of the path that led from the pier up to
the hall of Hakonstad, a cluster of chiefs stood talking. In the
midst of them, Hakon, King of Sogn, one of the independent
kinglings who reigned in the then chaotic Norway, watched the
departure of his son.

He was a venerable figure, conspicuous by his long, wintry locks
and embroidered cloak of blue, straight as a spear-shaft, but
grown too old for warfare. His hand rested on the shoulder of Earl
Sigvald of Askland, a bluff old warrior, long the king's most
faithful counsellor and companion in arms. Before them stood his
son Estein, a tall, auburn-haired, bright-eyed young man, gaily
dressed, after the fashion of the times, in red kirtle and cloak,
and armed as yet only with a gilded helmet, surmounted with a pair
of hawk's wings, and a sword girt to his side. His face, though
regular and handsome, would have been rather too grave and
reserved but for the keenness of his eyes, and a very pleasant
smile which at times lit up his features when he spoke.

After they had talked for a while, he glanced round him, and saw
that the bustle was subsiding, and most of the men had gone
aboard.

"All is ready now," he said.

"Ay," replied Thorkel Sigurdson, one of his ship captains, "they
wait but for us."

"Farewell then, Estein!" cried the earl. "Thor speed you, and send
you worthy foemen!"

"My son, I can ill spare you," said the king. "But it becomes a
king's son to see the world, and prove his valour in distant
lands. Warfare in the Baltic seas is but a pastime for common
Vikings. England and Valland, [Footnote: France] the countries of
the black man and the flat lands of the rivers, lie before you.
There Estein Hakonson must feed the wolves."

"And yet, Estein," he added in a lower tone, as he embraced him,
"I would that Yule were here again and you with it. I am growing
old, and my dreams last night were sorrow-laden."

"Farewell, son of Hakon!" shouted a loud-mouthed chieftain. "I
would that I too were sailing to the southern lands. Spare not,
Estein; fire and sword in England, sword and fire in Valland!"

The group had broken up, and Estein was about to go on board when
he heard himself hailed by name. He looked round, and saw the same
old man who had accosted Ketill coming down the pier after him.

"Hail, Estein Hakonson!" he cried; "I have come far to see thee."

"Hail, old man!" replied Estein courteously; "what errand brings
you here?"

"You know me not?" said the old man, looking at him keenly.

"Nay, I cannot call your face to mind."

"My name is Atli, and if my features are strange to thee, much
stranger must my name be."

He took Estein's hand, looked closely into his eyes for a minute,
and then said solemnly,--

"Estein Hakonson, this voyage will have an ending other than ye
deem. Troubles I see before ye--fishes feeding on warriors, and
winds that blow as they list, and not as ye."

"That is likely enough," replied Estein. "We are not sailing on a
trading voyage, and in the west seas the winds often blow high.
But what luck shall I have?"

"Strange luck, Estein, I see before thee. Thou shalt be warned and
heed not. More shall be left undone than shall be done. There
shall come a change in thee that I cannot fathom. Many that set
out shall not return, but thine own fate is dim to me."

A young man of barely twenty, very gaily dressed and martial-
looking, had come up to them while they were talking. He had a
reckless, merry look on his handsome face, and bore himself as
though he was aware of his personal attractions.

"And what is my fate, old man?" he asked, more as if he were in
jest than in earnest. "Shall I feed the fishes, or make this
strange change with Estein into a troll, [Footnote: A kind of
goblin] or werewolf, or whatsoever form he is to take?"

"Thy fate is naught to me, Helgi Sigvaldson," replied the seer;
"yet I think thou wilt never be far from Estein."

"That was easily answered," said Helgi with a laugh. "And I can
read my fate yet further. When I part from my foster-brother
Estein, then shall a man go to Valhalla. What say you to that?"

Atli's face darkened.

"Darest thou mock me?" he cried.

"Not so," interposed Estein. "' Bare is back without brother
behind it,' and Helgi means that death only can part us. Farewell,
Atli! If your prophecy comes true, and I return alive, you may
choose what gift you please from among my spoils."

"Little spoil there will be, Estein!" answered the old man, as the
foster-brothers turned from him down the pier.

The last man sprang on board, the oars dipped in the still water,
and as the little fleet moved slowly down the fiord the crowd on
shore gradually dispersed.

Out at sea, beyond the high headlands that guarded Hernersfiord, a
fresh breeze was blowing briskly from the north-east, and past the
rocky islets of the coast white caps gleamed in the sunshine. As
the ships drew clear of the fiord, and the boom of the outer sea
breaking on the skerries rose louder and nearer, sails were spread
and oars shipped. Slowly at first, and then more quickly as they
caught the deep-sea wind, the vessels cut the open water. Past the
islands they heeled to the breeze, and over a wake of foam the men
watched the mountains of Norway sink slowly into the wilderness of
waters.

On the decked poop of an open boat, sailing over an ocean unknown
to him, towards countries of whose whereabouts he was only vaguely
informed, Estein Hakonson stood lost in stirring fancies. He was
the only surviving son of the King of Sogn. Three brothers had
fallen in battle, one had perished at sea, and another, the
eldest, had died beneath a burning roof-tree. His education had
been conducted according to the only standard known in
Scandinavia. At fourteen he had slain his first man in fair fight;
at seventeen he was a Viking captain on the Baltic; and now, at
two-and-twenty--old far beyond his years and hardened in varied
experience--he was setting forth on the Viking path that led to
the wonderful countries of the south.

The tide of Norse energy was not yet at the full, the fury and the
terror were waxing fast, and the fever of unrest was ever
spreading through the North. Men were always coming back with
tales of monasteries filled with untold wealth, and rich provinces
to be won by the sword. Skalds sang of the deeds done in the
south, and shiploads of spoil confirmed their lays. Little wonder
then that Estein should feel his heart beat high as he stood by
the great tiller.

That night, long after the sun was set, he still sat on deck
watching the stars. By-and-by his foster-brother Helgi came up to
him, wrapped in a long sea cloak, and humming softly to himself.

"The night is fair, Estein. If Thor is kind, and this wind speeds
us, we shall soon reach England."

"Ay, if the gods are with us," answered Estein. "I am trying to
read the stars. Methinks they are unfavourable."

Helgi laughed. "What know you of the stars?" he said, "and what
does Estein Hakonson want with white magic? Will it make his life
one day longer? Will it make mine, if I too read the stars?"

"Not one day, Helgi, not one instant of time. We are in the hands
of the gods. This serves but to while away a long night."

"Norsemen should not read the stars," said Helgi. "These things
are for Finns and Lapps, and the poor peoples who fear us."

"I wished to know what Odin thought of Helgi Sigvaldson," said
Estein with a smile.

Helgi laughed lightly as he answered,--

"I know what Odin thinks of you, Estein--a foolish man and fey."

Estein stepped forward a pace, and leaning over the side gazed for
a while into the darkness. Helgi too was silent, but his blue eyes
danced and his heart beat high as his thoughts flew ahead of the
ship to the clash of arms and the shout of victory.

"There remains but me," said Estein at length. "Hakon has no other
son."

"And you have five brothers to avenge; the sword should not rust
long in your scabbard, Estein."

"Twice I have made the Danes pay a dear atonement for Eric. I
cannot punish Thor because he suffered Harald to drown, but if
ever in my life it be my fate to meet Thord the Tall, Snaekol
Gunnarson, or Thorfin of Skapstead, there shall be but one man
left to tell of our meeting."

"The burners of Olaf have long gone out of Norway, have they not?"

"I was but a child when my brother was burned like a fox in his
hole at Laxafiord. The burners knew my father too well to bide at
home and welcome him; and since then no man has told aught of
them, save that Thord the Tall at one time raided much in England,
and boasted widely of the burning. He perchance forgot that Hakon
had other sons.

"But now, Helgi, we must sleep while we may; nights may come when
we shall want it."

For six days and six nights they sailed with a favouring wind over
an empty ocean. On the seventh day land was sighted on the
starboard bow.

"Can that be England?" asked old Ulf, Estein's forecastle man, a
hairy, hugely muscular Viking from the far northern fiords.

"The coast of Scotland more likely," said Helgi. "Shall we try our
luck, Estein?"

"I should like to spill a little Scottish blood, and mayhap carry
off a maid or two," said Thorolf Hauskoldson, a young giant from
the upland dales.

"It may be but a waste of time," Estein replied. "We had best make
for England while this wind holds."

"I like not the look of the sky," said Ulf, gazing round him with
a frowning brow.

The wind had been dropping off for some time, and along the
eastern horizon the settled sky was giving place to heavy clouds.
For a short time Estein hesitated, but as the outlook grew more
threatening and the wind beat in flaws and gusts, now from one
quarter, now from another, the Vikings changed their course and
ran under oars and sails for the shelter of the land. Little
shelter it promised as they drew nearer: a dark, inhospitable line
of precipices stretched north and south as far as the eye could
reach, and even from a long distance they could see white flashes
breaking at the cliff foot. Again they changed their course; and
then, with a dull hum of approaching rain, a south-easterly storm
broke over them, and there was nothing for it but to turn and run
before the gale.

"I read the stars too well," said Estein grimly between his teeth,
clinging to the straining tiller, and watching the rollers rising
higher. "And the first part of Atli's prophecy has come true."

"Winds, war, and women make a Viking's luck," replied Helgi; "this
is but the first part of the rede."

At night the gale increased, the fleet was scattered over the
North Sea, and next morning from Estein's ship only two other
black hulls could be seen running before the tempest. Another wild
day passed, and it was not till the evening that the weather
moderated. Little by little the great seas began to calm, and the
drifts of stinging rain ceased. In their wake the stars struggled
through the cloud wrack, and towards morning the wind sank
altogether.




CHAPTER II.

THE BAIRN-SLAYERS.


At earliest dawn eyes were strained to catch a glimpse of
something that might tell them where they were. None of the men on
Estein's ship had been in those seas more than two or three times
at most, and the vaguest conjectures were rife when, as the light
was slowly gaining, Ulf raised a cry of land ahead.

"Land to the right!" cried Helgi, a moment later.

"Land to the left!" exclaimed Estein; "and we are close on it,
methinks."

When the morning fully broke they found themselves lying off a
wide-mouthed sound, that bent and narrowed among low, lonely-
looking islands. Only on the more distant land to the right were
heather hills of any height to be seen, and those, so far as they
could judge, were uninhabited. A heavy swell was running in from
the open sea, and a canopy of grey clouds hung over all.

"I like not this country," said Ulf. "What think you is it?"

"The Hjaltland islands, I should think, from what men tell of
them," Estein suggested.

"The Orkneys more likely," said Thorolf, who had sailed in those
seas before.

Far astern one other vessel was making towards them.

"Which ship is that, Ulf?" asked Estein. "One of our fleet, think
you?"

"Ay, it is Thorkel Sigurdson's," replied the shaggy forecastle
man, after a long, frowning look.

"By the hammer of Thor, she seems in haste," said Helgi. "They
must have broached the ale over-night."

"Perchance Thorkel feels cold," suggested Thorolf with a laugh.

"They have taken the shields from the sides," Estein exclaimed as
the ship drew nearer. "Can there be an enemy, think you?"

Again Ulf's hairy face gathered into a heavy frown. "No man can say
I fear a foeman," he said, "but I should like ill to fight after
two sleepless nights."

"Bah! Thorkel is drunk as usual, and thinks we are chapmen,"
[Footnote: Merchants.] said Helgi. "They are doubtless making
ready to board us."

The ship drew so near that they could plainly see the men on
board, and conspicuous among them the tall form of Thorkel
appeared in the bow.

"He waves to us; there is something behind this," said Estein.

"Drunk," muttered Helgi. "I wager my gold-handled sword he is
drunk. They have ale enough on board to float the ship."

"A sail!" Estein exclaimed, pointing to a promontory to seaward
round which the low black hull and coloured sail of a warship were
just appearing.

"Ay, and another!" said Ulf.

"Three-four-seven-eight!" Helgi cried.

"There come nine, and ten!" added Estein. "How many more?"

They watched the strange fleet in silence as one by one they
turned and bore down upon them, ten ships in all, their oars
rhythmically churning the sea, the strange monsters on the prows
creeping gradually nearer.

"Orkney Vikings," muttered Ulf. "If I know one long ship from
another, they are Orkney Vikings."

Meantime Thorkel's ship had drawn close alongside, and its captain
hailed Estein.

"There is little time for talking now, son of Hakon!" he shouted.
"What think you we should do?--run into the islands, or go to Odin
where we are? These men, methinks, will show us little mercy."

"I seek mercy from no man," answered Estein. "We will bide where
we are. We could not escape them if we would, and I would not if I
could. Have you seen aught of the other ships?"

"We parted from Ketill yesterday, and I fear me he has gone to
feed the fishes. I have seen nothing of Asgrim and the rest. I
think with you, Estein, that the bottom here will make as soft a
resting-place for us as elsewhere. Fill the beakers and serve the
men! It is ill that a man should die thirsty."

The stout sea-rover turned with a gleam of grim humour in his eyes
to the enjoyment of what he fully expected would be his last drink
on earth, and on both ships men buckled on their armour and
bestirred themselves for fight.

Vikings in those days preyed on one another as freely as on men of
alien blood. They came out to fight, and better sport could
generally be had from a crew of seasoned warriors like themselves
than from the softer peoples of the south. Particularly were the
Orkney and Shetland islands the stations for the freest of free
lances, men so hostile to all semblance of law and order that the
son of a Norwegian king would seem in their eyes a most desirable
quarry. Many a load of hard-won spoil changed hands on its way
home; and the shores of Norway itself were so harried by these
island Vikings that some time later King Harald Harfagri descended
and made a clean sweep of them in the interests of what he
probably considered society.

The two vessels floated close together, the oars were shipped, and
there, in the grey prosaic early morning light, they heaved gently
on the North Sea swell, and awaited the approach of the ten. A few
sea-birds circled and screamed above them; a faint pillar of smoke
rose from some homestead on a distant shore; elsewhere there was
no sign of life save in the ships to seaward.

Thorkel, leaning over the side of his vessel, told a tale of
buffetings by night and day such as Estein and his crew had
undergone. That morning he said they had descried Estein's ship
just as the day broke, and almost immediately afterwards ten long
ships were spied lying at anchor in an island bay. For a time they
hoped to slip by them unseen. The fates, however, were against
them. They were observed, and the strange Vikings awoke and gave
chase like a swarm of bees incautiously aroused.

Apparently the strangers considered themselves hardly yet prepared
for battle; for they slackened speed as they advanced, and those
on Estein's ships could see that a hasty bustle of preparation was
going on.

"What think you--friends or foes?" asked Helgi.

"To the Orkney Vikings all men are foes," replied Estein.

"Ay," said Thorkel with a laugh, "particularly when they are but
two to ten."

By this time the strangers were within hailing distance, and in
the leading ship a man in a red cloak came from the poop and stood
before the others in the bow. In a loud tone he bade his men cease
rowing, and then, clapping his hand to his mouth, asked in a voice
that had a ring of scornful command what name the captain bore.

"Estein, the son of Hakon, King of Sogn; and who are you who ask
my name?" came the reply across the water.

"Liot, the son of Skuli," answered the man in the red cloak. "With
me sails Osmund Hooknose, the son of Hallward. We have here ten
warships, as you see. Yield to us, Estein Hakonson, or we will
take by force what you will not give us."

The man threw his left hand on his hip, drew himself up, and said
something to his crew, accompanying the words by gestures with a
spear. They answered with a loud shout, and then struck up a wild
and monotonous chorus, the words of which were a refrain
descriptive of the usual fate of those who ventured to stand in
Liot Skulison's way. At the same time their oars churned the
water, and their vessel was brought into line with the others.

"It is easily seen that our friend Liot is a valiant man," said
Helgi with a short laugh. "He and his ill-looking crew make a
mighty noise. Has any man heard of Liot Skulison or Osmund
Hooknose before?"

"Ay," answered Ulf. "They call them the bairn-slayers, because
they show no mercy even to children."

"They will meet with other than bairns to-day," said Helgi.

Estein and Thorkel had been employed in binding the two vessels
together with grapnels. Then Estein turned to his men and said,--

"We are of one mind, are we not? We fight while we may, and then
let Odin do with us what he wills."

Without waiting for the shout of approval that followed his words,
he sprang to the bow, and raising his voice, cried,--

"We are ready for you, Liot and Osmund. When you get on board you
can take what you find here."

From another ship a man shouted,--

"Then you will fight, little Estein? Remember that we are called
the bairn-slayers."

Instantly Thorkel took up the challenge. Three beakers of ale had
made him in his happiest and most warlike mood, and his eyes
gleamed almost merrily as he answered,--

"I know you, Osmund the ugly, by that nose whereon men say you
hang the bairns you catch. Little need have you to do aught save
look at them. Here is a gift for you," and with that he hurled a
spear with so true an aim that, if Osmund had not stooped like a
flash, his share in the fight would have come to an end there and
then. As it was, the missile struck another man between the
shoulders and laid him on the deck.

"Forward! forward!" cried Liot. "Forward, Vikings! forward, the
men of Liot and Osmund!"

The oars struck the water, the wild chorus swelled into a terrible
and tuneless roar, and the ten ships bore down on the two. With a
crash the bows met, and metal rang on metal with the noise of a
hundred smithies; the unequal contest had begun.

Overpowering as such odds could hardly fail to prove in the long
run, they told more slowly in a sea-fight. Till the men who manned
the bulwarks were thinned, the sides were practically equal, and
at first many of the Orkney Vikings were perforce mere spectators.

Gradually, as the men in front were thinned, they poured in from
the other ships, fresh men always being pitted against tired, and
keen swords meeting hacked.

Liot laid his own ship alongside Estein's, Osmund attacked
Thorkel's, and the other vessels forced their bows forward
wherever they saw an opening. The Norwegians manned their bulwarks
shield to shield, and fought with the courage of despair. Twice
Liot, backed by his boldest men, tried by a headlong rush to force
himself on board, and twice he was beaten back. A third time he
charged, and selecting a place where the defenders seemed
thinnest, struck down a couple of men with two swinging blows of
his axe, and sprang on to the deck. Three or four men had already
followed him, a cry of victory rose from the Orkney Vikings, and
for a moment the fate of the battle seemed decided, when a huge
stone hurtled through the air, and falling on Liot's shield forced
it down on his helmet and him to his knees. It was the work of
Ulf, captain of the forecastle; and roaring like a bull, the old
Viking followed his stone. Estein sprang from the poop and clove
one man to the shoulders. Another fell to Ulf's sword. The half-
stunned Liot was seized by one of his followers, and bundled back
on board his ship; and for the time the day was saved.

"After them! after them, Ulf!" shouted Estein, and twenty bold
Norwegians followed their leader in the wake of Liot's retreating
boarding party. Their foes gave way right and left, the gangways
round the sides were cleared, and, despite the threats of Liot,
his men began to spring from forecastle and quarter-deck into the
ships behind.

"Forward, king's men! forward, men of Estein!" roared Ulf.

"Wait for me, Liot!" cried Estein, charging the poop with his red
shield before him." A bairn is after thee!"

Helgi, who had kept at his shoulder throughout, seized his arm.

"They are giving way on Thorkel's ship. Osmund is on board. If we
return not, the ship is cleared."

With a gesture of despair Estein turned.

"Back, men, back! Thorkel needs all his friends, I fear," he
cried; and to Helgi he said, "The day is lost. We can but sell our
lives dearly now."

They came back too late. Already Thorkel's men were pouring on
board Estein's ship, with Osmund of the Hooknose at their heels.
Thorkel himself lay stark across the bulwarks, his face to his
foes, and a great spear-head standing out of his back.

It was now but a question of time. With a single ship, surrounded
on all sides, and weary with storm and battle, there could be only
one fate for Estein's diminished band. Nevertheless, they stood
their ground as stoutly and cheerfully as if the fray were just
beginning. Finding that all efforts to board were useless, the
Orkney Vikings confined themselves for some time to keeping up an
incessant fire of darts and stones. One by one the defenders
dropped at their posts, and at last, when widening gaps appeared
in the line of shields, Liot and Osmund boarded together, each
from his own side.

"Back to the poop, Helgi!" Estein cried. "To the poop, men! we
cannot hold the gangways. One tired man cannot fight with five
fresh."

Last of all his men, he stepped from the gangway that ran round
the low and open waist of the ship, up to the decked poop, his red
shield stuck with darts like a pincushion with pins.

In the forecastle, old Ulf still held his own, backed by some
half-dozen stout survivors out of all those who had gone into
battle with him in the morning.

"My hour is come at last, Thorolf," he said to the upland giant,
who seemed to be disengaging something from his coat of ring-mail.
"I shall have tales of a merry fight to tell to Odin tonight. But
before I fall I shall slay me one of those two Vikings. Wilt thou
follow me, Thorolf, to the gangways, and then to Valhalla?"

With a violent wrench the giant drew a spearhead from his side,
and his blood spurted over Ulf, as he swayed on his feet.

"I go before," he said, and fell on the deck with a clatter of
steel.

"There died a brave man! Now, comrades, after him to Odin!"

And with that the forecastle captain sprang down on the gangway,
and knocking men off into the waist in his impetuous rush, swung
his battle-axe round his head and aimed a terrific blow at Osmund
Hooknose. Quick as lightning Osmund raised his shield and thrust
at his foe with his sword. The point of the blade passed in at his
breast and out between his shoulders, and at the same instant the
battle-axe fell. The edge of the shield was cut through like
paper, and the blade coming fair on the nape of the Hooknose's
neck, the bodies of the two champions rolled together off the
gangway.

Round the poop the last struggle raged. Spent and wounded as they
were, Estein's little band showed a bold front to their foes, and
around the red shield of their leader their lives were dearly
sold.

Then for a few minutes came a lull in the fight, and men could
breathe for a space.

"The next onset will be the last," said Estein grimly.

"Their ships are sheering off!" exclaimed one.

"'Tis we who are leaving them," said another.

"Look ahead!" cried Helgi; "we shall cheat them yet."

The men looked round them with astonished faces, for a strange
thing had happened. They had drifted into one of the dreaded
Orkney tideways, and all the time the fight was raging they were
being borne at increasing speed past islands, holms, and skerries.
The scene had completely changed; they were in a narrower sound,
swinging like sea-fowl, helpless on the tide. Heather hills were
close at hand, and right ahead was a great frothing and bubbling,
out of which rose the black heads of sunken rocks.

The other vessels had been twisted off by the whirling eddies, and
were now rapidly scattering, each striving to clear the reef. Only
the four vessels bound together--Estein's, Thorkel's, Liot's,
Osmund's--swept in an unresisting cluster towards the rocks.

Liot too saw the danger, and raised his voice in a great shout:--

"Let not man of mine touch an oar till Estein Hakonson lie dead on
yonder deck. We have yet time to slay them. Forward, Liot's men!"

There was a wild and furious rush of men towards the poop. Down
went man after man of the battle-worn defenders. Liot and Estein
met sword to sword and face to face. The red shield was ripped
from top to bottom by a sweep of the bairn-slayer's blade, and at
the same moment Estein's descending sword was met by a Viking's
battle-axe, and snapped at the hilt.

"Now, Estein, I have thee!" shouted his foe; but ere the words
were well out of his mouth, Estein had hurled himself at his
waist, dagger in hand, and brought him headlong to the deck. As
they fell, the ships struck with a mighty crash that threw friend
and foe alike on the bloody planks. Two vessels stuck fast; the
other two broke loose, and plunging over the first line of reefs,
settled down by the bows.

There was a rush to the bulwarks, a splashing of bodies in the
water, and then the doomed and deserted ships, the attacker and
the attacked, sank in the turmoil of the tide. Estein himself had
been pitched clear of his foe into the waist, where he had fallen
head first and half-stunned.

He felt a friendly hand dragging him to the side, and heard
Helgi's voice saying,--

"Art thou able to swim for it?"

Then he had a confused recollection of being swept along by an
irresistible current, clinging the while to what he afterwards
found to be a friendly plank, and after that came oblivion.




CHAPTER III.

THE HOLY ISLE.


With the first glimmer of consciousness, Estein became aware of an
aching head and a bruised body. Next he felt that he was very wet
and cold; and then he discovered that he was not alone. His head
rested on something soft, and two hands chafed his temples.

"Helgi," he said.

A voice that was not Helgi's replied, "Thanks be to the saints! he
is alive."

Estein started up, and his gaze met a pair of dark blue eyes. They
and the hands belonged to a fair young girl, a maid of some
seventeen summers, on whose knees his aching head had just been
resting.

They were sitting on a shelving rock that jutted into the tideway,
and at his feet his kindly plank bumped gently in an eddy of the
current.

He looked at her so silently and intently that the blue eyes
drooped and a faint blush rose to the maiden's cheeks.

"Are you wounded?" she asked. She spoke in the Norse tongue, but
with a pretty, foreign accent, and she looked so fair and so kind
that thoughts of sirens and mermaids passed through the Viking's
mind.

"Wounded? Well, methinks I ought to be," he answered; "and yet I
feel rather bruised than pierced. If I can stand--" and as he
spoke he rose to his feet, and slipping on the seaweed, slid
quietly into the water.

The girl screamed; and then, as he scrambled out none the worse
and only a little the wetter, an irresistible inclination to laugh
overcame her. Forgetful of his head, he laughed with her.

"Forgive me," she said; "I could not help laughing, though, to be
sure, you seem in no laughing plight. I thought at first that you
were drowned."

"'Tis your doing, I think, that I am not. Did you find me in the
water?"

"Half in and half out; and it took much pulling to get you wholly
out."

Estein impulsively drew a massive gold ring off his finger, and in
the gift-giving spirit of the times handed it to his preserver.

"I know not your name, fair maiden," he said, "but this I know,
that you have saved my life. Will you accept this Viking's gift
from me? It is all that the sea has left me."

"Nay, keep such gifts for those who deserve them. It would have
been an unchristian act to let you drown."

"You use a word that is strange to me; but I would that you might
take this ring."

"No, no!" she cried decidedly; "it will be time enough to talk of
gifts when I have earned them. Not," she added, a little proudly,
"that it is my wish to earn gifts. But you are wet and wounded;
come where I can give you shelter, poor though it be."

"Any shelter will seem good to me. Yet, ere I go, I would fain
learn something of my comrades' fate."

He scanned the sound narrowly, and in all its long stretch there
was not a sign of friend or foe. About a mile back the fatal reef,
bared by the ebbing tide, showed its line of black heads high out
of the water, but of ships there was no vestige to be seen. It was
long past mid-day by the sun, and he knew that he must have been
unconscious for some hours. In that time, such of the Vikings as
had escaped the rocks had evidently sailed away, leaving only the
dead in the sound.

"They are gone," he said, turning away, "friends and foes--gone,
or drowned, as I should have been, fair maid, but for you."

They scrambled together up the rocks, and then struck a winding
sheep-path that led them over the shoulder of a heath-clad hill.

At first they walked in silence, the girl in front, going at a
great speed up the narrow track; and Estein watched the wind blow
her fair hair about her neck in a waving tangle, and he saw that
she was tall and slender. By-and-by, when they had crossed the
hill and reached a less broken tract of ground, he came up to her
side.

"How did you come to be down where you found me?" he asked.

"I was on the hill," she answered, "when I saw ships in the sound
rowing hard to escape the current, and then I saw that some had
been wrecked. Wreckage was floating by, and I espied, for my eyes
are good, a man clinging to a plank; and presently he drifted upon
a rock, and I thought that perhaps I might save a life. So I went
down to the shore--and you yourself know the rest."

"I know, indeed, that I have to thank you for my life, such as it
is. And I know further that every girl would not have been so
kind."

She smiled, and her smile was one of those that illuminate a face.

"Thank rather the tide, which so kindly brought you ashore, for I
had done little if you had been in the middle of the sound. But
you have not yet told me how you came to be wrecked."

Estein told her of the storm at sea and the fight with the
Vikings; how they had fallen man by man, and how he too would have
been numbered amongst the dead but for the tideway and the rocks.

As she listened, her eyes betrayed her interest in the tale, and
when he had finished, she said,--

"I have heard of Liot and Osmund. They are the most pitiless of
all the robbers in these seas. Give thanks that you escaped them."

He asked her name, and she told him it was Osla, daughter of a
Norse leader who had fought in the Irish seas, and had finally
settled in Ireland. There his daughter was born and passed her
early girlhood; and it was a trace of the Irish accent that Estein
had noticed in her speech. In one fatal battle her two brothers
fell, her father was forced to fly from the land, and Osla had
left her Irish home with him and come to reside in Orkney.

"He is a holy Christian man," she said. "Once he was a famous
Viking, and his name was well known in the west seas. Now, he
would even have his name forgotten, and he is only known as
Andreas, which was the name of one of the blessed apostles; and
here we two live in a little lonely island, keeping aloof from all
men, and striving to live as did the early fathers."

"That must be a quiet life for you," said Estein.

"I sometimes think so myself," she answered with a smile. "And
what do men call you?"

For an instant Estein hesitated. The thought passed through his
mind, "She must not know me as son to the King of Sogn till I have
done some deed more worthy of a prince of Yngve's line than lose a
battle with two Orkney Vikings." Then he said, "I am called
Vandrad; [Footnote: The Unlucky.] from my youth up I have been a
sea-rover, and I fear I may prove ill suited to your father's
company."

"My father has met sea-rovers before," she said, with a smile in
her eye.

By this time they had nearly crossed the island, and Estein saw
before them another long sound. On the far side of this lay a
large and hilly island that stretched to his left hand as far as
his eye could reach, and on the right broke down at the end of the
strait into a precipitous headland, beyond which sparkled the open
sea. In the middle of the sound a small green islet basked like a
sea monster in the evening sunshine.

As they stood on the top of the descent that ran steeply to the
sea, he cast his eyes around for any signs of life on sea or on
shore. Below him, and much to the left, a cluster of small houses
round a larger drinking-hall marked the residence of a chieftain
of position; on the island across the water lay a few scattered
farms; and on the little islet his eye could just discern a faint
wreath of smoke. The seas were deserted, and the atmosphere seemed
charged with an air of calm loneliness.

"That is my home," said Osla, pointing to the little green island.
"The early fathers called it the Holy Isle. Our house is an
anchorite's cell, and our lands, as you see, are of the smallest.
Are you content to come to such a place?"

Estein smiled. "If you dwell there, I am content," he said.

Osla tossed her head with what quite failed to be an air of
impatience.

"Such things are easy to say now," she said. "If you say them
again after you have lived on a hermit's fare for one whole day, I
may begin to believe you."

They descended the hill, and in a little creek on the shore came
upon a skiff.

"This is our long ship," said Osla. "If you wish to show your
gratitude, you may assist me to launch her."

"Now," she said, when Estein had run the boat into the water, "you
can rest while I row you across."

"It has never been my custom to let a girl row me," he replied,
taking the oars.

"But your wounds?"

"If I have any I have forgotten them."

"Well, I will let you row, for the tide is at the turn, and you
will not need to watch the currents. There is a great roost here
when the tide is running."

Estein laughed. "I see that I am with a skilful helmsman," he
said.

"And I, that I am with an over-confident crew," she answered.

Only a distant corncrake broke the silence of the lonely channel,
its note sounding more faintly as they left the land behind. The
sun set slowly between the headlands to seaward, and by the time
they reached the shore of the islet the stillness was absolute,
and the northern air was growing chill. Osla led the Viking up a
slope of short sea-turf, and presently crossing the crest of the
land, they came upon a settlement so strange and primitive that it
could scarcely, he thought, have been designed by mortal men.

Facing the land-locked end of the sound, and looking upon a little
bay, a cluster of monastic cells marked the northern limits of the
Christian church. From this outpost it had for the time receded,
and all save two of the rude stone dwellings looked deserted and
forlorn. A thin thread of smoke rose straight heavenward in the
still air, and before the entrance of the cell whence it issued
stood an old and venerable man. Despite a slight stoop, he was
still much beyond the common height of men. His brows were shaggy,
and his grey beard reached well down over his breast; a long and
voluminous cloak, much discoloured by the weather, was bound round
his waist by a rope, and in his hand he carried a great staff.

As Estein approached, his brows bent in an expression of
displeased surprise, but he waited in silence till his daughter
spoke.

"I have brought a shipwrecked seafarer, father," she said. "He is
wounded, I fear, and certainly he is both wet and hungry. I have
told him we would give him shelter and food, and such tending as
his wounds may require."

"Whence came he?" asked the old man.

"From the sound beyond the island; at least, he was in the sound
when I first saw him."

"And I have to thank your daughter that I am not there now,"
Estein added.

"What is your name?"

"I am known as Vandrad, the son of a noble landowner in Norway."

The old man looked for a moment as though he would have questioned
him further on his family. Instead, he asked,--

"And why came you to these islands?"

"For that, the wind and not I is answerable. Orkney was the last
place I had thought of visiting."

"You were wrecked?"

"Wrecked, and wellnigh drowned."

In a more courteous tone the old man said, "While you are here you
are welcome to such cheer as we can give you. This cell is all my
dwelling, but since you have come to this island, enter and rest
you in peace."

Stooping low in the doorway, Estein entered the abode of Andreas
the hermit. Lit only by a small window and the gleam of a
driftwood fire, the rude apartment was dusky and dim; yet there
seemed nothing there that should make the sea-king pause at the
threshold. Was it but a smoke wreath that he saw, and did the wind
rise with a sudden gust out of the stillness of the evening? It
seemed to him a face that appeared and then vanished, and a far-
off voice that whispered a warning in his ear.

"Be not dismayed at our poverty; there is no worse foeman within,"
said Osla, with a touch of raillery, as he stood for a moment
irresolute.

Estein made no answer, but stepped quickly into the room. Had he
indeed heard a voice from beyond the grave, or was it but the
fancy of a wounded head? The impression lingered so vividly that
he stood in a reverie, and the words of his hosts fell unheeded on
his ears. He knew the face, he had heard the voice of old, but in
the kaleidoscope of memory he could see no name to fit them, no
incident wherewith they might be linked.

He was aroused by the voice of Osla.

"Let us give him food and drink quickly, father. He is faint, and
hears us not."

The tumultuous stir of battle was forgotten as they brought him
supper and gently bound his wounds. A kettle sang a drowsy song
and seemed to lay a languid spell upon him, and, as in a dream, he
heard the hermit offer up an evening prayer. The petitions,
eloquent and brief in his northern tongue, rose above the
throbbing of the roost outside, and died away into a prayerful
silence; and then, in the pleasant nicker of the firelight, they
parted till the morrow.

Estein and the hermit stepped out into the cool night.

"They who visit the Holy Isle must rest content with hard
pillows," said Andreas. "Here in this cell you will find a blanket
and a couch of stone. May Christ be with you through the night;"
and as he spoke he turned into his own bare apartment.

Estein looked upward at the stars shining as calmly on him here as
on the sea-king who lately paced his long ship's deck; he listened
for a moment to the roost rising higher and moaning more uneasily;
and then above both he saw a pair of dark blue eyes, and heard a
voice with just a touch of raillery in it. As he bent his head and
entered his cell, he smiled to himself at the pleasantness of the
vision.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ISLAND SPELL.


The Holy Isle was bathed in morning sunshine, shadows of light
clouds chased each other over the hills across the sound, and out
beyond the headlands the blue sea glimmered restfully.

On a bank of turf sloping to the rocks Estein sat with Osla,
drinking in the freshness of the air. She had milked their
solitary cow, baked cakes enough for the day's fare, and now, her
simple housekeeping over, she was free to entertain her guest.

"My father, I fear, is in a black mood," she said. "His moods come
and go, I know not why or when. To-day and perhaps to-morrow, and
it may be for four days or more, he will sit in his cell or on the
grass before the door, speaking never a word, and hardly answering
when I talk to him. Pay no heed to him; he means no
inhospitality."

"I fear he likes me not," said Estein. "He came here to escape
men, you say, and now he has to entertain a stranger and a
Viking."

"It is not that," she said. "The black moods come when we are
alone; they come sometimes with the rising storm, sometimes when
the sun shines brightest. I cannot tell when the gloom will fall,
nor when he will be himself again. When his mind is well, he will
talk to me for hours, and instruct me in many things."

"Has he instructed you in this religion he professes? Know you
what gods he worships?"

Osla opened her eyes in perplexed surprise; she hardly felt
herself equal to the task of converting this pagan, and yet it
were a pity not to try. So she told him, with a woman's
enthusiastic inaccuracy, of this new creed of love, then being so
strikingly illustrated in troubled, warlike Christian Europe.

"And what of the gods I and my ancestors have worshipped for so
long? What place have they in the Valhalla of the white Christ?"

"There are no other gods."

"No Odin, no Thor, no Freya of the fair seasons, no Valhalla for
the souls of the brave? Nay, Osla, leave me my gods, and I will
leave you yours. Mine is the religion of my kinsmen, of my father,
of my ancestors. And," he continued, "would you say that Christian
men are better than worshippers of Odin? Are they braver, are
their swords keener, are they more faithful to their friends?"

"We want not keen swords. Warfare is your only thought. You live
but to pillage and to fight. Have you known what it is to lose
home and brothers all in one battle? Have you fled from a smoking
roof-tree? Have you had mercy refused you? Have you had wife or
child borne away to slavery? That is your creed--tell me, is it
not?"

"I have thought of these things, Osla," said Estein gravely. "I
have thought of them at night when the stars shone and the wind
sighed in the trees. When I look upon my home and see the reapers
in the fields, and hear the maidens singing at their work, I would
sometimes be willing to turn hermit like your father, and sit in
the sun for ever.

"But," he went on, and his voice rose to a clear, stirring note,
"I could not rest long so. The sea calls us Northmen, and we
cannot bide at home. Unrest seizes us like a giant and hurls us
forth. We must be men; we must seek adventure on sea or on shore;
there are foemen to be met, and we long to meet them; and if we
bear us bravely, never striking sail though the wind blow high,
and never flinching from the greatest odds, we know that the gods
will smile, and, if they will, we die happy. We are not all bairn-
slayers. I have been taught to spare where there was nothing
worthy of my steel, and no maid or mother has yet suffered wrong
at my hands. Yet must I sail the seas, Osla, and fight where I
find a foe; for I feel that the gods bid me, and a man cannot
struggle with his fate."

While he spoke Osla's gaze was fixed on the turning tide, but her
eyes, had he seen them, were lit by the fire of his words. She
sprang to her feet as he finished, and said,--

"I, too, have the Norse blood in me; the sea calls me as it calls
you; and if I were a man, I fear I should make a bad hermit. Yet"-
-and she held up a warning finger to stay the impetuous words on
Estein's tongue--"yet I know I should be wrong. What is this
feeling but the hunger of wolves, and what are your gods but names
for it? Wolves, too, go out to slay; and if they had speech,
doubtless they would say that Thor called them."

"Is a Viking not different from a wolf, then, in your eyes?"

"By too little," she answered, "if they hold the same creed."

"A wolf, then, I am," he replied; "and I can but try to keep my
lips drawn over my fangs and bit on my hind legs, and practise
manliness as best I may."

"A very hungry manliness," she retorted. But despite herself she
smiled, and then lightly turned the talk to other things.

From day to day the quiet island life went on with few incidents
and pleasant monotony. With only one family was there any
intercourse, and that almost entirely on Osla's part. On the shore
of the great island to the west, which men called Hrossey, dwelt a
large farmer, named Margad, and from his household such supplies
as they needed were obtained. He was an honest, peaceable man, as
the times went, with a kindly wife, Gudrun by name, and they both
took a friendly interest in the hermit's daughter. Estein would
fain have lived in her society all day, listening to her talk and
watching the wind play with her hair, and every day he noticed,
with a sense of growing disappointment, that he saw her more
seldom. Sometimes they would have long talks, and then, abruptly
as it seemed to him, she would have to leave him, and he would
spend his time in fishing from a boat, or would cross with her to
Hrossey, and while she went to see Dame Gudrun he pursued the roe-
deer and moor-fowl.

With bow and arrow, and by dint of long and arduous stalks, he
brought home scanty but well-earned spoil, and then, either by
himself, or more often with Osla in the stern, he would cross the
sound as the day faded, to a welcome supper and an evening spent
in the firelit cell, or to a peaceful night beside the swirl of
the tideway under a sky so pale and clear that only the brightest
stars were ever seen.

He knew that he was in love, hopelessly in love. Why else should
he stay in the Holy Isle after his wounds were healed, and when
nothing bade him remain? Far away and faint sounded the echoes of
war and the shouts of revelry. Like memories of another life,
thoughts of his father, of Helgi, of friends and kinsmen, came to
him, pricked him for a moment, and faded into a pair of dark-blue
eyes and a tall and slender figure. He still talked to Osla of
voyages and battles, and caught her sometimes taking more interest
than she would own in some old tale of derring-do, or a story of
his own adventures. Yet the actual memories of these things grew
fainter, and he talked like an old man telling of his youth.

"I am under a spell," he would say to himself, and stride more
quickly over the heather, and then catch himself smiling at the
thought of some word or look of Osla's.

The hermit's black mood passed away, and was followed by an
attitude of grave distance towards his guest. He spoke little, but
always courteously, and seemed to treat him at first merely as an
addition to the live stock of the island.

One night Estein, after the manner of the skalds, sang a poem of
his own as they sat round the fire. He called it the "King's War
Song."

"On high the raven banner
Invites the hungry kites,
Red glares the sun at noon-tide,
Wild gleam the Northern lights;
The war-horn brays its summons,
And from each rock-bound fiord
Come the sea-kings of Norway,
To follow Norway's lord.

"The cloven arrow speeding,
Fraught with war's alarms,
Calls the ravens to their feast,
The Udallers to arms.
See that your helms be burnished,
See that your blades be ground,
When he of Yngve's kindred
Sends the war token round!"

"Skoal, [Footnote: The Norse drinking salutation.] Vandrad!
skoal!" cried the hermit.

His hearers looked at him in amazement. His eyes flashed, his lips
twitched, the whole man was transformed for the moment into the
Viking of the western seas.

"Once I was a skald myself," he said. "You have quickened what I
thought was dead." And he rose and walked out into the night.

For a minute they were too surprised to speak. Then Osla said
softly,--

"Your magic is too strong, Vandrad." She threw him one glance that
lived long in his memory, and quickly followed her father.

For more than an hour afterwards he could dimly see them pacing
the shore in silence, her arm within the hermit's.

Next day the old man was more silent and reserved than before, but
every now and then Estein saw that his eyes followed him, and the
few words he spoke were couched in a kindlier manner.

"Sing to him again," whispered Osla in the evening, and night
after night the young skald sang and the hermit and his daughter
listened. Sometimes when he was finished the old Viking would talk
on various themes. Brief glimpses of his earlier days, snatches of
religious converse, his travels, and the strange peoples he had
seen, he would touch upon before the evening prayer.

And so the time passed away, till Estein had spent six weeks in
the Holy Isle. All the while he had made no open love to Osla. She
seemed merely friendly, and he was distracted between a wild
desire to break down the barriers between them and a strange and
numbing feeling of warning that held him back, he knew not why. So
strong was it at times that he fancied two spells cast upon him,
one by the island maiden, the other by some unknown spirit.

One morning he found her wandering by the cliffs that formed the
seaward barrier of the isle.

"Let us sit here, Osla," he said. "I have a new song to sing you."

"I must bake my cakes," she answered. "Can you not sing it to us
to-night?"

"It concerns only you. Sit here but for a moment; it is not long,
and you can escape from me when I have done."

"Very well," she said, with a smile and an air of resignation. "I
will listen, but do not keep me long."

"If it will tire you, I can wait."

"You can try me."

"I must leave the Holy Isle soon, Osla; I have been too long away
from my kinsfolk and my country. It is hard to part, but it must
come some day, and these verses are my parting song."

She was silent, and seemed intently plucking sea pinks.

"I cannot tell you why," he went on, "but to-day I feel that my
hour has come to rove again. I would that I might live here for
ever, but I know it is not fated so."

Then he sang his farewell song:--

"Canst thou spare a sigh, fair Osla? It is fated I must go. Wilt
thou think of Vandrad ever When the sea winds hoarsely blow, Or
will the memory of my love With absence fainter grow?

"Canst thou spare a tear, sweet Osla, When I sail from this fair
land? Wilt thou dream of Vandrad sometimes When the waves boom on
the strand? Can visions of a pleasant hour The march of time
withstand?

"Osla, when I bear me bravely, 'Midst the lightning of the sword,
And the armies meet like torrents When the mountain snows have
thawed The thought of thine approving smile Shall be my sole
reward.

"Fare thee well, sweet blue-eyed Osla! The sea-king must not stay,
E'en for tresses rich as summer And for smile as bright as May;
But one hope I cannot part from--We may meet again some day!"

"Then are you going?" she said, more softly than he had ever heard
her speak before.

"Do you wish me to stay?"

"Not if you wish to rove the seas again, and fight and plunder, as
a brave man should," she cried with a flash of raillery. "If it is
your fate to go, why should I stand in the way? Am I anything to
you?"

She gave him no time to answer, but rose and ran lightly away.




CHAPTER V.

ANDREAS THE HERMIT.


The same day Estein rowed across alone to Hrossey, and started
over the hills with his bow and arrows. He walked for some miles
through moorland ground, and paused at length on the top of a
range of hills, whence he had a wide view over the inland country.
There he sat down and mused for long. Below him he saw a valley
opening out into a sweep of low-lying land, watered by many lochs,
and bounded by heather hills. All round, in glimpses between the
highest hill-tops, and in wide, unbroken stretches over the lower
ranges, the open sea girdled the island. Gradually the stillness
of the place and the freshness of the air told upon him, and at
length he fell asleep. He began to dream, at first of confused
events and hurrying faces, and then more distinctly and vividly.
He had landed, he thought, on the Holy Isle. It was dark, but he
seemed to see plainly a figure, wrapped in a long cloak, walking
before him towards the cells. It was neither Andreas nor his
daughter, and with some wonder he quickened his steps and overtook
it just as it was about to enter the hermit's cell. Then all at
once it seemed to flash upon him that this was no mortal visitor,
and with a sudden thrill of fear he stopped. At that instant the
figure turned a shrouded face on him, and said sternly, and so
clearly that the words were ringing in his ears when he woke,--

"What doest THOU here, Estein Hakonson?"

He came to himself with a start, the sweat standing on his
forehead. It was the second time he had heard the voice. Once
before it had warned him when he first entered the hermit's cell,
but now as then he could find neither name nor circumstance to fit
it.

All at once the prophecy of Atli came into his mind--"You will be
warned, but you will heed not," and in spite of himself a feeling
of gloom settled over his mind.

A herd of deer browsed unheeded on a distant slope, the hours
passed, and the sun sank low in the west, while he sat there
alone.

At last he rose and retraced his steps back to the shore. The tide
was running strongly, he had a long and stiff pull to win his way
across, and the summer dusk that never reaches darkness in the
north was gathering when he landed.

He looked round as though he expected to see a cloaked figure
start up out of the gloaming, but the island was deserted and
still. Before the cell he paused for an instant. "You will not
heed the warning," he repeated. "Yet what is fated must be," and
then he entered.

The hermit was alone. Farmer Margad had come for Osla, for his
wife was unwell, and the credulous people thought the daughter of
the wizard, as they deemed Father Andreas, might have some healing
influence. Estein sat down and took his supper; and all the time
he was eating, Andreas paced the floor saying nothing aloud, but
muttering continually under his breath. Legends of shape-changing
and black magic came into the young Viking's mind. As he watched
the old man pass to and fro in the firelight, and the huge,
distorted shadow sweep across and across the cell, he fancied once
or twice that he could see the beginnings of some horrid
transformation.

All of a sudden the hermit stopped and looked at him earnestly.

"Sing to me a song of battle!" he cried; and Estein saw that a
change had indeed taken place. A fit of gloom had given way to a
period of strange excitement, and the spirit of the sea-rover was
returned.

Estein composed his mind, and sang the song of the Battle of
Dunheath, beginning:--

  "Many the chiefs who drank the mead
    As the sun rose over the plain,
   But small the band who bound their wounds
    When the heath was dark again."

As the last words died away the hermit began to talk excitedly and
volubly, and in a strain new to his guest.

"I once sang such songs," he said. "I sailed the seas in my long
ship, and men feared my name--feared me, Andreas, the man of God.
I was a heathen then, as thou art; I worshipped the gods of the
North, and the hammer of Thor was my symbol on the ocean. I spared
none who stood in my way. These hands have dripped with the blood
of my foes, and many a widow have I left desolate."

He paused, and a tongue of flame shot suddenly from the fire and
cast a bright light in the cell.

"Fire!" cried the old man--"fire like that have I brought on my
foes! I have burned them like rats; I have left their homesteads
smouldering! Listen, Vandrad, and I shall tell thee of a deed that
made my name known throughout all the Northland. Now," he added,
"I am a Christian man, and my soul is safe with Christ.

"Once I received an injury I swore I should avenge. Hakon, King of
Sogn, a proud man and a stern, banished my brother Kolskegg for
manslaughter. The deed was but an act of justice on one who had
beguiled our kinswoman; but the dead man had many friends, and the
king hearkened neither to Kolskegg's offers of atonement nor to my
petitions--to mine, who had never asked aught of mortal man
before! My brother was a dear friend of the king, foster-father
even to his eldest son Olaf, and he weakly bowed his head and left
the land. When I heard that he had gone, I pressed my sword-hilt
so tightly in my rage that the blood dripped from my nails, and I
cursed him aloud for idly suffering such insult to our house to
pass without revenge. Our race is as old and proud as the kings of
Sogn themselves, and I vowed that Hakon should rue that day. I was
a heathen then, Vandrad."

He said these last words with a gleam in his eyes and a tightening
of his lips, as if he gloated over the memory of his bygone faith.
With the same grim reminiscent pleasure, he went on: "I and two
others sent the cloven arrow through the dales, and gathered armed
men enough to fill three ships. Ay, the sailing of Thord the Tall,
Snaekol Gunnarson, and Thorfin of Skapstead is not forgotten yet
in Norway. We went to Laxafiord, for there dwelt Olaf, son of
Hakon. You have heard the tale?" he cried suddenly, "you know of
the burning?"

"Go on," said Estein, in a hard, dry voice; "I am listening," and
all the while his right hand sought his side.

"It was a deed," said the hermit, "that made all Norway ring. We
landed in the night time, and saw the lights of the hall between
the pine trees. They were feasting, and they heard not our
approach. We made a ring round the house and heaped faggots
against the walls, and still they heard us not. It was a dark
night, Vandrad, very dark, till we lit a fire that was seen by men
in the outer islands. Then they heard us, they smelt the smoke,
and they ran to the doors. The first man who came out I clove to
the waist, for none in Norway had greater skill at arms than I.
Then we drove them in and closed the door. Sometimes at night I
hear them shriek even now. There was never such a burning in
Norway; we spared not one soul, not one.

"They asked us to let the women out, but we had come there to slay
and not to spare. They shrieked, Vandrad; they cried till the roof
fell in, and then they died. My soul is safe with God, and they
are in outer darkness. There they will shriek for ever."

He paused for a moment, and then went on in the same strain of
high excitement,--

"Now you know me. I am Thord the Tall, the burner of Olaf
Hakonson."

"And where are Snaekol Gunnarson and Thorfin of Skapstead?" Estein
spoke with difficulty, and his right hand had closed on something
in his belt.

"Both are dead. They died heathens, and their souls are as
hopelessly lost as the soul of Olaf Hakonson. I am the last of the
burners."

The voice of Thord the Tall died away. Estein bent forward, his
hand left his side, and something in it gleamed in the firelight.

Suddenly the hermit started.

"Osla! I hear Osla!" he said.

Estein thrust his dagger into its sheath, and bending in the
doorway stepped out into the night. Below the cell he saw a boat
leaving the land, and right before him, in the clear, cool
twilight, the form of Osla.

"Have you tired of my father's company?" she asked, with a smile.

"I would be alone," he answered, and walked quickly past her.

Now he knew the twice-heard voice, and remembered the fleeting
face.

"You came to warn me, Olaf, and I knew you not!" he cried. "I know
you now--too late!"

He paced the turf with hurried steps. The sacred duty of revenge
called him with a vehemence we cannot now realize. He had sworn to
let slip no chance of taking vengeance on the burners of his
brother. Often he had sought news of them, and often renewed his
resolution; and now that he had found his foe, was he to idly
suffer him to escape?

Yet he had been this man's guest; he had eaten of his bread, and
slept in his dwelling. And his hands were tied by a stronger
chain. "Osla, Osla," he cried, "for your sake I am faithless to my
vows, and forgetful of my duty to my kindred!"

Then the memory of Thord the Tall, telling of the burning, rose
fresh and strong, and again his hand sought his side, and his
breath came fast, till the vision of Osla swept aside all other
thoughts.

The time went by until the hour was hard on midnight. Gradually
his mind grew more composed.

"I am in the hands of destiny," he said to himself. "Let fate do
with me what it will."

All the northern sky was still red with the afterglow of sunset,
creeping slowly eastwards against the dawn; land and sea lay clear
and yet dim, for the light was ghostly as a phosphorescent
chamber; the tide was slack, and lapped softly on the rocks; and
everything in the world seemed tranquil.

"The end has come," he said.

All at once, on the sheen of the sound, he spied a curious black
mark, far out and vague. Gradually it seemed to steal nearer, till
Estein, looking at it keenly, forgot his thoughts in a rising
curiosity. Then it took shape, and faintly across the water came
the splash of oars and the voices of men. As they drew nearer, he
crouched below a bank and watched their approach with growing
wonder and something too of awe.

"The gods have sent for me," he thought.

They were being carried by the current towards the place where he
stood, and presently they made a landing on the rocks. There
followed a consultation in low tones, and then one man left the
boat and came up the bank. He stood out clearly in the transparent
dusk--a tall, mail-clad figure, walking with a confident carriage.

Estein waited till he was opposite him, and then sprang up, dagger
in hand.

"Who art thou?" he demanded.

The man's hand went straight to his sword, but at the sound of
Estein's voice it fell again.

"Estein, my foster-brother!" he cried.

"Helgi!"

Helgi opened his arms and embraced him tenderly, speaking with an
emotion he made no effort to control. "Estein, my brother, I
thought thou wert in truth in Valhalla. I have wept for thee,
Estein; I have mourned thee as dead. Tell me that this is thy very
self, and not some island ghost come to mock me."

The friendly voice and grasp, coming in this his hour of trouble,
touched Estein to the heart.

"It is I, indeed, Helgi," he said; "and never have I felt more
glad to see a face and clasp a hand. How came you here? I thought
I had parted from my friends for ever. I have been so long alone
that they had begun to seem like dream-men."

Helgi told him briefly how he had swum ashore to another island,
and there been picked up by Ketill, the black-bearded captain of
one of Estein's scattered ships; how, giving up all hope, they had
sailed for the south, and after meeting head winds and little
luck, returned to the Orkneys, where, from a man who had been with
Margad, news of the stranger on the Holy Isle had reached their
ears.

"They say, Estein, that your hermit has a fair daughter. Methinks
she would like to see your foster-brother; would she not?"

"Nay, Helgi, ask me no more questions, but take me quickly away. I
am spell-bound here, and I dare not trust myself to stay one
moment longer."

"I know these spells, Estein; they have been cast on men by other
maids before now. Better take your sorceress with you. It is
unlucky to break such spells so rudely."

"Laugh not, Helgi," said Estein, taking his arm and hurrying him
down to the shore. "This spell has meant more to me than you can
guess."

"By the hammer of Thor!" exclaimed Helgi, stopping suddenly,
"there surely is the witch herself."

Estein looked round, and standing against the sky he saw the
slender form he knew so well.

"Wait for me, Helgi," he said, "the spell is on me still," and
starting away suddenly he ran up the bank again.

"Osla!" he cried, and stopped abruptly.

"What means this, Vandrad?" she asked.

Her eyes were wide open with troubled surprise, and looking into
her upturned face he thought she never was so fair before.

"They have come for me, Osla, and I must go. Farewell! remember me
not."

"Do you leave us in this way--without saying farewell, or telling
us you were going?"

"I knew not myself when they would come. I told you I must leave
you and seek the sea again. It has come true sooner than I
expected."

He took her hands.

"Farewell!" he said again.

She turned her face away.

"I feared you would tire of us," she said, her voice sinking very
low.

"Never, Osla, never! but fate has been too strong for me. They
wait for me now, and I must leave you."

"Farewell, Vandrad!" she said, looking up, and he saw that her
eyes were filled with tears.

"Osla!" he cried, drawing her towards him. She yielded an instant,
and then suddenly broke free and started away.

"Farewell!" she said again, and her voice sounded like a sob.

He did not trust himself to answer, but turned and hurried to the
boat.

They pushed off in silence, the oars dipped in the quiet sound,
and Estein left the Holy Isle.




CHAPTER VI.

THE HALL OF LIOT.


All through the small hours of the morning Estein sat on the poop
in silence. Helgi, wrapped in his cloak, threw himself on the deck
beside him and fell asleep with a lightened heart, while the long
ship, slipping down the sound with the tide, turned westwards into
the swell of the Atlantic.

Gloom had settled over Estein's mind. The pleasantest memories
were distorted by the ghost of that old blood feud; his murdered
brother called aloud for vengeance; in the wash of the waves and
the creaking of the timbers he heard the hermit recite again the
story of the burning, and through it all a voice cried, "Farewell!
farewell!"

The sun at that season rises early. With it the breeze freshened,
and one by one the sleeping figures in the waist woke, and began
to stir about the ship. Still their leader sat silent.

Helgi at length sat up with a start, and rubbed his eyes. He
looked at Estein, and smiled.

"Very much in love methinks," he said to himself.

At last Estein saw he was observed, and passing his hand across
his brow as if to sweep away his thoughts, asked wearily,--

"Where do we go now, Helgi?"

"Your spell needs a violent remedy, and I have that on my mind
that may cure it. What say you to letting Liot Skulison know that
he did not slay us all? There are here two others besides
ourselves who escaped the fate of Thorkel and our comrades, and
they think they owe Liot something. Does revenge seem sweet?"

"Then Liot is alive?"

"Ay, Thor has spared him for us. The Orkney-man who led us to you
has an ancient feud against the bairn-slayers, and he tells me
Liot and his men are feasting at his dwelling. Shall we fall upon
them to-night?"

"You are a good physician, Helgi. Battle and storm are the best
cures for such as I."

"I cannot give you a storm, I fear," laughed Helgi, "but you can
have fighting enough to-night. Liot keeps two hundred men and more
about him, and we have here some seventy all told."

"We have faced greater odds together, Helgi. Life does not seem so
fair to me now that I should shrink from odds of three to one. Let
us seek Liot wherever he is, and when we have found him, tell him
to arm as many men as he can muster. Then let our destiny weave
its web for us."

Helgi laughed again.

"That would be a good revenge--to let Liot slay the men of Estein,
a shipload at a time. If Odin wishes us to die, I shall try to
meet my fate stoutly, but I shall not help him in the slaying.
Nay, Estein, I can devise a better plan than yours."

Estein smiled for the first time since he had come on board.

"So long as it gives me a good fight with stout foes, and with you
at my side, I care not what plan you propose."

"There speaks yourself again!" cried Helgi; "and I think that ere
long you will meddle with my schemes. I will call Ketill and the
Orkneyman, and we four will hold council here."

Ketill, the broad-beamed captain of the ship--the same whose path
had been stopped by Atli--a man of few words and stout deeds, and
Grim, the Orkneyman, came up to the poop. There they deliberated
for long. Helgi was all for fire.

"Let us hear how the men of Liot will sing when they are warm."

Ketill gave a short laugh.

"I, too, am for burning," he said.

"We must catch them when they are drinking," said Grim. "When
Liot's feasts are over many men go to sleep in outhouses round the
hall, and we have not force enough here to surround them all at
once."

"I will have no more burnings," said Estein.

"When had we our last?" asked Helgi. "You speak as though we had
done naught but burn foes all our lives. We have never had a
burning before, Estein, and it is better to begin as the burners
than the burned."

"I have lately heard tell of another. It is no work for brave
men."

Helgi shrugged his shoulders.

"Let us drown them then," he said.

Ketill gave another short, gruff laugh.

"Nay, Ketill, I am not jesting; in truth I am in little humour for
that. If seventy brave men cannot clear a hall of two hundred
drinkers, what virtue lies in stout hearts and sharp swords? We
will enter the hall, you from one end and I from the other, and I
think the men of Liot Skulison will not have to complain of too
peaceful an evening."

"We must catch them, then, while they are feasting. Afterwards it
will be too late, with only seventy men," the wary Grim replied.

"We can choose our hour," said Estein; "and whatever plan we fall
on, it seems we must be in time."

Helgi laughed lightly.

"I thought you would leave us little say, Estein, when once you
were aroused," he said. "'Tis all the same to me. Fire, sword, or
water--choose what you will, you will always find me by your side;
and if you must go to Valhalla, why, I will blithely bear you
company."

"Fire were better," said Ketill, shaking his head.

The day was still young when the council of war came to an end,
and as they had more than sufficient time to reach the hall of
Liot before night, the bows were turned to the open sea, that they
might better escape observation. Once they had got some miles from
land they turned southwards, and striking the sail, to make as
little mark as they could, moved slowly under oars alone. All day
the long ship rolled in a great ground-swell, the western cliffs
of Orkney now hidden by a wall of water, and now glinting in the
sunshine as they rose from trough to crest, and right ahead the
distant Scottish coast drawing gradually nearer. As the afternoon
wore on they turned landwards again, and towards evening found
themselves coasting a mountainous island lying to the south of
Hrossey.

"What do men call this?" asked Helgi.

"They call it Haey, the high island, and it is on a bay to the
south of it that Liot Skulison dwells," answered Grim, their pilot
for the time.

They drew closer and closer to the land, until a towering line of
cliffs rose for more than a thousand feet right above their heads.
It was a stern and sombre coast, unbroken by any bays or inland
glimpses, and gloomy and terrible in the fading light. The great
oily swell broke into spouts of foam at the cliff-foot, and all
along the face of the precipice they could see innumerable sea-
fowl clinging to the rock.

Gradually, as they sailed along this hostile land, a light sea-fog
began to gather. The leaders of the hazardous expedition watched
it closing in upon them with growing apprehension.

"What say you, Grim?" said Helgi; "can you take us to Liot in this
mist?"

Grim looked round him doubtfully.

"Methinks I can take you there," he said, "but I fear we shall be
too late, we can move but slowly; and with only seventy men, I
doubt we shall do little when the men of Liot have left the
feast."

Estein had been standing in silence near the tiller. At these
words he turned and cried fiercely,--

"Who talks of doing little? Liot or I shall fall to-night, though
the blackness of death were round us. Think you I have come to sit
here idly in a fog? Tell your men to row like valiant Vikings,
Ketill, and not like timorous women."

The respect due to rank in Norway was little more than the proud
Norseman chose to pay, and it was with small deference to his
prince that Ketill answered,--

"You are fey, I think, Estein. I shall not lose my ship that you
may the sooner feed the fishes."

"Are you, too, afraid? By the hammer of Thor! I think you are in
league with Liot. I shall make these cravens row."

"That you will not," replied Ketill.

In an instant both swords were half-drawn. The men within earshot
were too much surprised at this sudden change from Estein's usual
manner to his followers to do more than look in astonishment at
the dispute, and in another instant the blades would have clashed,
when Helgi rushed between them.

"What is this?" he cried. "Are you possessed of evil spirits, that
you would quarrel on the eve of battle? Remember, Ketill, that
Estein is your prince; and Estein, my brother, what ails you? You
are under a spell indeed. Would that I had slain the witch ere you
parted. You can gain nothing by wrecking the ship, and this fog is
too dense to row a race off such a coast as this."

Perhaps it was the allusion to the "witch" that brought Estein to
his senses, for his eyes suddenly softened.

"I was wrong, Ketill," he said. "The wrath of the gods is upon me,
and I am not myself."

He turned away abruptly, and gazed moodily into the fog; while
Ketill, with the look of one who is dealing with a madman, left
the poop.

"It is ill sailing with a bewitched leader," he muttered.

The idea that Estein was under a spell took rapid hold of the
superstitious crew. They told each other that this was no earthly
mist that had fallen on them, and listening to the break of the
sea on the cliffs, they talked low of wizards and sea-monsters,
and heard strange voices in the sound of the surge. Then they
became afraid to row at more than a snail's pace, and sometimes
almost stopped altogether. In vain Helgi went amongst them, and
urged that Grim knew these waters so well that there was little
danger, in vain he pointed to the hope of booty and revenge ahead;
even as he spoke there was a momentary break in the mist, and they
saw the towering cliff so close above them that his words were
wasted.

"There is witchcraft here," they said; and Ketill was as obstinate
as the rest. The ship crept under the cliffs with hardly any way
on at all, and Helgi, in despair, saw the golden hour slipping by.

"Oh, for two more good ships," he thought: "then we could wait
till daylight, and fall upon them when we pleased."

Estein had again fallen a prey to his thoughts. In his gloomy
fatalism he thought that the wrath of the gods pursued him for the
neglect of his duty to his murdered brother, and he submitted to
the failure of this adventure as the beginning of his punishment.
The fighting fire died out, the longing for action was choked, and
in their place what was as nearly a spell as can fall on mortal
men had fallen on him. His devoted friend fumed impatiently beside
him as the fog grew denser and the hours went slowly by, and
bitterly he cursed the enchantress of the Holy Isle.

"He talks of the gods," he said to himself. "This is no work of
theirs; it is the magic of that island witch, may the trolls take
her!"

"The fog lifts!" cried Grim from his post at the tiller.

The men heard the cry, and ceasing their awestruck talk, looked
eagerly at the fast-widening rifts in the white shroud. Ghost-like
wreaths detached themselves, flitted by the ship, and then
dissipated in thin air. The summer night sky with its pale stars
appeared in lakes above, and below, the fog rose from the water
like steam. Presently the great cliffs came out clear and terrible
in the midnight dusk, and the men cried that the spell was broken.

Over Estein came the greatest change. As the fog lifted, the light
returned to his eye, and he turned eagerly to Grim.

"Where are we now? Have we yet time to catch Liot at his feast?"

The pilot shook his head.

"It will take us full two hours to reach the bay where Liot
dwells, and the feast, I fear, will have ended even now, for the
hour is late."

Helgi's face fell, and he muttered a deep imprecation as he turned
to Estein.

"What think you?" he asked; "shall we run for some distant bay,
and return to-morrow night?"

"I have come to meet Liot to-night," Estein replied, and turning
away he paced the deck in deep thought.

Helgi's cheerfulness returned in an instant. He hummed an air, and
leaning against the bulwark awaited the march of events with his
usual careless philosophy.

"The men were right," he thought; "it was a magic mist. The spell
has lifted with the fog. It wants but a brisk fight now to cure
him."

A grim smile stole over Estein's face, and presently he stopped
beside Grim, and said,--

"Know you where Liot sleeps in this hall of his?"

"Ay; I was forced to follow him for two years, and I know well his
sleeping chamber."

"Can you lead us to it in the dark?"

Grim looked at him doubtfully before answering.

"I think so," he said at length.

"But are you sure?"

The pilot looked round him.

"The night is light," said he, "and there will still be some fire
in the hall. But it will be a dangerous venture."

Estein turned impatiently.

"Methinks you have little feud with Liot," he said, and went over
to where Helgi stood.

"Well?" asked Helgi.

"I have a plan."

"Have you resolved on a burning? This cursed fog has made me cold,
and a fire would like me well."

"You have heard my rede on burnings, Helgi. My scheme is to carry
off Liot in his sleep. They will keep no watch. The very dogs will
be drunk, and I think it will not be so difficult as it seems.
Will you come with me into Liot's hall?"

Helgi's blue eyes opened wide, and he laughed as he said,--

"There has never been your match for enterprise in the north,
Estein. Your plans seem all so chosen that your foes may have the
greatest chance to slay you. Are we to leave you in Liot's place?"

"I asked if you would follow me."

"You know the answer to that already. But why trouble with Liot's
carcass? Surely it were easier to slay him where he lies."

"I like not a midnight murder, and Liot and I have not yet decided
who is the better man. That is a trial which I would fain make,
and then we can see what the gods would do with me."

"To fight an enemy and capture him afterwards is common enough,
but to capture him first and then fight him seems the act of a
madman," answered Helgi.

"Then I am a madman," replied Estein, and with that he turned away
and walked forward to consult Ketill.

He was impelled by his creed of morbid fatalism to seek this test,
whereby his fate might be sharply decided. He longed, too, for
action, and the idea, once held, fascinated him. But to all others
on board he seemed merely the victim of some insidious magic. That
he was under a spell Helgi had no manner of doubt.

"A fair fight," he thought, "is always manlier than a secret
slaying, but not Odin himself would fly away with the foe who had
slain two shiploads of his followers, and afterwards challenge him
to single combat. It is as if he should catch a thief who had
stolen half his goods, and then throw dice with him for the rest.
But all spells act most banefully at night, they say; doubtless in
the morning Estein will rest content with giving him a fitting
burial--if he catches him."

And at the thought he laughed aloud.

"May I die in bed like a woman," he said to himself, "if this be
not the strangest way of fishing for a Viking!"

Ketill was at first for stoutly refusing the adventure; but Helgi,
whose convictions sat lightly on him compared with his attachment
to Estein, persuaded him to consent.

"Are you afraid?" he asked, and that question left no room for the
proud Viking to hesitate.

It was about two hours after midnight when the long ship, stealing
under the shadow of the cliffs, turned into a small bay. It lay
open to the south, guarded on either side by a precipitous
headland, and withdrawn from the tideway and the swell of the
western ocean. In the weird grey light of that June night the men
could see a valley opening out of great inland hills on to a more
level strip of moorland at the head of the bay. On a spit of sandy
beach lay three warships, and on the slope of the hill to the left
stood a small township of low buildings, clustering round the
higher drinking-hall of Liot Skulison.

In dead silence they hugged the shore as closely as their pilot
dared.

"We are as close inshore as we can win," he said at length in a
low voice.

The boat was stealthily launched, and into it as many men as it
would hold were crowded.

"Keep the rowers on their benches, we may have little time to get
away," said Ketill in a gruff whisper to his forecastle man, whom
he left in command of the ship.

"We have little wish to be caught."

"Push off, men, and remember he who speaks above a whisper I shall
think is tired of life."

The oars dipped and the boat crept slowly landwards.

"You know the landing, Grim?"

Grim, who sat at the tiller, merely nodded; and presently the bows
grated on a strip of gravel beach.

"The trolls take you!" muttered Ketill. "Could you not have told
us to slacken speed? The dead could hear a landing like this."

"'Tis all right yet, Ketill," whispered Estein. "We are too far
from the hall."

"By the hammer of Thor!" growled the black-bearded captain, whose
temper was ever of the shortest, "these men splash like cattle."

One by one they stepped ashore, and then the party was divided.
One man was left in charge of the boat; Ketill with three others
went round to where the long ships lay; while Estein, Helgi, and
Grim, with six picked men, cautiously approached the hall.

They crossed a strip of rising heather and struck a sharp slope of
turf. Close above them loomed a dark mass of building, and the
silence was unbroken save by the stealthy fall of their footsteps.
Grim led the way, then came Estein, then Helgi, and the others
followed in single file.

Warily they came up to the end of the hall, and under the door
there was a brief pause. Estein gave his final instructions in a
whisper, and then quickly pushing open the door, he stepped in.
Helgi, Grim, and one man followed, while the other five waited
outside with their weapons in their hands.

These old Norse drinking-halls were long and high rooms, with
great fires down the middle, and beside them long lines of benches
for the guests. All down the sides the sleeping chambers opened,
and over these hung the arms of the warriors.

The hall of Liot was very dark and still. A ghostly flicker of
light struggled through the narrow windows, and on the fires the
embers slowly died. Beside the benches slumbered the forms of some
of the heaviest drinkers, and once or twice they nearly stumbled
over these. Grim came up beside Estein and led him about half-way
down the hall. There he stopped and pointed to a door. There were
no words; the others closed up and loosened their daggers in their
sheaths. Estein stepped back softly to the fire and lifted up a
log, one end of which still glowed brightly, and then he pushed
open the door. The chamber was dark as a wolf's mouth as he groped
for the bed. So cautiously he stepped that the heavy breathing of
the sleeper only broke the silence, and very carefully he went
forward and thrust the log so close to the unconscious slumberer
that he could clearly read his features. Then he placed it against
the wall, and gave one whispered order. In an instant a mantle was
twisted round Liot's mouth, his hands and feet were bound, and ere
he was thoroughly awake, he was mounted on the shoulders of his
foes, forming one of a singular procession that hurried through
the hall of Liot Skulison.

Grim, who walked first, had almost reached the door, when from the
blackest of the shadows a man stepped suddenly across his path.
For an instant the pilot's heart stood still. Then he saw that he
had only to deal with a half-awakened drinker, and as his mouth
was framing a question, Grim's dagger flashed, and with a cry the
man fell heavily on the floor. Instantly there arose such a chorus
of barking as might have wakened the dead.

"The dogs are sobering," said Helgi.

"Hasten!" cried Estein. "The men will be on us."

They hurried through the door, and bearing their captive on their
shoulders, the whole party broke into a run.

"The dogs are after us!" cried one.

"Turn and kill them," said Estein.

Three men stopped, and with a few sweeping sword slashes scattered
the yelping crowd; but even as they were driving them off, they
could see that men were coming out of the hall and outhouses.

"Where is Ketill?" cried Estein, as they reached the boat.

The man in charge had seen nothing of him.

"May werewolves seize him!" exclaimed Helgi. "He has had time
enough to tear the long ships plank from plank."

"We have no time to wait for him; it is his fault if he be left,"
said Grim.

"That knowledge would doubtless comfort him," replied Estein; "but
nevertheless I shall wait."

"Here they come!" cried Helgi.

"And here come those who will reach us before them," said another
man.

He was right. A swarm of men were already running down the slope,
and it was clear that they must reach the boat first.

Estein sprang on board.

"Push off!" he cried; "we will row along the shore to meet them."

"Well thought of," said Helgi; "'tis lucky we have one cool head
with us."

The pursuers at first either failed to see Ketill's party, or
mistook them for their own men, for they continued their headlong
rush straight to the water, firing arrows and darts as they ran.
Then they saw the manoeuvre, and turned with loud cries along the
shore. The boat had got a start by this time; the rowers bent
their backs and made her spring like a live thing, and the still
water rose in oily waves from the bow. But fast as they pulled,
the men on shore ran faster.

"By all the gods, we are too late!" cried Helgi.

"They take to the water!" said Estein. "Pull, men, pull! Oh, 'tis
a night worth living for!"

The four swimmers stoutly struck out for dear life, to a splashing
accompaniment of darts and stones.

"By the hammer of Thor! they will be struck as we take them on
board," exclaimed Helgi. "Friend Ketill makes a generous mark."

"Round them!" said Estein. "Get between them and the shore."

Grim pressed the tiller hard down, and circling round the swimmers
they were presently hauling them in on the sheltered side. Then
the crowd on shore set off for their ships. Ketill, dripping with
water, and bleeding from an arrow wound on the shoulder, watched
them with a grim smile.

"They will find their ships ready for sea," he said.

As he spoke a tongue of flame shot up from one of the long ships,
and Estein turned to him in surprise.

"Then you set them on fire?"

"Ay," replied Ketill; "we slew some guards--who thereby learned
not to sleep at their posts--and made such holes in the ships as
will take them two days to patch. Then I bethought me it were well
to have a burning, if it were only of a long ship; so we kindled
three great fires, one for each vessel, and if the men of Liot
feel cold to-night, it will not be my fault. But have you got
Liot?"

"Here he is," said Estein, pointing to the pinioned captive.

Ketill laughed loud and long.

"Estein," he cried, "I ask your pardon. You may be under a spell,
but you have given us a merry night's work. We have earned a long
drink."




CHAPTER VII.

THE VERDICT OF THE SWORD.


A shout of congratulation rose from the ship as the boat drew near
and the anxious watchers counted the fourteen men returned again
with their prisoner. Drink was served round in huge beakers, and
the superstitious fears vanished like the fog as they rowed in
triumph out of the bay.

They could see behind them the flames and smoke rising ever higher
from the burning vessels, and as the ale mounted to their heads
they shouted derisive defiance across the water.

"Where shall we go now?" asked Grim.

"Do you know of any uninhabited holm where we could land by
daybreak?" said Estein.

"There are many such about the Orkneys; one I know well, which
methinks we should reach soon after sunrise. There I shall take
you."

Ketill came up at that moment with a great horn of ale, and cried,
with a joviality only shown when drink flowed freely,--

"Drink, Estein, drink!--drink to the soul of Liot Skulison, which
shall shortly speed to Valhalla. Shall we slay him now, or keep
that sport till we have better light to see him die?"

"I have other work on hand than drinking. Liot and I have an
account to settle at daybreak."

Ketill stared at him in astonishment.

"You mean then in very truth to fight?" he cried. "Well, do as you
wish; but it is a strange spell."

He left the poop with his horn, and Estein seated himself on a
stool, and leaning back against the bulwarks, tried to rest.

His face was set, his mind made up, and he only waited impatiently
for the hour of his trial. Sleep came to him in uneasy snatches,
during which he seemed to pass years of wild adventure, haunted
all the time by strangely distorted Oslas. He woke at last to the
chill of a grey morning and the roll of a Viking ship. With a
little shiver he started to his feet, and began to pace the deck.

Presently Helgi joined him, and laid his hand on his arm.

"Estein," he said, "tempt not your fate too far. Never before have
I seen witchcraft such as this. Why should you fear the wrath of
the gods? I tell you, my brother, you are under a spell; let us
seek some magician who will cure you, and not rashly look for
death when you are wearied with sleepless nights and black magic.
If the wrath of the gods is really on you, it will fall were you
to flee from men and seek refuge in the loneliest cave on all
these coasts. I will slay Liot Skulison for you; in fair fight if
you will, though I think not he deserves such a chance. Was it a
fair fight when he fell on our two ships with his ten?"

"I would slay him, Helgi, like a dog, were it not that something
within me bids me ask in this wise the wishes of Odin."

"'Tis the voice of yon witch."

"She is no witch, Helgi, only the fairest girl in all the North.
Listen, and I will tell you the story of this spell; but remember
it is to you alone I tell it, and never must another know of my
shame."

"Have you ever known me betray your trust?"

"Never, Helgi, my brother, or you would not hear this tale. To me
it seems the story of six years of my life, though it was scarcely
as many weeks; but I shall make it as brief as I may."

"The hour is yet early."

"After the battle, Helgi, I should have been drowned but for that
maid you saw. She saved my life, and that at least I owe her. She
brought me to the abode of her father, the hermit of the Holy
Isle; and there I learned to love her. For six weeks I was no
Viking. I forgot my kinsfolk and my country, forgot all but Osla."

"Call you not that a spell?"

"Did you not say yourself that you had known many spells like
that, cast on men by maids? It was the magic of love that
entangled me."

"Men said the hermit was a wizard."

"No wizard, Helgi, or he had never let me come there. He was a
moody and fitful old man. I pleased him with my songs, talked to
him of the strange religion he professes--for he is what men call
a Christian--and grew in time to think of him as a friend.
(Verily, I think there must have been magic!) All this while I
spoke no word of love to Osla, though I think she was not
indifferent to me."

"It was easy to see that."

"Twice on that island a voice I could not name warned me from
beyond the grave, but I heeded it not. (Can th