r. You won't say no, will you?"

Marian was liking him that day--he was looking his best. She particularly
liked his expression as he proposed to her. She had intended to pretend to
refuse him; instead her colour rose and she said: "No--which means yes.
Everybody expects it of us, Teddy. So I suppose we mustn't disappoint
them."

The fact that "everybody" did expect it, the fact that he was the great
"catch" in their set, with his two hundred and fifty thousand a year, his
good looks and his good character--these were her real reasons, with the
first dominant. But she did not admit it to herself then. At twenty-four
even the mercenary instinct tricks itself out in a most deceptive romantic
disguise if there is the ghost of an opportunity. Besides, there was no
reason, and no sign of an approaching reason, for the shadow of a suspicion
that life with Teddy Danvers would not be full of all that she and her
friends regarded as happiness.

But she would not marry immediately. She was tenacious of her freedom. She
was restless, dissatisfied with herself and not elated by her prospects.
She had an excellent mind, reasonable, appreciative, ambitious. Until she
"came out" she had spent much time among books; but as she had had no
capable director of her reading, she got from it only a vague sense, that
there was somewhere something in the way of achievement which she might
possibly like to attain if she knew what it was or where to look for it. As
she became settled in her place in the routine of social life, as her
horizon narrowed to the conventional ideas of her set, this sense of
possible and attractive achievement became vaguer. But her restlessness did
not diminish.

"I never saw such an ungrateful girl," was Mrs. Carnarvon's comment upon
one of Marian's outbursts of almost peevish fretting. "What do you want?"

"That's just it," exclaimed Marian, half-laughing. "What _do_ I want?
I look all about me and I can't see it. Yet I know that there must be
something. I think I ought to have been a man. Sometimes I feel like
running away--away off somewhere. I feel as if I were getting second-bests,
paste substitutes for the real jewels. I feel as I did when I was a child
and demanded the moon. They gave me a little gilt crescent and said: 'Here
is a nice little moon for baby;' and it made me furious."

Mrs. Carnarvon looked irritated. "I don't understand it. You are getting
the best of everything. Of course you can't expect to be happy. I don't
suppose that any one is happy. But all the solid things of life are yours,
and you can and should be comfortable and contented."

"That's just it," answered Marian indignantly. "I have always been swaddled
in cotton wool. I have never been allowed really to feel. I think it is the
spirit of revolt in me. Yes, I ought to have been a man. I'm sure that then
I could have made life a little less tiresome."

It was this dissatisfaction that postponed the announcement of the
engagement from month to month until a year had slipped away.

Instead of coming to New York, Danvers went off to Montana for a
mountain-lion hunt with two Englishmen who had been staying with him in
"The Valley." He would join Marian for the trip South, the engagement would
be announced, and the wedding would be in May--such was the arrangement
which Marian succeeded in making. It settled everything and at the same
time it gave her a month of freedom in New York. She hinted enough of this
programme to Howard to enable him to grasp its essential points.

"A month's holiday," was his comment. They were alone on the second seat of
George Browning's coach, driving through the Park. "If we were like those
people"--he was looking at a young man and young woman, side by side upon a
Park bench, blue with cold but absorbed in themselves and obviously
ecstatic. Marian glanced at them with slightly supercilious amusement and
became so interested that she turned her head to follow them with her eyes
after the coach had passed.

"Is he kissing her?" asked Howard.

"No--not yet. But I'm sure he will as soon as we have turned the corner."
She said nothing for a moment or two, her glance straight ahead and upon
vacancy, he admiring the curve of her cheek at the edge of its effective
framing of fur.

"But we are not----" She spoke in a low tone, regretful, pensive, almost
sad. "We are not like them."

"Oh, yes we are. But--we fancy we are not. We've sold our birthright, our
freedom, our independence for--for----"

"Well--what?"

"Baubles--childish toys--vanities--shadows. Doesn't it show what ridiculous
little creatures we human beings are that we regard the most valueless
things as of the highest value, and think least of the true valuables. For,
tell me, Lady-Whom-I-Love, what is most valuable in the few minutes of this
little journey among the stars on the good ship Mother Earth?"

"But you would not care always as you care now? It would not, could not,
last. If we--if we were like those people on the bench back there, we'd go
on and--and spoil it all."

"Perhaps--who can say? But in some circumstances couldn't I make you just
as happy as--as some one else could?"

"Not if you had made me infinitely happier at one time than even you could
hope to make me all the time. At least I think not. It would always be--be
racing against a record; we both would be, wouldn't we?"

Howard looked at her with an expression which transfigured his face and
sent the colour flaming to her cheeks. "That being the case," he said, "let
us--let us make the record one that will not be forgotten--soon."

During the month he saw her almost every day. She was most ingenious in
arranging these meetings. They were together afternoons and evenings. They
were often alone. Yet she was careful not to violate any convention, always
to keep, or seem to be keeping, one foot "on the line." Howard threw
himself into his infatuation with all his power of concentration He
practically took a month's holiday from the office. He thought about her
incessantly. He used all his skill with words in making love to her. And
she abandoned herself to an equal infatuation with equal absorption.
Neither of them spoke of the past or the future. They lived in the present,
talked of the present.

One day she spoke of herself as an orphan.

"I did not know that," he said. "But then what do I know about you in
relation to the rest of the world? To me you are an isolated act of
creation."

"You must tell me about yourself." She was looking at him, surprised. "Why,
I know nothing at all about you."

"Oh, yes, you do. You know all that there is to know--all that is
important."

"What?" She was asking for the pleasure of hearing him say it.

"That I love you--you--all of you--all of you, with all of me."

Her eyes answered for her lips, which only said smilingly: "No, we haven't
time to get acquainted--at least not to-day."

       *       *       *       *       *

She was to start for Florida at ten the next morning. Mrs. Carnarvon was
going away to the opera, giving them the last evening alone. Marian had
asked this of her point-blank.

"You are an extraordinarily sensible as well as strong-willed girl,
Marian," Mrs. Carnarvon replied.

"I can't find it in my heart to blame you for what you're doing. The fact
that I haven't even hinted a protest, but have lent myself to your little
plots, shows that that young man has hypnotized me also."

"You needn't disturb yourself, as you know," Marian said gaily. "I'm not
hypnotized. I shall not see Mr. Howard again until--after it's all over.
Perhaps not then."

He came to dinner and they were not alone until almost nine. She sat near
the open fire among the cushions heaped high upon the little sofa. She had
never been more beautiful, and apparently never in a happier mood. They
both laughed and talked as if it were the first instead of the last day of
their month. Neither spoke of the parting; each avoided all subjects that
pointed in direction of the one subject of which both thought whenever
their minds left the immediate present. As the little clock on the mantle
began to intimate in a faint, polite voice the quarter before eleven, he
said abruptly, almost brusquely:

"I feel like a coward, giving you up in this way. Yes--giving you up; for
you have a traitor in your fortress who has offered me the keys, who offers
them to me now. But I do not trust you; and I can't trust myself. The curse
of luxury is on you, the curse of ambition on me. If we had found each the
other younger; if I had lived less alone, more in the ordinary habit of
dependence upon others; if you had been brought up to live instead of to
have all the machinery of living provided and conducted for you--well, it
might have been different."

"You are wrong as to me, right as to yourself. But yours is not the curse
of ambition. It is the passion for freedom. It would be madness for you,
thinking as you do, even if you could--and you can't."

He stood up and held out his hand. She did not rise or look at him.

"Good night," she said at last, putting her hand in his. "Of course I am
thinking I shall see you tomorrow. One does not come out of such a dream,"
--she looked up at him smiling--"all in a moment."

"Good night," he smiled back at her. "I shall not open 'the fiddler's bill'
until--until I have to." At the door he turned. She had risen and was
kneeling on the sofa, her elbow on its low arm, her chin upon her hand, her
eyes staring into the fire. He came toward her.

"May I kiss you?" he said.

"Yes." Her voice was expressionless.

He bent over and just touched his lips to the back of her neck at the edge
of her hair. He thought that she trembled slightly, but her face was set
and she did not look toward him. He turned and left her. Half an hour later
she heard the bell ring--it was Mrs. Carnarvon. She wished to see no one,
so she fled through the rear door of the reception room and up the great
stairway to lock herself in her boudoir. She sank slowly upon the lounge in
front of the fire and closed her eyes. The fire died out and the room grew
cold. A warning chilliness made her rise to get ready for bed.

"No," she said aloud. "It isn't ambition and it isn't lack of love. It's a
queer sort of cowardice; but it's cowardice for all that. He's a coward or
he wouldn't have given up. But--I wonder--how am I going to live without
him? I need him--more than he needs me, I'm afraid."

She was standing before her dressing table. On it was a picture of
Danvers--handsome, self-satisfied, healthy, unintellectual. She looked at
it, gave a little shiver, and with the end of her comb toppled it over upon
its face.




XIII.

RECKONING WITH DANVERS.


On that journey south Marian for the first time studied Danvers as a
husband in prospect.

The morning after they left New York, their private car arrived at
Savannah. At dark the night before they were rushing through a snow storm
raging in a wintry landscape. Now they were looking out upon spring from
the open windows. As soon as the train stopped, all except Marian and
Danvers left the car to walk up and down the platform. Danvers, standing
behind Marian, looked around to make sure that none of the servants was
about, then rubbed his hand caressingly and familiarly upon her cheek.

"Did you miss me?" he asked.

Marian could not prevent her head from shrinking from his touch.

"There's nobody about," Danvers said, reassuringly. But he acted upon the
hint and, taking his hand away, came around and sat beside her.

"Did you miss me?" he repeated, looking at her with an expression in his
frank, manly blue eyes that made her flush at the thought of "treason" past
and to come.

"Did _you_ miss _me_?" she evaded.

"I would have returned long ago if I had not been ashamed," he answered,
smiling. "I never thought that I should come not to care for as good
shooting as that. You almost cost me my life."

"Yes?" Marian spoke absently. She was absorbed in her mental comparison of
the two men.

"I got away from the others and was looking at your picture. They started
up a lion and he came straight at me from behind. If he hadn't made a
misstep in his hurry and loosened a stone, I guess he would have got me. As
it was, I got him."

"You mean your gun got him."

"Of course. You don't suppose I tackled him bare-handed."

"It might have been fairer. I don't see how you can boast of having killed
a creature that never bothered you, that you had to go thousands of miles
out of your way to find, and that you attacked with a gun, giving him no
chance to escape."

"What nonsense!" laughed Danvers. "I never expected to hear you say
anything like that. Who's been putting such stuff into your head?"

Marian coloured. She did not like his tone. She resented the suggestion of
the truth that her speech was borrowed. It made her uncomfortable to find
herself thus unexpectedly on the dangerous ground.

"I suppose it must have been that newspaper fellow Mrs. Carnarvon has taken
up. She talked about him for an hour after you left us to go to bed last
night."

"Yes, it was--was Mr. Howard." Marian had recovered herself. "I want you to
meet him some time. You'll like him, I'm sure."

"I doubt it. Mrs. Carnarvon seemed not to know much about him. I suppose
he's more or less of an adventurer."

Marian wondered if this obvious dislike was the result of one of those
strange instincts that sometimes enable men to scent danger before any sign
of it appears.

"Perhaps he is an adventurer," she replied. "I'm sure I don't know. Why
should one bother to find out about a passing acquaintance? It is enough to
know that he is amusing."

"I'm not so sure of that. He might make off with the jewels when you had
your back turned."

As soon as she had made her jesting denial of her real lover Marian was
ashamed of herself. And Danvers' remark, though a jest, cut her. "What I
said about a passing acquaintance was not just or true," she said
impulsively and too warmly. "Mr. Howard is not an adventurer. I admire and
like him very much indeed. I'm proud of his friendship."

Danvers shrugged his shoulders and looked at her suspiciously.

"You saw a good deal of this--this friend of yours?" he demanded, his mouth
straightening into a dictatorial line.

At this Marian grew haughty and her eyes flashed: "Why do you ask?" she
inquired, her tone dangerously calm.

"Because I have the right to know." He pointed to the diamond on her third
finger.

"Oh--that is soon settled." Marian drew off the ring and held it out to
him. "Really, Teddy, I think you ought to have waited a little longer
before insisting so fiercely on your rights."

"Don't be absurd, Marian." Danvers did not take the ring but fixed his eyes
upon her face and changed his tone to friendly remonstrance. "You know the
ring doesn't mean anything. It's your promise that counts. And honestly
don't you think your promise does give me the right to ask you about your
new friends when you speak of them, of one of them, in--in such a way?"

"I don't intend to deceive you," she said, turning the ring around slowly
on her finger. "I didn't know how to tell you. I suppose the only way to
speak is just to speak."

"Do you think you are in love with this man, Marian?"

She nodded, then after a long pause, said, "Yes, Teddy, I love him."

"But I thought----"

"And so did I, Teddy. But he came, and I--well I couldn't help it."

As he did not speak, she looked at him. His face was haggard and white and
in his eyes which met hers frankly there was suffering.

"It wasn't my fault, Teddy," Marian laid her hand on his arm, "at least,
not altogether. I might have kept away and I didn't."

"Oh, I don't blame you. I blame him."

"But it wasn't his fault. I--I--encouraged him."

"Did he know that we were engaged?"

"Yes," reluctantly.

"The scoundrel! I suspected that he was rotten somewhere."

"You are unjust to him. I have not told you properly."

"Did he tell you that he cared for you?"

"Yes--but he didn't try to get me to break my engagement."

"So much the more a scoundrel, he. Tell me, Marian--come to your senses and
tell me--what in the devil did he hang about you for and make love to you,
if he didn't want to marry you? Would an honest man, a decent man, do
that?"

Marian's face confessed assent.

"I should think you would have seen what sort of a fellow he is. I should
think you would despise him."

"Sometimes it seems to me that I ought to. But I always end by despising
myself--and--and--it makes no difference in the way I feel toward him."

"I think I would do well to look him up and give him a horse-whipping. But
you'll get over him, Marian. I am astonished at your cousin. How could she
let this go on? But then, she's crazy about him too."

Marian smiled miserably. "I've owned up and you ought to congratulate
yourself on so luckily getting rid of such an untrustworthy person as I."

"Getting rid of you?" Danvers looked at her defiantly. "Do you think I'm
going to let you go on and ruin yourself on an impulse? Not much! I hold
you to your promise. You'll come round all right after you've been away
from this fellow for a few days. You'll be amazed at yourself a week from
now."

"You don't understand, Teddy." Marian wished him to see once for all that,
whatever might be the future for her and Howard, there was no future for
her and him. "Don't make it so hard for me to tell you."

"I don't want to hear any more about it now, Marian. I can't stand it--I
hardly know what I'm saying--wait a few days--let's go on as we have
been--here they come."

The others of the party came bustling into the car and the train started.
For the rest of the journey Danvers avoided her, keeping to the smoking
room and the game of poker there. Marian could neither read nor watch the
landscape. She did not know whether to be glad or sorry that she had told
him. She hated to think that she had inflicted pain and she could not
believe, in spite of what she had seen in his eyes, that his feeling in the
matter was more than jealousy and wounded vanity.

"He doesn't really care for me," she thought. "It's his pride that is hurt.
He will flare out at me and break it off. I do hope he'll get angry. It
will make it so much easier for me."

Late in the afternoon she took Mrs. Carnarvon into her confidence. "I've
told Teddy," she said.

"I might have known!" exclaimed her cousin. "What on earth made you do
that?"

"I don't know--perhaps shame."

"Shame--trash! Your life is going to be a fine turmoil if you run to Teddy
with an account of every little mild flirtation you happen to have. Of all
the imbeciles, the most imbecile is the woman who confesses."


"But how could I marry him when----"

"When you don't love him?"

"No--I might have done that. I like him. But, when I love another man."

"It does make a difference. But you ought to be able to foresee that you'll
get over Howard in a few weeks----"

"Precisely what Teddy said."

"Did he? I'm surprised at his having so much sense. For, if you'll forgive
me, I don't think Teddy will ever set New York on fire--at least,
he's--well, he has the makings of an ideal husband. And has he broken it
off?"

"No. He wouldn't have it."

"Really? Well he _is_ in love. Most men in his position--able to get
any girl he wants--would have thrown up the whole business. Yes, he must be
awfully in love."

"Do you think that?" Marian's voice spoke distress but she felt only
satisfaction. "Oh, I hope not--that is, I'd like to think he cared a great
deal and at the same time I don't want to hurt him."

"Don't fret yourself about these two men. Just go on thinking as you
please. You'll be surprised how soon Howard will fade." Mrs. Carnarvon
smiled satirically at some thought--perhaps a memory. "You're a good deal
of a goose, my dear, but you are a great deal more of a woman. That's why I
feel sure that Teddy will win."

With such an opportunity--with the field clear and the woman
half-remorseful over her treachery, half-indignant at the man who had shown
himself so weak and spiritless--a cleverer or a less vain man than Danvers
would have triumphed easily. And for the first week he did make progress.
He acted upon the theory that Marian had been hypnotized and that the
proper treatment was to ignore her delusion and to treat her with assiduous
but not annoying consideration. He did not pose as an injured or jealous
lover. He was the friend, always at her service, always thinking out plans
for her amusement. He made no reference to their engagement or to Howard.

Several people of their set were at the hotel and Marian was soon drifting
back into her accustomed modes of thought. The wider horizon which she
fancied Howard had shown her was growing dim and hazy. The horizon which he
had made her think narrow was beginning again to seem the only one. This
meant Danvers; but he was not acute enough to understand her and to follow
up his advantage.

One morning as he was walking up and down under the palms, waiting for Mrs.
Carnarvon and Marian, Mrs. Fortescue called him. She was a cold, rather
handsome woman. In her eyes was the expression that always betrays the wife
or the mistress who loathes the man she lives with, enduring him only
because he gives her that which she most wants--money. She had one fixed
idea--to marry her daughter "well," that is, to money.

"Can you join us to-day, Teddy?" she asked. "We need one more man."

"I'm waiting for Mrs. Carnarvon and Marian," he explained.

"Oh, of course." Mrs. Fortescue smiled. "What a nice girl she is--so
clever, so--so independent. I admired her immensely for deciding to marry
that poor, obscure young fellow. I like to see the young people romantic."

Danvers flushed angrily and pulled at his mustache. He tried to smile.
"We've teased her about it a good deal," he said, "but she denies it."

"I suppose they aren't ready to announce the engagement yet," Mrs.
Fortescue suggested. "I suppose they are waiting until he betters his
position a little. It's never a good idea to have too long a time between
the announcement and the marriage."

"Perhaps that is it." Danvers tried to look indifferent but his eyes were
sullen with jealousy.

"I always rather thought that you and Marian were going to make a match of
it," continued Mrs. Fortescue. Just then her daughter came down the walk.
She was fashionably dressed in white and blue that brought out all the
loveliness of her golden hair and violet eyes and faintly-coloured, smooth
fair skin. Danvers had not seen her since she "came out," and was dazzled
by her radiance.

They say that every man must be a little in love with every pretty woman he
sees. And Danvers at once gave Ellen Fortescue her due. She sat silent
beside her mother, looking the personification of innocence, purity and
poetry. Her mother continued subtly to poison Danvers against Marian, to
make him feel that she had not appreciated him, that she had trifled with
him, that she had not treated him as his dignity and importance merited.
When she and Mrs. Carnarvon appeared, he joined them tardily, after having
made an arrangement with the Fortescues for the next day.

That evening he danced several times with Ellen Fortescue and adopted the
familiar lover's tactics--he set about making Marian jealous. He scored the
customary success. When she went to bed she lay for several hours looking
out into the moonlight, raging against the Fortescues and against Danvers.
The mere fact that a man whom she regarded as hers was permitting himself
to show marked attention to another woman would have been sufficient. But
in addition, Marian was perfectly aware of the material advantages of this
particular man. She did not want to marry him; at least she was of that
mind at the moment. But she might change her mind. Certainly, if there was
to be any breaking off, she wished it to be of her doing. She did not fancy
the idea of him departing joyfully.

She was far too wise to show that she saw what was going on. She praised
Miss Fortescue to Danvers with apparent frankness and insisted on him
devoting more time to her. Danvers persisted in his scheme boldly for a
week and then, just as Marian was despairing and was casting about for
another plan of campaign, he gave in. They were sitting apart in the shadow
near one of the windows of the ball-room. He had been sullen all the
evening, almost rude.

"How much longer are you going to keep me in suspense?" he burst out
angrily.

"In suspense?"

"You know what I mean. I think I've been very patient."

"You mean our engagement?" Marian was looking at him, repelled by his
expression, his manner, the tone of his voice, his whole mood.

"Yes--I want your decision."

"I have not changed."

"You still love that--that newspaper fellow?"

"No, I don't mean that." Marian felt her irritation against Danvers
suddenly vanish and in its place a Sense of relief and of calmness. "I mean
toward you. It won't do, Teddy. We shall get on well as friends. But I
can't think of you in--in that way."

Mrs. Fortescue had so swollen his vanity that he was astounded at Marian's
decision. He rapidly went over in his mind all the advantages he offered as
a husband, and then looked at her as if he thought her beside herself.

"Look here, Marian," he protested. "You can't mean it. Why, it's all
settled that we are to marry. It would be madness for you to break it off.
I can give you everything--everything. And he can't give you anything."
Then with fatal tactlessness: "He won't even give you the little that he
can, according to your own story."

"Yes, it's madness, isn't it, Teddy, to refuse you--fascinating you, who
can give everything. But that's just it. You have too much. You overwhelm
me. I should feel like a cheat, taking so much and giving so little."

"Don't," he begged, his self-complacence and superiority all gone. "Don't
mind my blundering, please, dear. I want you. I can't say it. I haven't any
gift of words. But you've known me all my life and you know that I love
you. I've set my heart on it, Mary Ann,"--it was the name he used to tease
her with when they were children playing together--"You won't go back on me
now, will you?"

"I wish I could do as you wish, Teddy." Marian was forgetful of everything
but the unhappiness she was causing this friend of so many, many years and
of so many, many memories. "But I can't--I can't."

"Marry me, dear, anyhow. You will care afterward." Marian was silent and
Danvers hoped. "You know all about me. I'll not give you any surprises. I
shan't bother you. And I'll make you happy."

"No," she said firmly. "You mustn't ask it. I'll tell you why. I have
thought of marrying you regardless of this. Only last night I thought of
it--finally, went over the whole thing. Listen, Teddy--if I were married to
you--and if he should come--and he would come sooner or later--if he should
come and say 'Come with me,'--I'd go--yes, I'm sure I'd go. I can't explain
why. But I know that nothing would stand in the way--nothing."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself." Marian shrank from him. She was
horrified by the malignant fury that sparkled in his eyes and raged in his
voice. "That damned scoundrel is worthy of you and you of him. But I'll get
you yet. I never was crossed in anything in my life and I'll not be beaten
here."

"And I thought you were my friend!" Marian was looking at him, pale, her
eyes wide with amazement. "Is it really you?"

He laughed insolently. "Yes--you'll see. And he'll see. I'll crush him as
if he were an egg shell. And as for you--you perjurer--you liar!"

He looked at her with coarse contempt, rose and stalked away. Marian sat
rigid. She was conscious of the insult. But even that humiliation was not
so strong in her mind as the astounding revelation of Danvers. She
remembered that even as his eyes blazed hatred at her, he looked at her, at
her neck, her bare arms, with the baffled desire of brute passion. She did
not fully understand the look, but she felt that it was a degradation far
greater than his insulting words.

She slipped, almost skulked to her room, her eyes down, her face in a
burning flush, her scarf drawn tightly about her neck. As her door closed
behind her, she fell upon her bed and began to sob hysterically. She
started up with a scream to find her cousin standing beside her.

"I'm so sorry. Forgive me." Mrs. Carnarvon's voice had lost its wonted
levity. "I saw that you were in trouble and followed. I knocked and I
thought I heard you answer. What is it, Marie? May I ask? Can I do
anything?"

Marian drew her down to the bed and buried her face in her lap. "Oh, I feel
so unclean," she said. "It was--Teddy. Would you believe it, Jessie, Teddy!
I looked on him as a brother. And he showed me that he was not my
friend--that he didn't even love me--that he--oh, I shall never forget the
look in his eyes. He made me feel like a--like a _thing_."

Mrs. Carnarvon smothered a smile. "Of course Teddy's a brute," she said. "I
thought you knew. He's a domesticated brute, like most of the men and some
of the women. You'll have to get used to that."

By refusing to fall in with her mood, Mrs. Carnarvon had gone far toward
curing it. Marian stopped sobbing and presently said:

"Oh, I know all that. But I didn't expect it from Teddy--and toward me.
And--" she shuddered--"I was thinking, actually thinking of marrying him. I
wish never to see him again. And he pretended to be my friend!"

"And he was, no doubt, until he got you on the brain in another way, in the
way he calls love. There isn't any love that has friendship in it."

"We must go away at once."

"Unless Teddy saves us the trouble by going first, as I suspect he will."

"Jessie, he hates me and--and--Mr. Howard."

"So you talked to him about Howard again, did you?" Mrs. Carnarvon was
indignant. "You are old enough to know better, Marian. You carry frankness
entirely too far. There is such a thing as truth running amuck."

"He said he would crush Howard. And I believe he really meant it."

"Teddy is a man who believes in revenges--or thinks he does. His father
taught him to keep accounts in grievances, and no doubt he has opened an
account with Howard. But don't be disturbed about it. His father would have
insisted on balancing the account. Teddy will just keep on hating, but
won't do anything. He's not underhanded."

"He's everything that is vile and low."

"You're quite mistaken, my dear. He's what they call a manly fellow--a
little too masculine perhaps, but----"

A knock interrupted and Mrs. Carnarvon, answering it, took from the
bell-boy a note for Marian who read it, then handed it to her. Mrs.
Carnarvon read: "I apologise for the way I said what I did this evening,
not for what I said. Because you had forgotten yourself, had played the
traitor and the cheat was, perhaps, no excuse for my rudeness. You have
fallen under an evil influence. I hope no harm will come to you, for I
can't get over my feeling for you. But I have done my best and have not
been able to save you. I am going away early in the morning.

"E. D."

"Melodramatic, isn't it?" laughed Mrs. Carnarvon. "So he's off. How furious
Martha Fortescue and Ellen will be. But they'll go in pursuit, and they'll
get him. A man is never so susceptible as when he's broken-hearted. Well, I
must go. Good-night, dear. Don't mope and whine. Take your punishment
sensibly. You've learned something--if it's only not to tell one man how
much you love another."

"I think I'll go abroad with Aunt Retta next month."

"A good idea--you'll forget both these men. Good-night."

"Good-night," answered Marian dolefully, expecting to resume her thoughts
of Danvers. But, instead, he straightway disappeared from her mind and she
could think only of Howard. She was free now. The one barrier between him
and her of which she had been really conscious was gone. And her heart
began to ache with longing for him. Why had he not written? What was he
doing? Did he really love her or was his passion for her only a flash of a
strong and swift imagination?

No, he loved her--she could not doubt that. But she could not understand
his conduct. She felt that she ought to be very unhappy, yet she was not.
The longer she thought of him and the more she weighed his words and looks,
the stronger became her trust in him. "He loves me," she said. "He will
come when he can. It may be even harder for him than for me."

And so, explanation failing--for she rejected every explanation that
reflected upon him--she hid and excused him behind that familiar refuge of
the doubting, mystery.



XIV.

THE NEWS-RECORD GETS A NEW EDITOR.


A few minutes after leaving Marian that last night at Mrs. Carnarvon's,
Howard was deep in a mood of self-contempt. He felt that he had faced the
crisis like a coward. He despised the weakness which enfeebled him for
effort to win her and at the same time made it impossible for him to thrust
her from his mind.

In the working hours his will conquered with the aid of fixed habit and he
was able to concentrate upon his editorials. But in his rooms, and
especially after the lights were out, his imagination became master,
deprived him of sleep and occasionally lifted him to a height of hope in
order that it might dash him down the more cruelly upon the rocks of fact.

At last he was forced to face the situation--in his own evasive fashion. It
was impossible to go back. That loneliness which often threatened him after
Alice's death had become the permanent condition of his life. "I will work
for her," he said. "Until I have made a place for her I dare not claim her.
So much I will concede to my weakness. But when I have won a position which
reasonably assures the future, I shall claim her--no matter what has
happened in the meanwhile."

He would have smiled at this wild resolution had he been in a less
distracted state of mind or had he been dealing with any other than a
matter of love. But in the circumstances it gave him heart and set him to
work with an energy and effectiveness which still further increased Mr.
Malcolm's esteem for him.

"Will you dine with me at the Union Club on Wednesday?" Mr. Malcolm asked
one morning in mid-February. "Mr. Coulter and Mr. Stokely are coming. I
want you to know them better."

Howard accepted and wondered that he took so little interest. For Stokely
and Coulter were the principal stockholders of the _News-Record_, and
with Malcolm formed the triumvirate which directed it in all its
departments. Mr. Malcolm held only a few shares of stock, but received what
was in the newspaper-world an immense salary--thirty thousand a year. He
was at once an able editor and an able diplomatist. He knew how to make the
plans of his two associates conform to conditions of news and policy--when
to let them use the paper, or, rather, when to use the paper himself for
their personal interests; when and how to induce them to let the paper
alone. Through a quarter of a century of changing ownerships Malcolm had
persisted, chiefly because he had but one conviction--that the post of
editor of the _News-Record_ exactly suited him and must remain his at
any sacrifice of personal character.

Howard had met Stokely and Coulter. He liked Stokely who was owner of a few
shares more than one-third; he disliked Coulter who owned just under
one-half.

Stokely was a frank, coarse, dollar-hunter, cheerfully unscrupulous in a
large way, acute, caring not at all for principles of any kind, letting the
paper alone most of the time because he was astute enough to know that in
his ignorance of journalism he would surely injure it as a property.

Coulter was a hypocrite and a snob. Also he fancied he knew how to conduct
a newspaper. He was as unscrupulous as Stokely but tried to mask it.

When Stokely wished the _News-Record to advocate a "job," or steal, or
the election of some disreputable who would work in his interest, he told
Malcolm precisely what he wanted and left the details of the stultification
to his experienced adroitness. When Coulter wished to "poison the fountain
of publicity," as Malcolm called the paper's departures from honesty and
right, he approached the subject by stealth, trying to convince Malcolm
that the wrong was not really wrong, but was right unfortunately disguised.

He would take Malcolm into his confidence by slow and roundabout steps,
thus multiplying his difficulties in discharging his "duty." If Coulter's
son had not been married to Malcolm's daughter, it is probable that not
even his complete subserviency would have enabled him to keep his place.

"If you had told me frankly what you wanted in the first place, Mr.
Coulter," he said after an exasperating episode in which Coulter's
Pharisaic sensitiveness had resulted in Malcolm's having to "flop" the
paper both editorially and in its news columns twice in three days, "we
would not have made ourselves ridiculous and contemptible. The public is an
ass, but it is an ass with a memory at least three days long. Your
stealthiness has made the ass bray at us instead of with and for us. And
that is dangerous when you consider that running a newspaper is like
running a restaurant--you must please your customers every day afresh."

Coulter was further difficult because of his anxieties about social
position for himself and his family. He was disturbed whenever the
_News-Record_ published an item that might offend any of the people
whose acquaintance he had gained with so much difficulty, and for whose
good will he was willing to sacrifice even considerable money. Personally,
but very privately, he edited the _News-Record's_ "fashionable
intelligence" columns on Sunday and made them an exhibit of his own
sycophancy and snobbishness which excited the amused disgust of all who
were in the secret.

Malcolm liked Howard, admired him, in a way envied his fearlessness, his
earnestness for principles. For years he had had it in mind to retire and
write a history of the Civil War period which had been his own period of
greatest activity and most intimate acquaintance with the behind-the-scenes
of statecraft. Howard's energy, steady application, enthusiasm for
journalism and intelligence both as to editorials and as to news made
Malcolm look upon him as his natural successor.

"I think Howard is the man we want," he said to his two associates when he
was arranging the dinner. "He has new ideas--just what the paper needs. He
is in touch with these recent developments. And above all he has judgment.
He knows what not to print, where and how to print what ought to be
printed. He is still young and is over-enthusiastic. He has limitations,
but he knows them and he is eager and capable to learn."

It was a "shop" dinner, Howard doing most of the talking, led on by
Malcolm. The main point was the "new journalism," as it was called, and how
to adapt it to the _News-Record_ and the _News-Record_ to it.

Malcolm kept the conversation closely to news and news-ideas, fearing that,
if editorial policies were brought in, Howard would make "breaks." He soon
saw that his associates were much impressed with Howard, with his judgment,
with his knowledge of the details of every important newspaper in the city,
with his analysis of the good and bad points in each.

"I'll drop you at your corner," said he to Howard at the end of the dinner.
As they drove up the Avenue he began: "How would you like to be the editor
of the _News-Record_? My place, I mean."

"I don't understand," Howard answered, bewildered.

"I am going to retire at once," Malcolm went on. "I've been at it nearly
fifty years--ever since I was a boy of eighteen and I've been in charge
there almost a quarter of a century. I think I've earned a few years of
leisure to work for my own amusement. I'm pretty sure they'll want you to
take my place. Would you like it?"

"I'm not fit for it," Howard said, and he meant it. "I'm only an
apprentice. I'm always making blunders--but I needn't tell you about that."

"You can't say that you are not fit until you have tried. Besides, the
question is not, are _you_ fit? but, is there any one more fit than
you? I confess I don't see any one so well equipped, so certain to give the
paper all of the best that there is in him."

"Of course I'd like to try. I can only fail."

"Oh, you won't fail. But you may quarrel with Stokely and
Coulter--especially Coulter. In fact, I'm sure you'll quarrel with them.
But if you make yourself valuable enough, you'll probably win out.
Only----"

Malcolm hesitated, then went on:

"I stopped giving advice years ago. But I'll venture a suggestion. Whenever
your principles run counter to the policy of the paper, it would be wise to
think the matter over carefully before making an issue. Usually there is
truth on both sides, much that can be said fairly and honestly for either
side. Often devotion to principle is a mere prejudice. Often the crowd, the
mob, can be better controlled to right ends by conceding or seeming to
concede a principle for the time. Don't strike a mortal blow at your own
usefulness to good causes by making yourself a hasty martyr to some fancied
vital principle that will seem of no consequence the next morning but one
after the election."

"I know, Mr. Malcolm, judgment is all but impossible. And I have been
trying to learn what you have been teaching me with your blue pencil, what
you now put into words. But there is something in me--an instinct,
perhaps--that forces me on in spite of myself. I've learned to curb and
guide it to a certain extent, but as long as I am I, I shall never learn to
control it. Every man must work out his own salvation along his own lines.
And with my limitations of judgment, it would be fatal to me, I feel, to
study the art of compromise. Where another, broader, stronger, more master
of himself and of others, would succeed by compromising, I should fail
miserably. I should be lost, compassless, rudderless. I have often envied
you your calmness, your ability to see not only to-morrow but the day
after. But, if I ever try to imitate you, I shall make a sad mess of my
career."

As he ended Howard looked uneasily at the old editor, expecting to see that
caustic smile with which he preceded and accompanied his sarcasms at
"sentimental bosh." But instead, Malcolm's face was melancholy; and his
voice was sad and weary as he answered the young man who was just starting
where he had started so many years ago:

"No doubt you are right. I'm not intending to try to dissuade you
from--from the best there is in you. All I mean is that caution,
self-examination, self-doubt, calm consideration of the other side--these
are as necessary to success as energy and resolute action. All I suggest is
that its splendour does not redeem a splendid folly. Its folly remains its
essential characteristic."

Three weeks later Howard became editor-in-chief of the _News-Record_.
His salary was fifteen thousand a year; and Stokely and Coulter, acting
upon Malcolm's advice, gave him a "free hand" for one year. They agreed not
to interfere during that time unless the circulation or the profits showed
a decrease at the end of a quarter.

The next morning Howard, in the Madison Avenue car on his way to the
office, read among the "Incidents in Society:"

Mrs. George Alexander Provost and her niece, Miss Marion Trevor, sailed in
the _Campania_ yesterday. They will return in July for the Newport
season.




XV.

YELLOW JOURNALISM.


While several of the New York dailies were circulating from two to three
hundred thousand copies, the _News-Record_--the best-written, the most
complete, and, where the interests of the owners did not interfere, the
most accurate--circulated less than one hundred thousand. The Sunday
edition had a circulation of one hundred and fifty thousand where two other
newspapers had almost half a million.

The theory of the _News-Record_ staff was that their journal was too
"respectable," too intelligent, to be widely read; that the "yellow
journals" grovelled, "appealed to the mob," drew their vast crowds by the
methods of the fakir and the freak. They professed pride in the
_News-Record's_ smaller circulation as proof of its freedom from
vulgarity and debasement. They looked down upon the journalists of the
popular newspapers and posed as the aristocracy of the profession.

Howard did not assent to these self-complacent excuses. He was democratic
and modern, and the aristocratic pose appealed only to his sense of humour
and his suspicions. He believed that the success of the "yellow journals"
with the most intelligent, alert and progressive public in the world must
be based upon solid reasons of desert, must be in spite of, not because of,
their follies and exhibitions of bad taste. He resolved upon a radical
departure, a revolution from the policy of satisfying petty vanity and
tradition within the office to a policy of satisfying the demands of the
public.

He gave Segur temporary charge of the editorial page, and, taking a desk in
the news-room, centred his attention upon news and the news-staff. But he
was careful not to agitate and antagonise those whose cooperation was
necessary to success. He made only one change in the management; he retired
old Bowring on a pension and appointed to the city editorship one of the
young reporters--Frank Cumnock.

He chose Cumnock for this position, in many respects the most important on
the staff of a New York daily, because he wrote well, was a judge of good
writing, had a minute knowledge of New York and its neighbourhood and,
finally and chiefly, because he had a "news-sense," keener than that of any
other man on the paper.

For instance, there was the murder of old Thayer, the rich miser in East
Sixteenth Street. It was the sensation in all the newspapers for two weeks.
Then they dropped it as an unsolvable mystery. Cumnock persuaded Mr.
Bowring to let him keep on. After five days' work he heard of a deaf and
dumb woman who sat every afternoon at a back window of her flat overlooking
the back windows of Thayer's house. He had a trying struggle with her
infirmity and stupidity, but finally was rewarded. On the afternoon of the
murder, in its very hour (which the police had been able to discover), she
had seen a man and woman in the bathroom of the Thayer house. Both were
agitated and the man washed his hands again and again, carefully rinsing
the bowl afterward. From her description Cumnock got upon the track of
Thayer's niece and her husband, found the proof of their guilt, had them
watched until the _News-Record_ came out with the "beat," then turned
them over to the police.

Also, Cumnock was keen at taking hints of good news-items concealed in
obscure paragraphs. The Morris Prison scandal was an example of this. He
found in the New England edition of _The World_ a six-line item giving
an astonishing death rate for the Morris Prison. He asked the City Editor
to assign him to go there; and within a week the press of the entire
country was discussing the _News-Record's_ exposure of the barbarities
of torture and starvation practised by Warden Johnson and his keepers.

"We are going to print the news, all the news and nothing but the news,"
Howard said to Cumnock. "They've put you here because, so they tell me, you
know news no matter how thoroughly it is concealed or disguised. And I
assure you that no one shall interfere with you. No favours to anybody; no
use of the news-columns for revenge or exploitation. The only questions a
news-item need raise in your mind are: Is it true? Is it interesting? Is it
printable in a newspaper that will publish anything which a healthy-minded
grown-person wishes to read?"

"Is that 'straight'?" asked Cumnock. "No favourites? No suppressions? No
exploitations?"

"'Straight'--'dead straight'! And if I were you I'd make this particularly
clear to the Wall Street and political men. If anybody"--with stress upon
the anybody--"comes to you about this, send him to me."

Howard was uneasy about the managing editor, Mr. King. But he soon found
that his fears were groundless. Mr. King was without petty vanity, and
cordially and sincerely welcomed his control.

"We look too dull," King began when Howard asked him if he had any changes
to suggest. "We need more and bigger headlines, and we need pictures."

"That is it!" Howard was delighted to find that King and he were in perfect
accord. "But we must not have pictures unless we can have the best. Just at
present we can't increase expenses by any great amount. What do you say to
trying what we can do with all the news, larger headlines and plenty of
leads?"

"I'm sure we can do better with our class of readers by livening up the
appearance of our headlines than we could with second-rate pictures."

"I hope," Howard said earnestly, "that we won't have to use that
phrase--'our class of readers'--much longer. Our paper should interest
every man and woman able to read. It seems to me that a newspaper's
audience should be like that of a good play--the orchestra chairs full and
the last seat in the gallery taken. I suppose you know we're not an 'organ'
any longer?"

"No, I didn't." Mr. King looked surprised. "Do you mean to say that we're
free to print the news?"

"Free as freedom. In our news columns we're neither Democrat nor Republican
nor Mugwump nor Reform. We have no Wall Street or social connections. We
are going to print a newspaper--all the news and nothing but the news."

Mr. King drummed on his desk softly with the tips of his outstretched
fingers. "Hum--hum," he said. "This _is_ news. Well--the
circulation'll go up. And that's all I'm interested in."

Howard went about his plans quietly. He avoided every appearance of
exerting authority, disturbed not a wheel in the great machine. He made his
changes so subtly that those who received the suggestions often came to him
a few days afterward, proposing as their own the very plans he had hinted.
He was thus cautious partly because of his experience of the vanity of men,
their sensitiveness to criticism, their instinctive opposition to
improvement from without; partly from his knowledge of the hysteria which
raged in the offices of the "yellow journals." He wished to avoid an
epidemic of that hysteria--the mad rush for sensation and novelty; the
strife of opposing ambitions; the plotting and counter-plotting of rival
heads of departments; the chaos out of which the craziest ideas often
emerged triumphant, making the pages of the paper look like a series of
disordered dreams.

He was indifferent to the semblance of authority, to the shadows for which
small men are forever struggling. What he wanted, all he wanted,
was--results.

The first opposition came from the night editor, who for twenty-six years,
his weekly "night off" and his two weeks' vacation in summer excepted, had
"made up" the paper--that is to say, had defined, with the advice and
consent of the managing editor, the position and order of the various news
items. This night editor, Mr. Vroom, was a strenuous conservative. He
believed that an editor's duty was done when he had intelligently arranged
his paper so that the news was placed before the reader in the order of its
importance. Big headlines, attempts at effect with varying sizes of large
type and varying column-widths he held to be crowd-catching devices, vulgar
and debasing. He had no sympathy with Howard's theory that the first object
of a newspaper published in a democratic republic is to catch the crowd, to
interest it, to compel it to read, and so to lead it to think.

"We're on the way to scuffling in the gutter with the 'yellow journals' for
the pennies of the mob," he was saying sarcastically to Mr. King, one
afternoon just as Howard joined them.

Howard laughed. "Not on the way to the gutter, Mr. Vroom. Actually in the
gutter, actually scuffling."

"Well, I'm frank to say that I don't like it. A newspaper ought to appeal
to the intelligent."

"To intelligence, yes; to the intelligent, no. At least in my opinion, that
is the right theory. We want people to read us because we're intelligent
enough to know how to please them, not because they're intelligent enough
to overcome the difficulties we put in their way. But let's go out to
dinner this evening and talk it over."

They dined together at Mouquin's every night for a week. At the end of that
time Vroom, still sarcastic and grumbling, was a convert. And a great
accession Howard found him. He had sound judgment as to the value of
news-items--what demanded first page, the "show-window," because it would
interest everybody; what was worth a line on an inside page because it
would interest only a few thousands. He was the most skillful of the
_News-Record's_ many good writers of headlines, a master of that, for
the newspaper, art of arts--condensed and interesting statement, alluring
the glancing reader to read on. Also he had an eye for effects with type.
"You make every page a picture," Howard said to him. "It is wonderful how
you balance your headlines, emphasising the important news yet saving the
minor items from obscurity. I should like to see the paper you would make
if you had the right sort of illustrations to put in."

Vroom was amazed at himself. He who had opposed any "head" which broke the
column rule was now so far degenerated into a "yellow journalist" that,
when Howard spoke of illustrations, he actually longed to test his skill at
distributing them effectively.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two months of hard work, tedious, because necessarily so indirect, produced
a newspaper which was "on the right lines," as Howard understood right
lines. And he felt that the time had come to make the necessary radical
changes in the editorial page.

The _News-Record_ had long posed as independent because it supported
now one political party and now the other, or divided its support. But this
superficial independence was in reality subservience to the financial
interests of the two principal owners. They made their newspaper assail
Republican or Democratic corruption and misgovernment in city, state or
nation, according as their personal interests lay. They used the editorial
page and, to even better advantage, the news-columns, in revenging
themselves for too heavy levies of blackmail upon their corrupt interests
or in securing unjust legislation and privileges.

Obedient and cynical Mr. Malcolm had made the editorial page corrupt and
brilliant--never so effective as when assailing a good cause. The great
misfortune of good causes is that they attract so many fatal friends--the
superciliously conscientious; the well-meaning but feeble-minded and
blundering; the most offensive because least deceptive kinds of hypocrites.
Mr. Malcolm, as acute as he was intellectually unscrupulous, well
understood how to weaken or to ruin a just cause through these supporters.
Sometimes he stood afar off, showering the poisoned arrows of raillery and
satire. Again he was the plain-spoken friend of the cause and warned its
honest supporters against these "fool friends" whom he pretended to regard
as its leaders. Again he played the part of a blind enthusiast and praised
folly as wisdom and urged it on to more damaging activities.

"We abhor humbug here," he used to say; and perhaps he did in a measure
excuse himself to his conscience with the phrase. But in fact his editorial
page was usually a succession of humbugs, of brilliant hypocrisies and
cheats perpetrated under the guise of exposing humbug.

Just as Howard was ready to reverse Malcolm's editorial programme, New York
was seized with one of its "periodic spasms of virtue." The city government
was, as usual, in the hands of the two bosses who owned the two political
machines. One was taking the responsibility and the larger share of the
spoils; the other was maintaining him in power and getting the smaller but
a satisfactory share. The alliance between the police and criminal vice had
become so open and aggressive under this bi-boss patronage that the people
were aroused and indignant. But as they had no capable leaders and no way
of selecting leaders, there arose a self-constituted leadership of uptown
Phariseeism and sentimentality, planning the "purification" of the city.

Every man of sense knowing human nature and the conditions of city life
knew that this plan was foredoomed to ridiculous failure, and that the
event would be a popular revulsion against "reform."

"Why not speak the truth about these vice-hunters?" Howard was discussing
the situation with three of his editorial writers--Segur, Huntington and
Montgomery.

"It's mighty dangerous," Montgomery objected. "You will be sticking knives
into a sacred Anglo-Saxon hypocrisy."

"Yes, we'll have all the good people about our ears," said Segur. "We'll be
denounced as a defender of depravity, a foe of purity. They'll thunder away
at us from every pulpit. The other newspapers will take it up, especially
those that expect to sell millions of papers containing accounts of the
'exposure' of the dives and dens."

"That's good. I hope we shall," said Howard cheerfully. "It will advertise
us tremendously."

The three were better pleased than they would have admitted to themselves
by the seeming certainty of Howard's impending undoing.

"No, gentlemen," Howard said, as they were about to go to their rooms for
the day's work. "There's no danger in attacking any hypocrisy. Don't attack
beliefs that are universal or nearly universal--at least not openly. But
don't be afraid of a hypocrisy because it is universal. People know that
they are hypocrites in respect of it. They may not have the courage
publicly to applaud you. But they'll be privately delighted and will admire
your courage. We'll try to be discreet and we'll be careful to be truthful.
And we'll begin by making these gentlemen show themselves up."

The next morning the _News-Record_ published a double-leaded
editorial. It described the importance of improving political and social
conditions in New York; it went on to note the distinguished names on the
committee for the destruction of vice; it closed with the announcement that
on the following day the _News-Record_ would publish the views of
these eminent reformers upon conditions and remedies.

The next day he printed the interviews--a collection of curiosities in
utopianism, cant, ignorant fanaticism, provincialism, hypocrisy. These
appeared strictly as news; for the cardinal principle of Howard's theory of
a newspaper was that it had no right to intrude its own views into its
news-columns. On the editorial page he riddled the interviews. By adroit
quotations, by contrasting one with another, he showed, or rather made the
so-called reformers themselves show, that where they were sincere they were
in the main silly, and where they were plausible they were in the main
insincere; that every man of them had his own pet scheme for the salvation
of wicked New York; and that they could not possibly accomplish anything
more valuable than leading the people on the familiar, aimless,
demoralizing excursion through the slums.

On the following day he frankly laughed at them as a lot of impracticables
who either did not know the patent facts of city life or refused to admit
those facts. And he turned his attention to the real problem, a respectable
administration for the city--a practical end which could easily be
accomplished by practical action. From day to day he kept this up,
publishing a splendid series of articles, humorous, witty, satirical,
eloquent, bold, with a dominant strain of sincerity and plain common sense.
As his associates had predicted, a storm gathered and burst in fury about
the _News-Record_. It was denounced by "leading citizens," including
many of the clergy. Its "esteemed" contemporaries published and endorsed
and amplified the abuse. And its circulation went up at the rate of five
thousand a day.

When the storm was at its height, when the whole town seemed to be agreeing
with the angry reformers but was quietly laughing at their folly and
hypocrisy, Howard threw his bomb. On a Saturday morning he gave half of his
first page with big but severely impartial headlines to an analysis of the
members of the vice committee--a broadside of facts often hinted but never
before verified and published. First came those who owned property and
sub-let it for vicious purposes, the property and purpose specified in
detail; then those who were directors in corporations which had got corrupt
privileges from the local boss, the privileges being carefully specified,
and also the amounts of which they had robbed the city. Last came those who
were directors in corporations which had bought from the State-boss
injustices and licenses to rob, the specifications given in damning detail.

His leading editorial was entitled "Why We Don't Have Decent Government."
It was powerful in its simplicity, its merciless raillery and irony; and
only at the very end did it contain passion. There, in a few eloquent
sentences he arraigned these professed reformers who were growing rich
through the boss-system, who were trafficking with the bosses and were now
engaged in wrecking the hopes of honesty and decency. On that day the
_News-Record's_ circulation went up thirty thousand. The town rang
with its "exposure" and the attention of the whole country was arrested. It
was one of the historic "beats" of New York journalism. The reputation of
the _News-Record_ for fearlessness and truth-telling and
news-enterprise was established. At abound it had become the most
conspicuous and one of the most powerful journals in New York.




XVI.

MR. STOKELY IS TACTLESS.


Howard, riding in the Park one morning late in the spring, came upon Mrs.
Carnarvon. She gave him no chance to evade her, but joined him and
accommodated her horse's pace to his.

"And are you still on the _News-Record?_" she said. "I hope not."

"Why?" Howard was smiling, glad to get an outside view of what he had been
doing.

"Because it's become so sensational. It used to be such a nice paper. And
now--gracious, what headlines! What attacks on the very best people in the
town!"

"Dreadful, isn't it?" laughed Howard. "We've become so depraved that we are
actually telling the truth about somebodies instead of only about
nobodies."

"I might have known that you would sympathise with that sort of thing."
Mrs. Carnarvon was teasing, yet reproachful. "You always were an
anarchist."

"Is it anarchistic to be no respecter of persons and to put big headlines
over big items and little headlines over little items?"

"Oh, you know what I mean. You are encouraging the unruly classes."

"Dear me! And we thought we were fighting the unruly class. We thought that
it was our friends--or rather, your friends--the franchise grabbers and
legislature-buyers who won't obey the laws unless the laws happen to suit
their convenience. They're the only unruly class I know anything about.
I've heard of another kind but I've never been able to find it. And I never
hear much about it except when a lot of big rascals are making off weighted
down with plunder. They always shout back over their shoulders: 'Don't
raise a disturbance or you'll arouse the unruly classes.'"

Mrs. Carnarvon was laughing. "You put it well," she said, "and I'm not
clever enough to answer you. But they all tell me the _News-Record_
has become a dangerous paper, that it's attacking everybody who has
anything."

"Anything he has stolen, yes. But that's all."

"You can't get me to sympathise with you. I like well-dressed,
well-mannered people who speak good English."

"So do I. That's why I'm doing all in my power to improve the conditions
for making more and more people of the sort one likes to talk to and dine
with."

"Why, I thought you sympathised with the lower classes."

"Not a bit of it. Who has been maligning me to you? I abhor the lower
classes--so much so that I wish to see them abolished."

"Well, you'll have to blame Marian for misleading me."

"Miss Trevor? How is she?" Mrs. Carnarvon was looking closely at him, and
he was not sure that he succeeded in showing nothing more than friendly
interest.

"Haven't you heard from her? She's in England, visiting in Lancashire. You
know her cousin married Lord Cranmore."

"I saw in the papers several months ago that she was going abroad. I
haven't heard a word since."

Mrs. Carnarvon started to say something, but changed her mind.

"When is she coming home?"

"Not until July. You must come to see us at Newport."

"Nothing could please me better--if I can get away."

"I'll send you an invitation, although you have treated me very badly of
late. But I suppose you are busy."

"Busy? Isn't a galley slave always busy?"

"Are you still writing editorials?"

"Yes--and on the fallen _News-Record_. In fact----"

"Well--what?"

Howard laughed. "Don't faint," he said. "I'll leave you at once if you wish
me to, and I'll never give it away that you once knew me. I'm the
editor--the responsible devil for the depravity."

"How interesting!" Mrs. Carnarvon was evidently not disturbed. Then the
American adoration of success came out. "I'm so glad you're getting on. I
always knew you would. Really, you must come to dinner. I'll invite some of
the people you've been attacking. They'll like to look at you, and you will
be amused by them. And I don't in the least mind your giving it to them if
they bait you, as I did this morning. Will you come?"

"If I may leave by ten o'clock. I go down town every night."

"Why, when do you sleep?"

"Not much, these days. Life's too interesting to permit of much sleep. I'll
make up when it slackens a bit."

As he was turning his horse, she said: "Marian's address is Claridge's,
Brooke Street, Mayfair. If she isn't there, they forward her mail."

Howard was puzzled. "What made her give me that address?" he thought. "I
know she didn't like my seeing so much of Marian. And here she is
practically inviting me to write to her." He could not understand it. "If I
were not a 'yellow' editor and if Marian were not engaged to one of the
richest men in New York, I'd say that this lady was encouraging me." He
smiled. "Not yet--not just yet." And he cheerfully urged his horse into a
canter.

Mrs. Carnarvon's opinion of the _News-Record_ and its recent
performances fairly represented that of the fashionable and the very rich.
They read it, as they never did before, because it interested them. They
could not deny that what it said was true; that is, they could not deny it
to their own minds, although they did vigorously deny it publicly. Those
who were attacked directly or indirectly, or expected to be attacked,
denounced the paper as an "outrage," a "disgrace to the city," a "specimen
of the journalism of the gutter." Many who were not in sympathy with the
men or the methods assailed thought that its course was "inexpedient,"
"tended to increase discontent among the lower classes," "weakened the
influence of the better classes." Only a few of the "triumphant classes"
saw the real value and benefit of the _News-Record's_ frank attacks
upon greed and hypocrisy, saw that these attacks were not dangerous or
demagogical because they were just and were combined with a careful
avoidance of encouragement to the lazy, the envious, the incompetent and
the ignorant.

Fortunately for Howard's peace, that eminent New York "multi," Samuel
Jocelyn, for whom Coulter had the highest respect, was of this last class.
When Howard began, Coulter was at Aiken where Jocelyn had a cottage. He had
never been able to make headway with Jocelyn, and Mrs. Jocelyn deigned to
give him and Mrs. Coulter only the coldest of cold nods. Just as Coulter
had become so agitated by Howard's radical course that he was preparing to
go to New York to remonstrate with him, Jocelyn called.

"I came to thank you for what you are doing with your paper," he said
cordially. "It seems to me that all intelligent men who are not blind to
their own ultimate interests ought to stand by you. I can't tell you how
much I admire your frankness and honesty. And you draw the line just right.
You attack plunder, you defend property. Will your wife and you dine with
us this evening?"

Coulter postponed his trip to New York.

On the last day of the first three months the circulation of the
_News-Record_ was 147,253--an increase of 42,150 over what it was on
the day Howard took charge; its advertising had increased twelve per cent;
its net profits for the quarter were seventy-five thousand dollars as
against fifty-seven thousand for the preceding quarter.

"Very good indeed," was Stokely's comment.

"Another quarter like this," said Howard, "and I'm going to ask you to let
me increase expenses a thousand dollars a week to illustrate the paper."

"We'll talk that over with Coulter. Personally I like this
'yellow-journalism'--when it's done intelligently. I always told Coulter
we'd have to come to it. It's only common sense to make a paper easy
reading. Then, too, we can have a great deal more influence--in fact, we
have already. I'm getting what I want up at Albany this winter much
cheaper."

Howard winced. "He made me feel like a blackmailer," he said to himself
when Stokely had gone. "And I suppose these fellows do look on me as a new
Malcolm with up-to-date tricks. Well, they will see, they will see."

He tried to go on with his work, but Stokely's cynical words persistently
interrupted him. Why had he not squarely challenged Stokely then and there?
Why had he only winced where a year ago he would have demanded an
explanation?

He hated to confess it to himself, he made every effort to smother it, but
the thought still stared him in the face--"I am not so strong in my ideals
of personal character as I was a year ago."

The fact that his present course was profitable gave him, he felt, more
pleasure than the fact that it was right. If the alternative of wealth and
power with self-abasement or poverty, obscurity with self-respect were put
to him now, what would he decide? Would he give up his prospects, his hopes
of Marian and of an easy career? He was afraid to answer. He contented
himself with one of his habitual evasions--"I will settle that when the
time comes. No, Stokely's remark did not make a crisis. If the crisis ever
does come, surely I will act like a man. I'll be securer then, more
necessary to this pair of plunderers, able to make better terms for myself.
In practical life, it is necessary to sacrifice something in order to
succeed."

But Stokely's words and his own silence and the real reasons for his
changing ideals and for his cowardice continued to annoy him.

Every day he came down town planning for a better newspaper the next
morning than they had ever made before. And his vigour, his enthusiasm
permeated the entire office. He went from one news department to another,
suggesting, asking for suggestions, praising, criticising judiciously and
with the greatest consideration for vanity. He talked with the reporters,
urging them on by showing keen interest in them and their work, and
intimate knowledge of what they were doing. And he dictated every day
telegrams to correspondents, thanking them for any conspicuously good
stories they had telegraphed in, adding something to the compensation of
those who were paid by space and made little.

If his work had not been his amusement the long hours, the constant
application, would have broken him down. But he had no interests outside
the office and he got his mental recreation by shifting his mind from one
department to another.

In June his salary was increased to twenty-five thousand a year and his
last lingering feeling of financial insecurity disappeared. For the first
time in his life he felt strong enough to undertake a serious
responsibility, to give hostages to fortune without fear of being unable to
keep faith. He learned from Mrs. Carnarvon that Marian was returning on the
_Oceanic_ on the ninth of July, and he accepted a Saturday-to-Monday
invitation to Newport for the twelfth of July. It was from Segur that he
got the news that Danvers was in Japan and was not returning until the
autumn.

On the ninth of July, from the window of his office, he saw the
_Oceanic_ steam up the bay and up the river to her pier. He sent down
a request that the ship-news reporter be sent up as soon as he returned.
"Is it a good story?" he asked when the reporter, Blackwell, entered. "Was
there anybody on board?"

"A lot of swell people," the young man answered; "all the women got up in
the latest Paris gowns."

"Did you notice whether Mrs. Provost came?"

"Came? Well, rather, with two French maids chattering and chasing after
her. And there was a tall girl with her, a stunner, a girl she called
'Marian, my dear.'"

Howard stopped him with "Thank you. Don't write anything about them."

"It was the best thing I saw--the funniest."

"Well--don't use the names."

Young Blackwell turned to go. "Oh, I see--friends of yours," he smiled.
"Very well. I'll keep 'em out."

Howard flushed and called him back. "Go ahead," he said. "Write just what
you were going to. Of course you wouldn't write anything that was not fair
and truthful. We don't 'play favourites' here. Forget what I said."

And so it came to pass that Mrs. Provost, half pleased, half indignant,
said to Miss Trevor as they sat in the drawing room of the Pullman on the
way to Newport the next day: "Just look at this, Marian dear, in the horrid
_News-Record_. And it used to be such a nice paper with that slimy
Coulter bowing and scraping to everybody."

"This" was Mrs. Provost and her dogs and her maids and her asides to
"Marian dear," described with accuracy and a keen sense of the ludicrous.

"It's too dreadful," she continued. "There is no such thing as privacy in
this country. The newspapers are making us," with a slight accent on the
pronoun, "as common and public as tenement-house people."

"Yes," Miss Trevor answered absently. "But why read the newspapers? I never
could get interested in them, though I've tried."




XVII.

A WOMAN AND A WARNING.


On the evening of Howard's arrival at Newport, Mrs. Carnarvon was having a
few people in to dine. He had just time to dress and so saw no one until he
descended to the reception room.

"You are to take in Marian," said his hostess, going with him to where Miss
Trevor was sitting, her back to the door and her attention apparently
absorbed by the man facing her.

"Here's Mr. Howard, Marian," Mrs. Carnarvon interrupted. "Come with me,
Willie. Your lady is over here and we're going in directly."

Marian saw that Howard was looking at her in the straight, frank fashion
she remembered and liked so well. "I've come for you," he said.

"Yes, you are to take me in," she evaded, her look even lamer than her
words.

"You know what I mean." He was smiling, his heart in his eyes, as if the
dozen people were not about them.

"I see you have not changed," she laughed, answering his look in kind.

"Changed? I'm revolutionized. I was blind and now I see. I was paralyzed
and behold, I walk. I was weak and lo, I am strong--strong enough for two,
if necessary."

"Now, hasn't it occurred to you that I might possibly have something to say
about my own fate?"

"You? Why, you had everything to say. I reasoned it all out with you. You
simply can't add anything to the case I made you make out for yourself when
I talked it over with you. I made you protest very vigorously."

"Well, what did I say--that is, what did you make me say?"

"You said you were engaged--pledged to another--that you could not draw
back without dishonour. And I answered that no engagement could bind you to
become the wife of a man you did not love; that no moral code could hold
you to such a sin; that no code of honour could command you to permit a man
to degrade himself and you. Then you pleaded that you were not sure you
liked my kind of a life, that you feared you wanted wealth and a great
establishment and social leadership and--and all that."

"Did I?" Marian said with exaggerated astonishment.

"You did indeed. You were perfectly open with me. You let me see all that
part of you which we try to keep concealed and fancy we are concealing--all
that one really feels and wishes and thinks as distinguished from what one
fancies he ought to feel and wish and think."

"I wonder that you cared, after a glance behind that curtain."

"Oh, but I like what is behind that curtain best of all. The very human
things are there. They make me feel so at home."

Dinner was announced and it was not until the second course that he had a
chance to resume. Then he began as if there had been no interval:

"You said--"

Marian laughed and looked at him--a flash of her luminous blue-green
eyes--and was looking away again with her usual expression. "You needn't
tell me the rest. It doesn't matter what I said. I've had you with me
wherever I went. You never doubted my--my caring, did you?"

"No. I couldn't doubt you. If you were the sort of woman a man could doubt,
you wouldn't be the sort of woman I could love. And you know it isn't
vanity that makes me sure. I often wonder how you happened to care for such
a--but I must not attack any one whom you like so well. No, I knew you
cared by the same instinct that makes you know that I care for you."

"But why did you come?"

"Because I have won a position for myself, have enough to enable us to live
without eternally fretting over money-matters. I feel that I have the right
to come. And then I could not be interested to live on, without you; and
I'm willing to face, willing to have you face, whatever may come to us
through me. I know that you and I together----"

"Not now--don't--please." Marian was pale and she was obviously under a
great strain. "You see, you knew all about this. But I didn't until you
looked at me when Jessie brought you. It makes me--happy--I am so happy.
But I must--I can't control myself here." She leaned over as if her napkin
had slipped to the floor. "I love you," she murmured.

It was Howard's turn to struggle for self-control. "I understand," he said,
"why you wished me not to go on. You never said those words to me
before--and----"

"Oh, yes I have--many and many a time."

"With your eyes, but not with your voice--at least not so that I could
hear. And--well, it is not easy to look calm and only friendly when every
nerve in one's body is vibrating like a violin string under the bow. Yes,
let us talk of something else. I've never been acutely conscious of the
presence of others when I've been with you. To-night I'm in great danger of
forgetting them altogether."

"That would be so like you." Marian laughed, then raised her voice a little
and went on. "Yes, your little restaurant in the Rue Louis le Grand was
gone. There was a dressmaker in its place--Raudinitz. She made this. How do
you like it?"

"It has the air of--of belonging to you."

Marian looked amused. Howard shrugged his shoulders. "All roads lead to
Rome," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carnarvon hung about until the women went to bed, so Howard and Marian had
no opportunity to be alone. As soon as he saw his last chance vanish, he
went to his own room, to the solitude of its balcony in the shadow of the
projecting facade with the moonlight flooding the rocks and the sea.

As he sat smoking, the recession came, the reaction from weeks of nervous
tension. And with the ebb of the tide entered that Visitor who alone has
the privilege of the innermost chamber where lives the man himself,
unmasked of all vanity and show and pretense. The visit was not unexpected;
for at every such crisis every one is certain of a call from this Visitor,
this merciless critic, plain and rude of speech, rare and reluctant in
praise, so mocking in our moments of elation, so cruelly frank about our
follies and self-excuses when he comes in our moments of depression.

"So you are going to marry?" the Visitor said abruptly. "I thought you had
made up your mind on that subject long ago."

"Love changes a man's point of view," Howard replied, timid and apologetic
before this quiet, relentless other-self.

"But it doesn't change the facts of life, does it? It doesn't change
character, does it?"

"I think so. For instance, it has changed me. It has made a man of me. It
has been the inspiration of the past year, strengthening me, making me
ambitious, energetic. Have I not thought of her all the time, worked for
her?"

"You have been uncommonly persistent--as you always are when you are
thwarted." The Visitor wore a satirical smile. "But a spurt of inspiration
is one thing. A wife--responsibility--fetters----"

"Not when one loves."

"That depends upon the kind of love--and the kind of woman--and the kind of
man."

"Could there be any higher kind of love than ours?"

"Most romantic, most high-minded--quite idyllic." The Visitor's tone was
gently mocking. "And I don't deny that you may go on loving each the other.
But--how does she fit in with your scheme of life? What does she really
know of or care about your ambitions? Why, you had so little confidence in
her that you didn't dare to think of marrying her until you had an income
which you once would have thought wealth--an income which, by the way,
already begins to seem small to you."

"No, it wasn't lack of confidence in her," protested Howard. "It was lack
of confidence in myself."

"True, that did have something to do with it, I grant you. And that reminds
me--what has become of all your cowardice about responsibility?"

"Oh, I'm changed there."

"Are you sure? Are you not deceived by this sudden and maybe momentary
streak of good luck in your affairs? You have fixed your ambition
high--very high. You wish to make an honest and a useful and a
distinguished career. You know you have weaknesses. I needn't remind
you--need I--that you have had to fight those weaknesses? How could you
have won thus far if you had been responsible for others instead of being
alone, and certain that the consequences would fall upon yourself only? I
want to see you continue to win. I don't want to see you dragged down by
extravagance, by love for this woman, by ambition of the kind her friends
approve. I don't want to see you--You were silent when Stokely insulted
you!"

"Love--such love as mine--and for such a woman--and with such love in
return--drag down? Impossible!"

"Not so--not exactly so, though I must say you are plausible. But don't
forget that you and she are not starting out to make a career. Don't forget
that she is already fixed--her tastes, habits, friendships, associations,
ideals already formed. Don't forget that your love is the only bond between
you--and that it may drag you toward her mode of life instead of drawing
her towards yours. Don't forget that your own associations and temptations
are becoming more and more difficult. I repeat, you cringed--yes,
cringed--when Stokely insulted you. Why?"

Howard was silent.

"And," the Visitor went on relentlessly, "let me remind you that not only
did you give her up without a struggle a few months ago but also she gave
you up without a word."

"But what could she have said?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. I'm not familiar with ways feminine. But I
know--we know--that, if there had not been some reservation in her love,
some hesitation about you--unconscious, perhaps, but powerful enough to
make her yield--she would not have let you go as she did."

"But she did not realise, as I did not, how much our love meant to us."

"Perhaps--that sounds well. All I ask is, will she help you? Are you really
so much stronger than you were only four months ago? Or are you stimulated
by success? Suppose that days of disaster, of peril, come? What then?"

"But they will not. I have won a position. I can always command a large
salary--perhaps not quite so much but still a large salary."

"Perhaps--if you don't trouble yourself about principles. But how would it
be if you would do nothing, write nothing, except what you think is honest?
Would you ask her to face it? Tell me, tell yourself honestly, have you the
right to assume a responsibility you may not be able to bear, to invite
temptations you may not be able to resist?"

There was a long silence. At last Howard stood up and flung his cigar into
the sea. His face was drawn and his eyes burned.

"God in heaven!" he cried, "am I not human? May I not have companionship
and sympathy and love? Must I be alone and friendless and loveless always?
That is not life; that is not just. I will not; I will not. I love
her--love her--love her. With the best that there is in me, I love her. Am
I such a coward that I cannot face even my own weaknesses?"




XVIII.

HOWARD EXPLAINS HIS MACHINE.


In August Marian and Mrs. Carnarvon came to the Waldorf for two days.
Howard had offered to show them how a newspaper is made; and Mrs.
Carnarvon, finding herself bored by too many days of the same few people
every day, herself proposed the trip. The three dined in the open air on
Sherry's piazza and at eleven o'clock drove down the Avenue, to the east at
Washington Square, and through the Bowery.

"I never saw it before," said Marian, "and I must say I shall not care if I
never see it again. Why do people make so much fuss about slums, I wonder?"

"Oh, they're so queer, so like another world," suggested Mrs. Carnarvon.
"It gives you such a delightful sensation of sadness. It's just like a
not-too-melancholy play, only better because it's real. Then, too, it makes
one feel so much more comfortable and clean and contented in one's own
surroundings."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Jessie." Marian spoke in mock
indignation. "The next thing we know you'll sink to being a patron of the
poor and go about enjoying yourself at making them self-conscious and
envious."

"They're not at all sad down this way," said Howard, "except in the usual
inescapable human ways. When they're not hit too hard, they bear up
wonderfully. You see, living on the verge of ruin and tumbling over every
few weeks get one used to it. It ceases to give the sensation of event."

Their automobile had turned into Park Row and so reached the
_News-Record_ building in Printing House Square. Howard took the two
women to the elevator and they shot upward in a car crowded with telegraph
messengers, each carrying one or more envelopes, some of them bearing in
bold black type the words: "News!--Rush!"

"I suppose that is the news for the paper?" Mrs. Carnarvon asked.

"A little of it. Our special cable and special news from towns to which we
have no direct wire and also the _Associated Press_ reports come this
way. But we don't use much _Associated Press_ matter, as it is the
same for all the papers."

"What do you do with it?"

"Throw it away. A New York newspaper throws away every night enough to fill
two papers and often enough to fill five or six."

"Isn't that very wasteful?"

"Yes, but it's necessary. Every editor has his own idea of what to print
and what not to print and how much space each news event calls for. It is
there that editors show their judgment or lack of it. To print the things
the people wish to read in the quantities the people like and in the form
the most people can most easily understand--that is success as an editor."

"No doubt," said Marian, thinking of the low view all her friends took of
Howard's newspaper, "if you were making a newspaper to please yourself, you
would make a very different one."

"Oh, no," laughed Howard, "I print what I myself like; that is, what I like
to find in a newspaper. We print human news made by human beings and
interesting to human beings. And we don't pretend to be anything more than
human. We try never to think of our own idea of what the people ought to
read, but always to get at what the people themselves think they ought to
read. We are journalists, not news-censors."

"I must say newspapers do not interest me." Marian confessed it a little
diffidently.

"You are probably not interested," Howard answered, "because you don't care
for news. It is a queer passion--the passion for news. The public has it in
a way. But to see it in its delirium you must come here."

"This seems quiet enough." Marian looked about Howard's upstairs office. It
was silent, and from the windows one could see New York and its rivers and
harbour, vast, vague, mysterious, animated yet quiet.

"Oh, I rarely come here--a few hours a week," Howard replied. "On this
floor the editorial writers work." He opened a door leading to a private
hall. There were five small rooms. In each sat a coatless man, smoking and
writing. One was Segur, and Howard called to him.

"Are you too busy to look after Mrs. Carnarvon and Miss Trevor for a few
minutes? I must go downstairs."

Segur gave some "copy" to a boy who handed him a bundle of proofs and
rushed away down a narrow staircase. Howard descended in the elevator, and
Segur, who had put on his coat, sat talking to the two women as he looked
through the proofs, glancing at each narrow strip, then letting it drop to
the floor.

"You don't mind my working?" he asked. "I have to look at these things to
see if there is any news that calls for editional attention. If I find
anything and can think an editorial thought about it, I write it; and if
Howard is in the humour, perhaps the public is permitted to read it."

"Is he severe?" asked Mrs. Carnarvon.

"The 'worst ever,'" laughed Segur. "He is very positive and likes only a
certain style and won't have anything that doesn't exactly fit his ideas.
He's easy to get along with but difficult to work for."

"I imagine his positiveness is the secret of his success." Marian knew that
Segur was half in jest and was fond of Howard. But she couldn't endure
hearing him criticised.

"No. I think he succeeds because he works, pushes straight on, never stops
to repair blunders but never makes the same kind of a blunder the second
time."

Segur's eye caught an item that suggested an editorial paragraph. He sat at
Howard's desk, thought a moment, scrawled half a dozen lines in a large
ragged hand on a sheet of ruled yellow paper, and pressed an electric
button. The boy came, handed him another thick bundle of proofs, took the
"copy" and withdrew. Just then Howard returned.

"We'll go down to the news-room," he said.

The windows of the great news-room were thrown wide. Scores of electric
lights made it bright. At the various desks or in the aisles were perhaps
fifty men, most of them young, none of them beyond middle age. They were in
every kind of clothing from the most fashionable summer attire to an old
pair of cheap and stained duck trousers, collarless negligee shirt open all
the way down the front and suspenders hanging about the hips.

Some were writing long-hand; others were pounding away at the typewriter;
others were talking in undertones to "typists" taking dictation to the
machine; others were reading "copy" and altering it with huge blue pencils
which made apparently unreadable smears wherever they touched the paper. In
and out skurried a dozen office-boys, responding to calls from various
desks, bringing bundles of proofs, thrusting copy into boxes which
instantly and noisily shot up through the ceiling.

It was a scene of confusion and furious activity. The face of each
individual was calm and his motions by themselves were not excited. But
taking all together and adding the tense, strained expression underneath
the calm--the expression of the professional gambler--there was a total of
active energy that was oppressive.

"We had a fire below us one night," said Howard. "We are two hundred feet
from the street and there were no fire escapes. We all thought it was
good-bye. It was nearly half an hour before we found out that the smoke
booming up the stairways and into this room had no danger behind it."

"Gracious!" Mrs. Carnarvon shuddered and looked uneasily about.

"It's perfectly safe," Howard reassured her. "We've arranged things better
since then. Besides, that fire demonstrated that the building was
fireproof."

"And what happened?" asked Miss Trevor.

"Why, just what you see now. The Managing Editor, Mr. King over there--I'll
introduce him to you presently--went up to a group of men standing at one
of the windows. They were pretending indifference as they looked down at
the crowd which was shouting and tossing its arms in a way that more than
suggested pity for us poor devils up here. Well, King said: 'Boys, boys,
this isn't getting out a paper.' Every one went back to his work and--and
that was all."

They went on to the room behind the newsroom. As Howard opened its heavy
door a sound, almost a roar, of clicking instruments and typewriters burst
out. Here again were scores of desks with men seated at them, every man
with a typewriter and a telegraph instrument before him.

"These are our direct wires," Howard explained. "Our correspondents in all
the big cities, east, west, north and south and in London, are at the other
end of these wires. Let me show you."

Howard spoke to the operator nearest them. "Whom have you got?"

"I'm taking three thousand words from Kansas City," he replied. "Washington
is on the next wire."

"Ask Mr. Simpson how the President is to-night," Howard said to the
Washington operator.

His instrument clicked a few times and was silent. Almost immediately the
receiver began to click and, as the operator dashed the message off on his
typewriter the two women read over his shoulder: "Just came from White
House. He is no better, probably a little worse because weaker. Simpson."

"And can you hear just as quickly from London?" Marian asked.

"Almost. I'll try. There is always a little delay in transmission from the
land systems to the cable system; and messages have to be telephoned
between our office in Trafalgar Square and the cable office down in the
city. Let's see, it's five o'clock in the morning in London now. They've
been having it hot there. I'll ask about the weather."

Howard dictated to the man at the London wire: "Roberts, London. How is the
weather? Howard."

In less than ten minutes the cable-man handed Howard a typewritten slip
reading: "_News-Record_, New York, Howard: Thermometer 97 our office
now. Promises hottest day yet. Roberts."

"I never before realised how we have destroyed distance," said Mrs.
Carnarvon.

"I don't think any one but a newspaper editor completely realises it,"
Howard answered. "As one sits here night after night, sending messages far
and wide and receiving immediate answers, he loses all sense of space. The
whole world seems to be in his anteroom."

"I begin to see fascination in this life of yours." Marian's face showed
interest to enthusiasm. "This atmosphere tightens one's nerves. It seems to
me that in the next moment I shall hear of some thrilling happening."

"It's listening for the first rumour of the 'about to happen' that makes
newspaper-men so old and yet so young, so worn and yet so eager. Every
night, every moment of every night, we are expecting it, hoping for some
astounding news which it will test our resources to the utmost to present
adequately."

From the news-room they went up to the composing room--a vast hall of
confusion, filled with strange-looking machines and half-dressed men and
boys. Some were hurrying about with galleys of type, with large metal
frames; some were wheeling tables here and there; scores of men and a few
women were seated at the machines. These responded to touches upon their
key-boards by going through uncanny internal agitations. Then out from a
mysterious somewhere would come a small thin strip of almost hot metal, the
width of a newspaper column and marked along one edge with letters printed
backwards.

Up through the floor of this room burst boxes filled with "copy." Boys
snatched the scrawled, ragged-looking sheets and tossed them upon a desk. A
man seated there cut them into little strips, hanging each strip upon a
hook. A line of men filed rapidly past these hooks, snatching each man a
single strip and darting away to a machine.

"It is getting late," said Howard. "The final rush for the first edition is
on. They are setting the last 'copy.'"

"But," Mrs. Carnarvon asked, "how do they ever get the different parts of
the different news-items together straight?"

"The man who is cutting copy there--don't you see him make little marks on
each piece? Those marks tell them just where their 'take,' as they call it,
belongs."

They went over to the part of the great room where there were many tables,
on each a metal frame about the size of a page of the newspaper. Some of
the frames were filled with type, others were partly empty. And men were
lifting into them the galleys of type under the direction of the Night
Editor and his staff. As soon as a frame was filled two men began to even
the ends of the columns and then to screw up an inside framework which held
the type firmly in place. Then a man laid a great sheet of what looked like
blotting-paper upon the page of type and pounded it down with a mallet and
scraped it with a stiff brush.

"That is the matrix," said Howard. "See him putting it on the elevator."
They looked down the shaft. "It has dropped to the sub-basement," said
Howard, "two hundred and fifty feet below us. They are already bending it
into a casting-box of the shape of the cylinders on the presses; metal will
be poured in and when it is cool, you will have the metal form, the metal
impression of the page. It will be fastened upon the press to print from."

They walked back through the room which was now in almost lunatic
confusion--forms being locked; galleys being lifted in; editors,
compositors, boys, rushing to and fro in a fury of activity. Again the
phenomenon of the news-room, the individual faces calm but their tense
expressions and their swift motions making an impression of almost
irrational excitement.

"Why such haste?" asked Marian.

"Because the paper must be put to press. It must contain the very latest
news and it must also catch the mails; and the mail-trains do not wait."

They descended in the main elevator to the ground floor and then went down
a dark and winding staircase until they faced an iron door. Howard pushed
it open and they entered the press-room. Its temperature was blood-heat,
its air heavy and nauseating with the odours of ink, moist paper and oil,
its lights dim. They were in a gallery and below them on all sides were the
huge presses, silent, motionless, waiting.

Suddenly a small army of men leaped upon the mighty machines, scrambled
over them, then sprang back. With a tremendous roar that shook the entire
building the presses began to revolve, to hurl out great heaps of
newspapers.

"Those presses eat six hundred thousand pounds of paper and four tons of
ink a week," Howard shouted. "They can throw out two hundred thousand
complete papers an hour--papers that are cut, folded, pasted, and ready to
send away. Let us go before you are stifled. This air is horrible."

They returned in the elevator to his lofty office. Even there a slight
vibration from the press-room could be felt. But it was calm and still, a
fit place from which to view the panorama of sleeping city and drowsy
harbour tranquil in the moonlight.

"Look." Howard was leaning over the railing just outside his window.

They looked straight down three hundred feet to the street made bright by
electric lights. Scores of wagons loaded with newspapers were rushing away
from the several newspaper buildings. The shouts, the clash of hoofs and
heavy tires on the granite blocks, the whirr of automobiles, were borne
faintly upward.

"It is the race to the railway stations to catch the mail-trains," Howard
explained. "The first editions go to the country. These wagons are hurrying
in order that tens of thousands of people hundreds of miles away, at
Boston, Philadelphia, Washington and scores on scores of towns between and
beyond, may find the New York newspapers on their breakfast-tables."

The office-boy came with a bundle of papers, warm, moist, the ink
brilliant.

"And now for the inquest," said Howard.

"The inquest?" Marian looked at him inquiringly.

"Yes--viewing the corpse. It was to give birth to this that there was all
that intensity and fury--that and a thousand times more. For, remember,
this paper is the work of perhaps twenty thousand brains, in every part of
the world, throughout civilisation and far into the depths of barbarism.
Look at these date lines--cities and towns everywhere in our own country,
Canada, Mexico, Central America, South America. You'll find most of the
capitals of Europe represented; and Africa, north, south and central, east
and west coast. Here's India and here the heart of Siberia.

"There is China and there Japan and there Australia. Think of these scores
of newspaper correspondents telegraphing news of the doings of their fellow
beings--not what they did last month or last year, but what they did a few
hours ago--some of it what they were doing while we were dining up at
Sherry's. Then think of the thousands on thousands of these newspaper-men,
eager, watchful agents of publicity, who were on duty but had nothing to
report to-day. And----"

Howard shrugged his shoulders and tossed the paper from him.

"There it lies," he said, "a corpse. Already a corpse, its life ended
before it was fairly born. There it is, dead and done for--writ in water,
and by anonymous hands. Who knows who did it? Who cares?"

He caught Marian's eyes, looking wonder and reproach.

"I don't like to hear you say that," she said, forgetting Mrs. Carnarvon.
"Other men--yes, the little men who work for the cheap rewards. But not
you, who work for the sake of work. This night's experience has thrilled
me. I understand your profession now. I see what it means to us all, to
civilisation, what a splendid force for good, for enlightenment, for
uplifting it is. I can see a great flood of light radiating from this
building, pouring into the dark places, driving away ignorance. And the
thunder of those presses seems to me to fill the world with some mighty
command--what is it?--oh, yes--I can hear it distinctly. It is, 'Let there
be light!'"

Mrs. Carnarvon's back was toward them and she was looking out at the
harbour. Howard put his hands upon Marian's shoulders and they looked each
the other straight in the eyes.

"Lovers and comrades," he said, "always. And how strong we are--together!"




XIX.

"I MUST BE RICH."


"While I don't feel dependent upon the owners of the _News-Record_,
still I am not exactly independent of them either. And if I left them it
would only be to become dependent in the same way upon somebody else. A man
who makes his living by the advocacy of principles should be wholly free.
If he isn't, the principles are sure sooner or later to become incidental
to the living, instead of the living being incidental to the principles."

"But you see--perhaps I ought to have told you before--that is, there may
be"--Marian was stammering and blushing.

"What's the matter? Don't frighten me by looking so--so criminal," Howard
laughed.

It was late in August. Marian was visiting Mrs. Brandon at
Irvington-on-the-Hudson and she and Howard were driving.

"I never told you. But the fact is"--she hesitated again.

"Is it about your other engagement? You never told me about that--how you
broke it off. I don't want you to tell me unless you wish to. You know I
never meddle in past matters. I'm simply trying to help you out."

"Instead, you're making it worse. I'd rather not tell you that if----"

"We'll never speak of it again. And now, what is it that is troubling you?"

"I have been trying to tell you--I wish you wouldn't look at me--I've got a
small income--it's really very small."

"I'm glad to hear it."

"I was afraid you wouldn't like it. It isn't very big--only about eight
thousand a year--some years not so much. But then, if anything happened--we
could be--we could live."

Howard smiled as he looked at her--but not with his eyes.

"I'm glad," he said. "It makes me feel safer in several ways. And I'm
especially glad that it is not larger than mine. I know it's stupid, as so
many of our instincts are; but I should not like to marry a woman who had a
larger income than I could earn. I think it is the only remnant I have of
the 'lord and master' idea that makes so many men ridiculous. But we need
not let that bother us. Fate has made us about equal in this respect, so
unimportant yet so important; and we are each independent of the other.
Each will always know that love is the only bond that holds us together."

They decided that they would live at the rate of about fifteen thousand a
year and would put by the rest of their income. She was to undertake the
entire management of their home, he transferring his share by check each
month.

"And so," she said, "we shall never have to discuss money matters."

"We couldn't," laughed Howard. "I don't know anything about them and could
not take part in a discussion."

As they were to be married in November, they planned to take an apartment
when Marian came back to town--in late September. She was to attend to the
furnishing and all was to be in readiness by the time they were married.
Howard was to get a six weeks' vacation and, as soon as they returned, they
were to go to housekeeping.

Her visit to the _News-Record_ office had made a change in her. Until
she met Howard, she had known only the world-that-idles and the
world-that-drudges. Howard brought her the first real news of the
world-that-works. Of course she knew that there was such a world, but she
had confused it with the world-that-drudges. She liked to hear Howard talk
about his world, but she thought that his enthusiasm blinded him to the
truth of its drudgery; and she often caught herself half regretting that he
had to work.

But that vast machine for the swift collecting and distributing of the news
of the world had opened her eyes, had made her see her lover and, through
him, his life, in a different aspect. She had accepted the supercilious,
thoughtless opinion of those about her that the newspaper is a mere
purveyor of inaccurate gossip. And while Howard had tried to show her his
profession as it was, he had only succeeded in convincing her that he
himself had an exalted view of it; a view which she thought creditable to
him but wide of the disagreeable truth.

On that trip down-town she had seen "the press" with the flaws reduced and
the merits looming. She had looked into those all-seeing eyes that watch
the councils of statesmen and the movements of nations and peoples, yet
also note the swing of a murderous knife in an alley of the slums. She had
heard that stentorian voice of Publicity, arousing the people of the earth
to apprehend, to reflect, to progress.

She had been proud of Howard for his appearance, for what he said and the
way he said it. Now she was proud of him for the part he was taking in this
wonderful world-that-works. And she would not have confessed to him how
insignificant she felt, how weak and worthless.

She thought she was impatient for the time to come when she could learn how
to help him in his work, could begin to feel that she too had a real share
in it. With what seemed to her most creditable energy and self-sacrifice
she tried again to interest herself in newspapers. But the trivial parts
bored her; the chronicles of crime repelled her; and the politics and most
of the other serious articles were beyond the range of her knowledge or of
her interest. "I shall wait until we are married," she said, "then he will
teach me." And she did not suspect how significant, how ominous her
postponement was.

She asked him if he would not teach her and he replied: "Why, certainly, if
you are interested. But I don't intend to trouble you with the details of
my profession. I want you to lead your own life--to do what interests you."

She did not stop to analyse her feeling of relief at this release, and went
on to protest: "But I want your life to be my life. I want there to be only
one life--our life."

"And there shall be--each contributing his share, at least I'll try to
contribute mine. But you have your own individuality, dear; and a very
strong one it is. And I don't want you to change."

At the time he was deep in his plans for illustrating the
_News-Record_. Early in that fall's campaign they had secured the best
cartoonist in America. Cartoons are rarely the work of one man but are got
up by consultations. Howard spent never less than an hour each day with the
cartoonist, Wickham, wrestling with the problem of the next day's picture.
For he insisted upon having a striking cartoon each day, and gave it the
most conspicuous place in the paper--the top-centre of the first page.

"If a cartoon is worth printing at all," he said, "it is worth printing
large and conspicuous. And to be worth printing it must be like an ideal
editorial--one point sharply and swiftly made and so clear that the most
careless glance-of-the-eye is enough."

Wickham had made a series of cartoons on the campaign, humorous and
satirical, which had the distinction of being reproduced on lantern slides
for use in all parts of the town. It was an admirable beginning of the new
policy of illustration. Howard had been making a careful study of all the
illustrators in the country, not overlooking those toiling in obscurity on
the big western dailies. He had selected a staff of twenty; as soon as
Coulter and Stokely assented, he engaged them by telegraph. Five were
developed artists, the rest beginners with talent. He gave all of his
attention for two weeks to organising this staff. He infected it with his
enthusiasm. He impressed upon it his ideas of newspaper illustration--the
dash and energy of the French illustrators adapted to American public
taste. He insisted upon the artists studying the French illustrated papers
and applying what they learned. It was not until the first Sunday in
December that he felt ready to submit the results of these labours to the
public.

Again he scored over the "contemporaries" of the _News-Record_. They
printed many more illustrations than it did. It had only one illustration
on a page, but there was one on every page and a good one. All the subjects
were well chosen--either action or character--and as many good looking
women as possible.

"Never publish a commonplace face," he said. "There is no such thing in
life as an uninteresting face. Always find the element of interest and
bring it out."

The result of this policy, interpreted by a carefully trained and
enthusiastic staff, was what the out-of-town press was soon praising as "a
revelation in newspaper-illustration." Howard himself was surprised. He had
mentally insured against a long period of disappointment.

"This shows," he remarked to King and Vroom, "how much more competent men
are than we usually think--if they get a chance, if they are pointed in the
right direction and are left free."

"He certainly knows his business." Vroom was looking after Howard
admiringly. "I never saw anybody who so well understood when to lead and
when to let alone. What results he does get!"

"A pity to waste such talents on this thankless business," said King. "If
he'd gone into real business, he would have a salary of a hundred thousand
a year, would be rich and secure for life. Why, a business man could and
would make a whole career on the ideas he has in a single week. As it
is----"

King shrugged his shoulders and Vroom finished the sentence for him:
"Coulter and Stokely could kick him out to-morrow and the
_News-Record_ would go straight on living upon his ideas for ten years
at least."

Howard needed no one to make this truth clear to him to the full. Often, as
he thought of his expanding tastes, his expanding expenditures and his
expanding plans both for his private life and for his career, he felt an
awful sinking at the heart and a sense of fundamental weakness.

"I am building upon sand," he said to himself. "In business, in the law, in
almost any other career to-day's work would be to-morrow's capital. As it
is, I am ever more and more a slave. To be free I ought to be poor or rich.
And I cannot endure the thought of poverty again. I must be rich."

The idea allured him to a degree that made him ashamed of himself.
Sometimes, when he was talking to Marian or writing editorials, all in the
strain of high principle and contempt for sordidness, he would flush at the
thought that he was in reality a good deal of a hypocrite. "I'm expressing
the ideals I ought to have, the ideals I used to have, not the ideals I
have."

But the clearer this discrepancy became to him and the wider the gap
between what he ought to think and what he really did think, the more
strenuously he protested to himself against himself, and the more fiercely
he denounced in public the very poison he was himself taking.

"I am living in a tainted atmosphere," he said to Marian. "We all are. I
fight against the taint but how can I hope to avoid the consequences if I
persist in breathing it, in absorbing it at every pore of my body?"

"I don't understand you." Marian was used to his moods of self-criticism
and did not attach much importance to them.

He thought a moment. "Oh, nothing," he said. "What's the use of discussing
what can't be helped?" How could he tell her that the greatest factor in
his enervating environment was herself; that the strongest chains which
held him in it were the chains which bound him to her? Indeed, was he not
indulging in cowardly self-excuse in thinking that this was true? Had not
his success, rather than his love, made ambition unfettered by principle
the mainspring of his life?




XX.

ILLUSION.


"How shall we be married?" Howard asked her in the late Autumn.

"I know it will not be in a church with ushers and bridesmaids and a crowd
gaping at us. I suppose there is a public side to marriage since the state
makes one enter into a formal contract. But that can be done privately. I
should as soon think of driving down the Avenue with my arms about your
neck as of a public wedding."

"Thank you," he laughed. "I was afraid--well, women are usually so fond
of--but you're not usual. Let us see. The minister is absolutely necessary,
I suppose. Would one feel married if there were not a minister?"

"I don't know--I feel--"

She hesitated and blushed but looked straight at him with that expression
in her eyes which always made him think of their love as their religion.

"Feel--go on. I want to hear that very, very much."

"I feel as if I were just as much married to you now as I ever could be."

"And that is how I have felt ever since the day, when I hardly knew you,
when you suddenly came into my life--my real, inner life where no one had
been before--and sat down and at once made it look as if it were your home.
And the place that had been lonely was lonely no more, and has not been
since."

She put her hand in his and he saw that there were tears in her eyes.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Only that--that I am so happy. It--it frightens me. It seems so like a
dream."

"It's going to be a long, long dream, isn't it?" He lifted her hand and
kissed it, then put it down in her lap again gently as if he feared a
sudden movement might awaken them. "Perhaps it had better be at Mrs.
Carnarvon's house--some morning just before luncheon and we could go
quietly away afterward."

"Yes--and--tell me," she said, "wouldn't it be better for us not to go far
away--and not to stay long? It seems to me that I most want to begin--begin
our life together just as it will be."

"Are you afraid you wouldn't know what to do with me if I were idling about
all day long?"

"Not exactly that. But I'd rather not take a vacation until we had earned
it together."

"What a beautiful idea! I'll see what I can do."

They postponed the wedding until Howard had the "art-department" of the
_News-Record_ well established. It was on a bright winter day in the
second week of January that they stood up together and were married by the
Mayor whom Howard had helped to elect. Only Mr. and Mrs. Carnarvon and
Marian's brother were there. Then the six sat down to luncheon, and at
three o'clock Howard and his wife started for Lakewood.

When they arrived a victoria was waiting. As soon as they were seated,
Howard said "Home." The coachman touched his hat and the horses set out at
a swift trot. The sun was setting and the dry, still air was saturated with
the perfume of the snow-draped pines. Within five minutes the carriage was
at a pretty little cottage with wide, glass-enclosed porches. They entered
the hall. In the rooms on either side open fires were blazing an ecstatic
welcome.

"How do you like 'home'?" asked Howard.

"I don't quite understand."

"You remember your plan of beginning at once. Well--this is the compromise.
Stokely has let me have his house here for a month--we may keep it two if
we like it. There is a telephone. The office isn't two hours away by rail.
The newspapers are here early. We can combine work and play."

The manservant had left the room, a sort of library-reception room. Marian
was seated in a big chair drawn near the fire. She had thrown back her
wraps and was slowly drawing off her gloves. Howard stood at the side of
the fire, leaning against the mantel and looking down at her.

"Before you definitely decide to stay--" he paused.

"Yes," she said, her colour heightening as she slowly lifted her eyes to
his, "yes--why this solemn tone?"

"If ever--in the days that come--one never knows what may happen--if ever
you should find that you had changed toward me----"

"Yes?"

"I ask you--don't promise--I never want you to promise me anything--I want
you always--at every moment--to be perfectly free. So I just ask that you
will let me see it. Then we can talk about it frankly, and we can decide
what is best to do."

"But--suppose--you see I might still not wish to wound you--" she
suggested, half teasing, half in earnest.

"It seems to me now that it is impossible that we can ever change. It seems
to me--" he sat on the wide arm of her chair, and leaned over until his
head touched hers, "that if you were to change it would break my heart. But
if you were to change and were to hide it from me, I should find it out
some day and----" "And what----"

"It would be worse--a broken heart, a horror of myself, a--a contempt for
you."

"Whatever comes, I'll be myself or try to be. Is that what you mean?"

"Exactly."

"And if you change?"

"But I shall not!"

"Why do you say that so positively?"

"Because--well, there are some things that we wish to believe and half
believe, and some things that we believe that we believe, and somethings
that we _know_. I _know_ about you--about my love for you."

"It is strange in a way, isn't it?" Marian was gently drawing her fingers
through his. "This is all so different from what I used to think love would
be. I used to picture to myself a man, something like you in appearance,
only taller and fair, who would be my master, who would make me do what he
wished. I think a woman always dreams of a lover who will be strong enough
to be her ruler. And here----"

"So I am not the strong man that you look up to and tremble before? We
shall see."

"Don't laugh at me. I mean that instead I have a man who makes me rule
myself. You make me feel strong, not weak, and proud, not humble. You make
me respect myself so."

"The democracy of love--freedom, equality, fraternity. Don't you like it?"

"Madame is served." It was the servant holding back one of the portieres,
his face expressionless, his eyes down.

       *       *       *       *       *

Happiness evades description or analysis. We can only say that it reaches
its highest point when a man and a woman, intelligent, appreciative,
sympathetic, endowed with youth, health and freedom, are devoting their
energies solely and determinedly to verifying each a preconceived idea of
the other.

"And what do you think of it by this time?"

Marian asked the question in the pause after a twenty minutes' canter over
a straightaway stretch through the pines.

"Of what?" Howard inquired. "I mean of what phase of it. Of you?"

"Well,--yes, of me--after a week."

"As I expected, only more so--more than I could have imagined. And you,
what do you think?"

"It's very different from what I expected. It seemed to me beforehand that
you, even you, would 'get on my nerves' just a little at times. I didn't
expect you to appreciate--to feel my moods and to avoid doing--or is it
that you simply cannot do--anything jarring. You have amazing instincts or
else--" Marian looked at him and smiled mischievously, "or else you have
been well educated. Oh, I don't mind--not in the least. No matter what the
cause, I'm glad--glad--glad that you have been taught how to treat a
woman."

"I see you are determined to destroy me," Howard was in jest, yet in
earnest. "I am not used to being flattered. I have never had but one
critic, and I have trained him to be severe and uncharitable. Now if you
set me up on a high altar and wave the censers and cry 'glory, glory,
glory,' I'll lose my head. You have a terrible responsibility. I trust you
and I believe everything you say."

"I'll begin my duties as critic as soon as we go back to--to earth. But at
present I'm going to be selfish. You see it makes me happier to blind
myself to your faults."

They rode in silence for a few moments and then she said:

"I wish I had your feeling about--about democracy. I see your point of view
but I can't take it. I know that you are right but I'm afraid my education
is too strong for me. I don't believe in the people as you do. It's
beautiful when you say it. I like to hear you. And I would not wish you to
feel as I do. I'd hate it if you did. It would be stooping, grovelling for
you to make distinctions among people. But----"

"Oh, but I do make distinctions among people--so much so that I have never
had a friend in my life until you came. I have been on intimate terms with
many, but no one except you has been on intimate terms with me. Oh, yes,
I'm one of the most exclusive persons in the world."

"That sounds like autocracy, doesn't it?" laughed Marian. "But you know I
don't mean that. You think all the others are just as good as you are, only
in different ways, whereas I feel that they're not. You don't mind
vulgarity and underbreeding because you are perfectly indifferent to people
so long as they don't try to jump the fence about your own little private
enclosure."

"Oh, I believe in letting other people alone, and I insist upon being let
alone myself. You see you make the whole world revolve about social
distinctions. The fact is, isn't it, that social distinctions are mere
trifles--"

"You oughtn't to waste time arguing with a prejudice. I admit that what I
believe and feel is unreasonable. But I can't change an instinct. To me
some people are better than others and are entitled to more, and ought to
be looked up to and respected."

Howard had an answer on the tip of his tongue. His passion for high
principle seemed to have been rekindled for the time by his love and in
this tranquillising environment. He felt strongly tempted to reason with
her unreasonableness, thus practically boasted as a virtue. It seemed so
unworthy, this streak of snobbery, so senseless in an American at most
three generations away from manual labour. But he had made up his mind long
ago to trust to new surroundings, new interests to create in her a spirit
more in sympathy with his career.

"She is too intelligent, too high-minded," he often reassured himself, "to
cling to this stupidity of class-feeling. She has heard nothing but
class-distinction all her life. Now that she is away from those people,
with their petty routine of petty ideas, she will begin to see things as
they are."

So he suppressed the argument and, instead, said in a tone of mock-pity:
"Poor fallen queen--to marry beneath her. How she must have fought against
the idea of such a plebeian partner."

"Plebeian--you?" Marian looked at him proudly. "Why, one has only to see
you to know."

"Yes, plebeian. I shall conceal it no longer. My ancestors were plain,
ordinary, common, untitled Americans."

"Why, so were mine," she laughed.

"Don't! You distress me. I should never have married you had I known that."

"I _am_ absurd, am I not?" Marian said gaily. "But let me have my
craze for well-mannered people and I'll leave you your craze for the--the
masses."

They began to canter. Howard was smiling in spite of his irritation; for it
always irritated him to have her refuse to see his point in this
matter--his distinction between a person as a friend and a person as a
sociological unit.

He worked for an hour or two every morning and sometimes in the evening,
Marian not far from his desk, so seated that when she turned the page of
her book she could lift her eyes and look at him. She read the papers
diligently every day for the first week. At the outset she thought she was
interested. But she knew so little about newspaper details that she soon
had to confess to herself that she was in fact interested in Howard as her
husband and lover, and that his career interested her only in a broad,
general way. What he talked about, that she understood and liked and was
able to discuss. But the newspapers and the news direct suggested nothing
to her, bored her.

"Just read that," he would say, pointing to an item. She would read it and
wonder what he meant.

"It seems to me," she would think, "that it wouldn't in the least matter if
that had not been printed." Then she would ask evasively but with an
assumption of interest, "What are you going to do about it?"

And he would explain the meaning between the lines; the hinted facts that
ought to be brought out; the possibilities of getting a piece of news that
would attract wide attention. And she would see it, sometimes clearly,
usually vaguely; and she would admire him, but resume her unconquerable
indifference to news.

She was soon looking at the paper only to read what he wrote; and she often
thought how much more interesting he was as a talker than as a writer.
"I'll start right when we get to town," she was constantly promising
herself. "It must, must, must be _our_ work."

Howard was, as she had told him, acutely sensitive to her moods. He did not
formulate it to himself but simply obeyed an instinct which defined for him
the limits of her interest. Before they had been at Lakewood a month, he
was working alone without any expectation of sympathy or interest from her
and without the slightest sense of loss in not getting it. Why should he
miss that which he had never had, had never counted upon getting? He had
always been mentally alone, most alone in the plans and actions bearing
directly upon his own career. He was perfectly content to have her as the
companion of his leisure.

Possibly, if he had been insistent, or if they had been in real sympathy
instead of in only surface sympathy in most respects, she might have become
interested in his work, might have impelled him to right development. But
her distaste and inertia and his habit of debating and deciding questions
as to the paper in his own mind, the fear of boring her, the dread of
intruding upon her rights to her own individual tastes and feelings,
restrained him without his having a sense of restraint.

When, after two months, they went up to town to stay, their course of life
was settled, though Marian was protesting that it was not and Howard was
unconscious of there having been any settlement, or anything to settle.



XXI.

WAVERING.

Their home was an apartment at Twenty-ninth Street and Madison Avenue--just
large enough for two with its eleven rooms, all bearing the stamp of
Marian's individuality. She had a keen sense of the beautiful and she had
given her thought and most of her time between the early autumn and the
wedding to making an attractive home. He had not seen her work until they
came together in the late afternoon of a day in the last week of February.

"You--everywhere you," he said, as they inspected room after room. "I don't
see how I could add anything to that. It is beautiful--the things you have
brought together, I mean, the furniture, curtains, carpets, pictures, all
beautiful in themselves, but--"

He was looking at her in that way which made her feel his great love for
her even more deeply than when he put his arms about her and kissed her.
"It reminds me of what I so often think about you. Nature gave you beauty
but you make it wonderful because _you_ shine through it, give it the
force, the expression of your individuality. Other women have noses, eyes,
chins, mouths as beautiful as yours. But only you produce such effects with
the materials. I don't express it very well but--you understand?"

"Yes, I understand." She was leaning against him, her head resting upon his
shoulder. "And you like your home?"

"We shall be happy here. I feel it in the air. This is a temple of the
three great gods--Freedom, Love and Happiness. And--we'll keep the fires on
the altars blazing, won't we?"

His hours were most irregular. Sometimes he was off to work early in the
morning. Again he would not rise until noon. Sometimes he did not go to the
office after dinner, and again he came hurriedly to dinner, not having the
time to dress, and left immediately afterward to be gone until two, three
or even four in the morning. At first Marian tried to follow his
irregularities; but she was soon compelled to give up. As he most often
breakfasted about ten o'clock, she arranged to breakfast regularly at that
hour. If he was not yet up, she waited about the house until she had seen
him, listened while he talked of those "everlasting newspapers," praised
his work a great deal, criticised it little and that gently. She made few
and feeble struggles to interest herself in newspapers as newspapers. But
he did not encourage her; other interests, domestic and social, clamoured
for her time; and the idea of being directly useful to him in his work
faded from her mind.

If she had loved him more sympathetically, if she had not been so
super-sensitive to his passion for complete freedom, she would have
resented what in another kind of man would have seemed frank neglect of
her. But she thought she understood him and was deceived by his
self-deceiving conviction that his work was her service and that the
highest proof of his devotion to her was devotion to "our" career. Thus
there was no bitterness or reproach of him, rarely much intensity, in her
regret that they were together so little.

"Good morning, stranger!" she said, as he came into the dining room one day
in early June.

He kissed her hand and then the "topknot" as he called the point into which
her hair was gathered at the crown of her head. "It has been four days
since I saw you," he said. And he sat opposite her looking at her with an
expression of sadness which she had not seen since the first days of their
acquaintance.

"I have missed you--you know," she was trying to look cheerful, "but I
understand--"

"Yes," he interrupted. "You understand what I intend, understand that I
mean my life to be for _us_. But sometimes--this morning--I think I am
mistaken. It seems to me that I am letting this--" he threw his hand
contemptuously toward the heap of morning newspapers beside him, "this
trash comes between us. You are my real career, not these, and under the
pretense of working for us I am spending my whole life, my one life, my one
chance to help to make us happy, upon these." And he pushed the bundle of
papers off the table.

"Something has depressed you." She was leaning her elbow upon the table and
her chin upon her hand and was looking at him wistfully. "I wouldn't have
you any different. You must follow the law of your nature. You must work at
your ideal of being useful and influential in the world. You would not be
satisfied to take my hand and trudge off with me through Arcadia to pick
flowers and weave them into crowns for me. Nor should I," she laughed, "or
I try to think I shouldn't."

"Let us go abroad for two months," he said. "I am tired, so tired. I am so
weary of all these others, men and things."

"Can you spare the time?"

"I"--he corrected himself--"we have earned a vacation. It will be for me
the first real vacation since I left Yale--thirteen years ago. I am growing
narrow and stale. Let us get away and forget. Shall we?"

"The sooner the better--if this is not a passing mood. What has depressed
you?" she persisted.

"What seems to be a piece of very good luck." He laughed almost sneeringly.
"They have given me a share in the paper, twenty thousand in stock--which
means a fixed income of five thousand a year so long as the paper pays what
it does now--twenty-five per cent. And they offer me twenty thousand more
at par to be paid for within two years. We are in a fair way to be rich."

"They don't want to lose you, evidently," she said. "But why does this make
you sad? We are independent now--absolutely independent, both of us."

"Yes--we are rich. Together we have more than thirty-five thousand a year.
But it is not what I wanted. I wanted to be free. Can a man be free who is
rich, and rich in the way we are? Will my mind be open? Shall I dare to act
and speak the truth? Or will our property, our environment, speak for me?"

"I can't imagine you a slave to mere dollars."

"Can't you? Well, I am afraid--I'm really afraid. I have always said that
if I wished to--enslave a people I would make them prosperous, would give
them property, make them dependent upon their dollars. Then the fear of
losing their dollars, their investments, would make them endure any
oppression. Freedom's battles were never fought by men with full stomachs
and full purses."

"But rich men have given up everything for freedom--Washington was a rich
man."

"Ah, but how many Washingtons has the world produced? I see the time coming
when I shall have to choose. I see it and--I dread it."

She rose and stood behind him leaning over with her arms about his neck and
her check against his.

"You are brave. You are strong," she whispered. "You will meet that crisis
if it comes and I have no fear, Mr. Valiant-for-Truth, as to how the battle
will go."

He was glad that he did not have to face her eyes just then. "We will go
abroad next Wednesday week," he whispered, "and we'll be happy in
France--in Switzerland--in Holland--I want to see the park at the Hague
again; and the tall trees with their straight big trunks green with moss;
and the boughs meeting over the canals and making the clear water so black;
and the snow-white swans sailing statelily about."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the Atlantic between him and his work, he was able to suspend the
habit of so many years. You would have fancied them just married, at
whatever stage of their wanderings you might have met them. They were
always laughing and talking--an endless flow of high spirits, absorption
each in the other. They rose when they pleased, went to bed when it suited
them. They had a manservant and a maid with them to relieve them of all the
details. They travelled only in the afternoons, and then not far. If they
missed one train, they cheerfully waited for another.

"I think we are achieving my ideal of vacation," he said.

"What is that--perfect idleness? We certainly are idle. I shouldn't have
believed you could be so idle."

"Perfect idleness--yes. But more than that. I aimed far higher. My ideal
was perfect irresponsibility. We have become like the wind that bloweth
where it listeth."

And again, she said: "Let me see, what day is this?"

"I think it is Thursday or Friday," he replied. "But it may be Sunday. I
can assure you that it is afternoon, late afternoon, and I think we ought
to dress for dinner soon. After dinner, if you still care to know, and will
remind me, I'll try to find out the day. But I'm sure we shall have
forgotten before to-morrow."

Howard got an extension of his leave of absence and they roamed about
England in August, reaching New York on the first day of September. Marian
went on to Mrs. Carnarvon at Newport and Howard took rooms at the Waldorf.
She stayed away a full week, then came to town, opened their apartment, and
surprised him with a formal invitation to dinner.

He came like a guest and they went through all the formalities of meeting
for the first time, of increasing intimacy--condensing a complete courtship
into one evening.

"I thought you had had enough of me for the time," he said, as they sat in
the wide window-seat, he tracing with his forefinger the line of the straps
over her bare shoulders.

"And I thought that I would give you a chance to forget how nice I am and
so give you the pleasure of learning all over again. But it was so lonely
and miserable up there. 'Who can come after the king?'"

"Sometimes I think I ought to stir about more--meet the men who lead in the
city. But it seems such a waste of time when I can come and call upon you."

"But might it not be better in the long run if you did meet these men?
Mightn't it make your getting on quicker and easier?"

"Perhaps--if I were a gregarious animal, but I'm not. I'm shy and solitary
and hard to get acquainted with. And it takes time to make friends.
Besides, in making friends you also make enemies, and one enemy can do you
more harm than all your friends can do you good. Then too, friends take up
too much time. We have so little time and--we can spend it to so much
better advantage--can't we?"

Marian pushed herself closer against him and presently said dreamily: "So
much happiness, such utter happiness which no one, nothing can take away. I
wonder when and how the first storm will come?"

"It needn't come at all--not for a long, long time. And when it does--we
can weather it, don't you think?"

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next two months they were together more than they had been in
the spring. He imposed day office hours upon himself and did no work in the
evenings except the correcting of editorial proofs which he had sent to him
at the house, at the theatre, or at whatever restaurant they were dining.
And at midnight he called up the office on the telephone and talked with
Mr. King or Mr. Vroom about the news in hand and the programme for
presenting it in the next morning's paper.

But as "people"--meaning Marian's friends--returned to town, they fell into
the former routine. It was in part his doing, in part hers. He was now
thirty-seven years old and his mind, always of a serious cast, was
intolerant of trifles and triflers.

Marian's range of interests was shallower but much wider than his. Her
beauty, her cleverness, her tact caused her to be sought. She invited many
to their house and accepted more and more invitations. At first she never
went without him. But he was sometimes compelled by his work to send her
alone. He rarely went except for her sake--because he thought going about
amused her. And he was glad and relieved when she began to go without him,
instead of spending the evenings in solitude.

"There is no reason why you should punish yourself and punish me because
you had the ill luck to marry a working-man," he said. "It cannot be
agreeable to sit here all by yourself evening after evening. And it
depresses me when I am at the office at night to think of you as lonely. It
makes me happier in my work--my pleasure, you know--to think of you
enjoying yourself."

"But aren't you afraid that some one will steal me?" she asked, laughingly.

"Not I." He was smiling proudly at her. "If you could be stolen, if you
could be happier anywhere than with me, you have only to let me into the
plot."

"There are some women who would not like that."

"And there are men who wouldn't feel as I do. But you and I, we belong to a
class all by ourselves, don't we?"

Apparently they were as devoted each to the other as ever. But each now
sought a separate happiness--he perforce in his work, she perforce in the
only way left open to her. When they were together, which meant several
hours every day and usually one whole day in the week, they were at once
seemingly absorbed each in the other with all the rest as background. But
none the less, they were leading separate lives, with separate interests,
separate tastes, separate modes of thinking. The "bourgeois" life which
they had planned--both standing behind the counter and both adding up the
results of the day's business after they had put up the shutters, two as
one in all the interests of life--became a dead and forgotten dream.




XXII.

THE SHENSTONE EPISODE.


On the way to or from the opera or a party, she would peep in on him,
watching the back of his head as he bent over his desk or read away at some
dull-looking book, wishing that he would feel her presence and turn with
that smile which was always hers from him, yet fearing to make a sound and
compel his attention.

"At times I think," she said one day when he caught her in his arms on a
sudden impulse and kissed her, "that the reason you don't try to rule me is
because you don't care enough."

"That's precisely it." He was smoothing her eyebrows with his forefinger.
"I don't care enough about ruling. I don't care enough for the sort of love
that responds to 'must.'"

"But a woman likes to have 'must' said to her sometimes."

"Does she? Do you? Well--I'll say 'must' to you. You must love me freely
and voluntarily, or not at all. You must do as you please."

"But don't you see that that drives me from you often, keeps us apart in
many ways. Now if you compelled me to think as you do, to like what you
like--"

"But I couldn't. Then you would no longer be _you_. And I like you so
well just as you are that I would not change an idea in your head."

Marian sighed and went away to her dinner party. She felt that she was in
danger. "Not of falling in love with some other man," she thought, "for
that's impossible. But if a man were to come along who invited me to be
interested in his work, to keep him at whatever he was doing, I'd accept
and that would lead on and on--where?"

She soon had an opportunity to answer that question. Howard went away to
Washington to assist the party leaders in putting through a difficult
tariff-reform bill which all the protected interests were fighting. He
expected to be gone a week; but week after week passed and he was still at
the capital, directing the paper by telegraph and sending Marian hurried
notes postponing his return. She was going about daily, early and late, her
life vacant, her mind restlessly seeking occupation, interest.

After he had been gone three weeks she found herself at dinner at Mrs.
Provost's next to a tall, fair-haired athletic young man of about her own
age. Something in his expression--perhaps the amused way in which he
studied the faces of the others--attracted her to him. She glanced over at
his card. It read "Mr. Shenstone."

"It doesn't add much to your information, does it?" he smiled, as he caught
her glance rising from the card.

"Nothing," she confessed candidly. "I never heard of you before."

"And yet I've been splashing about, trying to attract attention to myself,
for twelve years."

"Perhaps not in this particular pond."

"No, that is true."

"I was wondering what you do--lawyer, doctor, journalist, business man or
what.

"And what did you conclude?"

"I concluded that you did nothing."

"You are right. But I try--I paint."

"Portraits?"

"Yes."

"That explains your way of looking at people. Only, you'll get no customers
if you paint them as you see them."

"I only see what they see when they look in the mirror."

"Yes, but you see it impartial--or rather, I should say, cynically."

"Thank you."

"For what?"

"For calling me cynical. The two keenest pleasures a man can attain are for
a woman to call him a cynic and for a woman to call him a devil with the
women."

"Are you a 'devil with the women'?"

"Not I--not any more than I am a cynic. But let us talk about you--I am
about exhausted as a topic of conversation. Why do you look so
discontented?"

"Because I have nothing to occupy my mind."

"No children?"

"None--and no dogs."

"No husband?"

"Husbands are busy."

"So you are the typical American woman--the American instinct for doing,
the universal woman's instinct for sunshine and laziness; the husband
absorbed in his business or profession with his domestic life as an
incident; the wife--like you."

"That is right, and wrong--nearer right than wrong, a little unjust to the
husband."

"Oh, it's probably your fault that you are not absorbed in his business or
profession. It ought to be as much yours as his. What does he do?"

"He edits a newspaper."

"Oh, he's _the_ Mr. Howard. A very interesting, a very remarkable
man."

Marian was delighted by this appreciation. She talked with Shenstone again
after dinner and was pleased that he was to be in the same box with her at
the opera the next night. He had spent much of his time on the other side
of the Atlantic. He was unusually well educated for an artist's, and his
mind was not developed in one direction only. Like Marian, his point of
view was artistic and emotional. Like her he had a reverence for tradition,
a deference to caste--the latter not offensive for the same reason that
hers was not, because good birth and good breeding made him of the "high
caste" and not a cringer with his eyes craned upward. It seemed in him, as
in her, a sort of self-respect.

Marian showed a candid liking for his society and he was quick to take
advantage of it. For a month they saw more and more each of the other, she
discreet without deliberation and he discreet with deliberation. He talked
to her of his work, of his ambition. He showed her himself without egotism.
He made an impression upon her so distinct and so favourable that she
admitted to herself that he was the most fascinating man--except one--whom
she had ever met.

When Howard at last returned, defeated by corruption within his own party
and for the time disgusted with politics, she at once had Shenstone at the
house to dine. "What do you think of Mr. Shenstone?" she asked when they
were alone.

"No wonder you're enthusiastic about him. As he talked to me, I could
hardly keep from laughing. It was your own views, almost your own words. He
has the look of a great man. I think he will 'arrive,' as they say in the
Bowery."

Howard went out of his way to be agreeable to Shenstone, often inviting him
to the house and giving him a commission to paint Marian. For the rest of
the winter Shenstone was constantly in Marian's company; so constantly that
they were gossiped about, and all the women who were unpleasantly discussed
"for cause" conspired to throw them together as much as possible.

One evening in the very end of the winter, Howard called to Marian from his
dressing room: "Why, lady, Shenstone's gone, hasn't he? I've just read a
note from him."

There was a pause before Marian answered in a constrained voice: "Yes, he
sailed to-day."

Howard was tying his bow. He paused at the curious tone, then smiled
mysteriously to himself. He put on his waistcoat and coat and knocked on
the half-open door. "May I come in?" he asked.

"Yes--I'm waiting for dinner to be announced."

She was sitting before the fire, very beautiful in her evening gown. She
seemed not to observe that he had entered but stared on into the flames. He
stood beside her, looking down at her with the half mocking, half tender
smile. Presently he sat upon the arm of her chair and took one of her
hands. "Poor, friendless, beautiful lady," he said softly.

She glanced up quickly, her cheeks flaming but her eyes clear and frank.
"Why do you say that?" she asked in the tone of one who knows why.

"Other women will not be her friends because they are jealous of her, and
as for the men--how can a man be really a friend to a woman, a fascinating,
sympathetic woman?"

Marian hid her face against the lapel of his coat. "He told me," she
whispered, "and then he went away."

"He always does tell her. But----"

"But--what?"

"She doesn't always send him away. Poor fellow! Still, he went into it with
his eyes open."

"He was very nice. He told it in a roundabout way. And I wasn't a bit
afraid that he'd--he'd--you know. But I got to thinking about how I'd feel
if he did--did touch me. And it made me--nervous."

There was a long pause, then she went on: "I wonder how you'd feel about
touching another woman?"

"I? Dear me, I wonder! I never thought. You see I'm such a domestic,
unattractive creature----"

"Don't laugh at me, please," she pleaded.

"I'm not laughing. Underneath, I'm thinking--thinking what I would do if I
met you and lost you. It's very black on the Atlantic for one pair of eyes
to-night."

"And the worst of it is," she said, "that my vanity is flattered and I'm
not really sorry for him."

"Rather proud of her conquest, is she?"

"Yes, it pleased me to have him care."

"She likes to think that he'll carry his broken heart to the grave, does
she?"

"Yes. Isn't it shameful?"

"Shameful? Shameless. I have always held that even the best woman dearly
loves to ruin a man. It's such a triumph. And the more she loves him, the
more she'd like to ruin him--that is, if ruin came solely through love for
her and didn't involve her."

"But I would not want to ruin you."

"If that seemed to be the supreme test of my love for you--are you sure?
I'm not. There's Thomas, knocking to announce dinner."

The Shenstone incident was apparently closed. Marian, a most attractive
woman of thirty, absorbed in a social life that demanded all her physical
and mental energy as well as all of her time, did not long vividly remember
him. But he had given her a standard by which she unconsciously measured
her husband. She contrasted the life he had promised her, the life
Shenstone reminded her of, with the life that was--so material, so
suspiciously physical when it professed to be loving, so suspiciously chill
when it professed to be friendly. She thrust aside these thoughts as
disloyal and false. But they persisted in returning.

If she had been less appreciative of Howard's intellect, less fascinated by
the charm of his personality, she would soon have become one of the
"misunderstood" women in search of "consolation." Instead, she turned her
mind in the direction natural to her character--social ambition.




XXIII.

EXPANDING AND CONTRACTING.


In such a city as New York, to be deliberately careful about money is the
only way to keep within one's income, whether it be vast or small. There
are temptations to buy at the end of every glance of the eye. The merchants
are crafty in producing new and insidious allurements, in creating new and
expensive tastes. But these might be resisted were it not that the habits
of all one's associates are constantly and all but irresistibly stimulating
the faculty of imitation.

Neither Howard nor Marian had been brought up to be watchful about money.
Both had been accustomed to having their wants supplied. And now that they
had a household and a growing income, it was a matter of course that their
expenditures should steadily expand. Before three years had passed they
were spending more than double the sum which at the outset they had fixed
upon as their limit. A merely decent and self-respecting return of the
hospitalities they accepted, a carriage and pair and two saddle horses and
the servants to look after them--these items accounted for the increase.
They looked upon this as really necessary expenditure and soon would have
found that curtailment involved genuine deprivation. From the very
beginning each step in expansion made the next logical and inevitable, made
the plea of necessity seem valid.

An aunt of Marian's died, leaving her a "small" house--worth perhaps a
quarter of a million--near the Avenue in Sixty-fifth Street, and eighty
thousand in cash. About the same time Stokely told Howard of a fine
speculative opportunity in certain copper properties. Howard hesitated. He
knew that the way of speculation was the way of bondage for his newspaper
and for him. But this particular adventure seemed harmless and he yielded.
The money was invested and within a few months was producing an income of
fifteen thousand a year which promised to be steady. Howard's ownership of
stock in the paper increased; and as the profits advanced swiftly with its
swift growth in its illustrated form, his own income was nearly fifty
thousand a year. They were growing very rich. There was no longer the
slightest anxiety as to money in his mind.

"You know the great dread I had in marrying," he said to her one day, "was
lest I should make myself and you dependents, should some day sacrifice my
freedom to my fear of losing--happiness."

"Yes, and very foolish you were, not to have more confidence in yourself
and in me."

"Perhaps. But what I am thinking is that you have brought me luck. I am
free, beyond anybody's reach. I could quit the paper to-morrow and we
should hardly have to change our style of living even if I did not get
something else to do."

"Style of living--" in that phrase lay the key to the change that was
swiftly going on in Howard's mind and mental attitude. It is not easy for a
man with environment wholly in his favour to keep his point of view
correct, to keep his horizon wide and clear, his sense of proportion just.
It is next to impossible for him to do so when his environment opposes.

The man who looks out from misery and squalor upon misery and squalor is,
if he thinks at all, naturally an anarchist. To him the established order
shows only injustice and persistence of injustice. The man who looks out
from luxury and ease and well-being upon luxury and ease and well-being is
forced by the very limitations of the human mind to an over-reverence for
the established order. He is unreasonably suspicious of anything that
threatens change. "When I'm comfortable all's well in the world; change
might bring discomfort to me." And he flatters himself that he is a
"conservative."

Howard had had a long training at the correct standpoint and in right
thinking. But the influences were there, were at work, were destroying his
devotion to a social and political ideal wholly alien to the life he was
now living under the leading of his wife. He did not blame her, indeed he
could not justly have blamed her, for his falling away from what he knew
were correct principles for him. While she had brought him into this
environment, while at first it was in large part for her that he gave so
much time and thought to the accumulation of wealth, soon love of luxury,
dependence upon a train of servants, fondness for the great extravagances
to which New York tempts the rich and those living near the rich, became
stronger in him than it was in her. And through the inevitable reaction of
environment upon the man, the central point in his valuation of men and
women tended to shift from the fundamentals, mind and character, to the
surface qualities--dress and style and manners and refinement, and even
dress.

This process of demoralisation was well advanced when they moved from the
apartment. After four years of "expansion" there, they had begun to feel
cramped; and a year after Marian inherited the house Howard had progressed
to the mental, the moral, the financial state where it seemed natural,
logical, practically necessary that they should set up a real New York
"establishment."

"Isn't this just the house for us?" she said. "I hate huge, big houses.
Like you, I think the taste of the occupants should be everywhere. Now this
house is just big enough. You don't know how wonderful it would be."

"Oh, yes, I do," he laughed, "and you must try it." He was as enthusiastic
as she.

In the late autumn the house was ready; and there was not a more artistic
interior in New York. It was not so much the result of great expense as of
intelligence and taste. It was an expression of an individuality--a
revelation of a woman's beautiful mind, inspired by love.

"At last I have something to interest, to occupy me," she said. "This is
our very own, through and through our own. It will be such a pleasure to me
to keep it always like this."

"You--degenerated into a household drudge," he mocked. "Why, you used to
laugh at me when I held up a wife who was a good housekeeper as one of my
ideals."

"Did I?" she answered. "Well, as you would say, see what I've come to
through living with--a member of the working-classes."

Howard's own particular part of this house included a library with a small
study next to it. In the study was a most attractive table with plenty of
room to spread about books and papers, a huge divan in the corner and a
fire-place near by. He found himself doing more and more of his work at
home. There were not so many interruptions as at the office, the beauty of
the surroundings, the consciousness that "she" was not far away--all
combined to keep him at home and to enable him to do more and better work
there.

He was justly and greatly proud of her achievement; and where he used to be
more regretful than he admitted even to himself when they had guests, he
was now glad to see others about, admiring her taste, appreciating her
skill as a hostess and giving him opportunities to look at her from an ever
new point of view.

Of course these guests were almost all "_their_ kind of
people"--amiable, well mannered persons who thought and acted in that most
conventional of moulds, the mould of "good society." They fitted into the
surroundings, they did their part toward making those surroundings
luxurious--a "wallow of self-complacent content." And this environment soon
suited and fitted him exactly.

But to her he was still The Democrat. She loved him in the way and to the
degree which her character, as the years had developed it, permitted her to
love. And this love, or rather admiring respect, was wholly based upon her
ideal of him, her belief in the honesty and intensity of his convictions.
While she did not share them, she had breadth enough to admire them and to
regard them as high removed above her own ideas to which for herself she
held tenaciously, instinct and association and "tradition" triumphing over
reason.

Howard retained his ideal of her, never examining her closely, never seeing
or suspecting what a pale love she gave him and how shrivelled had become
the part of her nature which she and he both assumed was most strongly
developed. He knew how she idealised him and did not dare to undeceive her.
Therefore he practised toward her a hypocrisy that grew steadily more
disgraceful, yet grew so gradually that there was no single moment at which
he could conveniently halt and "straighten the record." At first he was
often and heartily ashamed of himself; but by degrees this feeling deadened
into cynical insensibility and he was only ashamed to let her see him as he
really was. She had kept her self-respect. She esteemed self-respect at the
exalted valuation he had formerly put upon it. What if she should find him
out?

       *       *       *       *       *

When the famous "coal conspiracy" was formed, three of the men conspicuous
in it were among their intimates--that is, their families were often at his
house and he and Marian were often at theirs. Yet he had never made a more
relentless attack. Nor did he, either in the news columns or on the
editorial page, conceal the connection of his three friends with the
conspiracy.

"Mrs. Mercer was here this morning," Marian said as they were waiting for
the butler to announce dinner. She was flushed and embarrassed.

Howard laughed. "And did she tell you what a dreadful husband you had?"

"Oh, she didn't blame you at all. She said they all knew how perfectly
upright you were. Only, she said you did not understand and were doing Mr.
Mercer a great injustice."

"Well, what do you think?"

"Why--I can't believe--is it possible, dear--I was just reading one of your
editorials. Can Mr. Mercer be in such a scheme? The way she told it to me,
he and the others were really doing a lot of people a valuable service,
putting their property on a paying basis, enabling the railroads to meet
their expenses and to keep thousands and thousands of men employed."

"Poor Mercer!" Howard said ironically. "Poor misunderstood philanthropist!
What a pity that that sort of benevolence has to be carried on by bribing
judges and prosecutors and legislatures, by making the poor shiver and
freeze, by subtracting from the pleasures and adding to the anxieties of
millions. One would almost say that such a philanthropy had better not be
undertaken. It is so likely to be misunderstood by the 'unruly classes.'"

"Oh, I knew you were right. I told her you must be right, that you never
wrote until you knew."

"And what was the result?"

"Well, we are making some very bitter enemies."

"I doubt it. I suspect that before long they'll come wheedling about in the
hope that I'll let up on them or be a little easier next time."

"I'm sure I do not care what they do," said Marian, drawing herself up.
"All I care for is--you, and to see you do your duty at whatever cost or
regardless of cost--" she was leaning over the back of his chair with her
arms about his neck and her lips very near to his ear--"you are my love
without fear and without reproach."

"Listen, dear." He took her hand and drew her arms more closely about his
neck. "Suppose that the lines were drawn--as they may be any day. Suppose
that we had to choose, with all these friends of yours, with our position,
yes, even the place I have won in my profession, my place as editor--all
that we now have on the one side; and on the other side a thankless,
unprofitable, apparently useless standing up for the right. Wouldn't you
miss your friends?"

"_All_ our friends? And who will be on the other side?"

"Almost no one that we know--that you would care to call upon or go about
with or have here at the house. Nobody with any great amount of wealth or
social position. Those other people who are in town when it is said 'Nobody
is in town now!'"

She did not answer.

"Where would you be?" he repeated.

"Oh, I wasn't thinking of that." She came around and sat on his knee.
"Where? Why, there's only one 'where' in all this world for
me--'wheresoever thou goest.'"

And so the half-formed impulse to begin to straighten himself out with her
was smothered by her.

Both were silent through dinner. She was thinking how honest, how fearless
he was, how he loved her, how eagerly she would follow him, how blessed she
was in the love of such a man. And he--he was regretting that his "pose"
had carried him so far; he was wishing that he had not been so bitter in
his attacks upon his and his wife's friends, the coal conspirators. When he
had definitely cast in his lot with "the shearers" why persist in making
his hypocrisy more abominable by protesting more loudly than ever in behalf
of "the sheep?" Above all, why had he let his habit of voluble denunciation
lead him into this hypocrisy with the woman he loved?

He admitted to himself that "causes" had ceased to interest him except as
they might contribute to the advancement of his power. Power!--that was his
ambition now. First he had wished to have an independent income in order to
be free. When he had achieved that, it was at the sacrifice of his mental
freedom. And now, with the clearness of self-knowledge which only men of
great ability have, he knew that the one cause for which he would make
sacrifices was--himself.

"Of what are you thinking so gloomily?" she interrupted.

"Oh--I--let me see--well, I was thinking what a fraud I am; and that I
wished I could dupe myself as completely as I can dupe--"

"Me?" she laughed. "Oh, we're all frauds--shocking frauds. I wouldn't have
you see me as I really am for anything."

Although her remark was a commonplace, of small meaning, as he knew, he got
comfort out of it, so desperately was he casting about for some
consolation.

"That's true, my dear," he said. "And I wish that you liked the kind of a
fraud I am as well as I like the kind of a fraud you are."




XXIV.

"MR. VALIANT-FOR-TRUTH."


Stokely came rushing into his office the next morning. "Good God, old man,"
he exclaimed, "What's the meaning of this attack on the coal roads?"

Howard flushed with resentment, not at what Stokely said, but at his tone.

"Now, don't get on your high horse. I don't think you understand."
Stokely's tone had moderated. "Don't you know that the Delaware Valley road
is in this?"

Howard started. He had just invested two hundred thousand dollars in that
stock on Stokely's advice "No, I didn't know it." He recovered himself.
"And furthermore I don't give a damn." He struck his desk angrily. His
simulation of incorruptible indignation for the moment half deceived
himself.

"Why, man, if this infernal roast is kept up, you'll lose a hundred
thousand. Then there are my interests. I'm up to my neck in this deal."

"My advice to you is to get out of it. I'm sorry, but you know as well as I
do that the thing is infamous." "Infamous--nonsense! It will double our
dividends and the consumers won't feel it."

"Let us not discuss it, Stokely. There--don't say anything you'll regret."

"But--"

"Now, Stokely--don't argue it with me."

Stokely put on his hat, stood up and looked at Howard with sullen
admiration. "You will drive away the last friend you've got on earth, if
you keep this up. Good morning."

Howard sent a smile of cynical amusement after him, then stared
thoughtfully into the mass of papers on his desk for five, ten, fifteen
minutes. When his plan was formed he touched the electric button.

"Please tell Mr. King I'd like to see him," he said to the answering boy.

Mr. King entered with a bundle of legal documents. "I suppose it's the
injunction you want to discuss," he said. "We've got the papers all ready.
It's simply great. Those fellows will be in a corner and will have to give
up. They can't get away from us. The price of coal will drop half a dollar
within a week, I'll bet."

"I'm afraid you are over sanguine," Howard said. "I've just been going over
the matter with my lawyer. But leave the papers with me. And--about the
news--be careful what you say. We've been going a little strong. I think a
little less personal matter would be advisable."

Mr. King was amazed and looked it. He slowly pulled himself together to
say, "All right, Mr. Howard. I think I understand." He laid the papers down
and departed. Outside the door he laughed softly to himself. "Somebody's
been cutting his comb, I guess," he murmured. "Well, I didn't think he'd
last. New York always gets 'em when they're worth while."

As the door closed behind King, Howard drew out the lowest and deepest
drawer of his desk. It was half-filled with long-undisturbed pamphlets and
newspaper cuttings. He tossed in the injunction papers. A cloud of dust
flew up and settled thickly upon them. He shut the drawer.

He went to the window and looked out over the city--that seductive, that
overwhelming expression of wealth and power. "What was it my father wrote
me when I told him I was going to New York?" and he recalled almost the
exact words--"New York that lures young men from the towns and the farms,
and prostitutes them, teaches them to sell themselves with unblushing
cheeks for a fee, for an office, for riches, for power." He shrugged his
shoulders, smiled, drew himself up, returned to his desk and was soon
absorbed in his work.

The next morning the _News-Record's_ double-leaded "leader" on the
Coal Trust was a discharge of heavy artillery. But it was artillery in
retreat. And in the succeeding days, the retreat continued--not precipitate
but orderly, masterly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ten days after their talk on the "coal conspiracy" Marian greeted him late
in the afternoon with "Oh, such a row with Mrs. Mercer!"

"Mrs. Mercer! Why, what was she angry about?"

"She wasn't--at least, not at first. It was I. I went to see her and she
asked me to thank you for stopping that fight on the coal conspiracy."

"That was tactful of her," Howard said, turning away to hide his
nervousness.

"And I told her that you had not stopped, that you wouldn't stop until you
had broken it up. And she smiled in a superior way and said I was quite
mistaken, that I didn't read the paper, I haven't read it for several days,
but I knew _you_, dear, and I remembered what you had said. And so we
just had it. We were polite but furious when I went. I shall never go near
her again."

"But, unfortunately, we have stopped. We had to do it. We could accomplish
nothing."

"Oh, it doesn't matter. What angered me was her insinuation."

"That was irritating. But, tell me, what if it had been true?" Howard's
voice was strained and he was looking at her eagerly, with fever in his
eyes.

"But it couldn't be. It isn't worth while imagining. You could not be a
coward and a traitor." So complete was her confidence in him that suspicion
of him was impossible.

"Would you sit in judgment on me?"

"Not if I could help it."

"But you can--you could help it." His manner was agitated, and he spoke
almost fiercely. "I am free," he went on, and as she watched his eyes she
understood why men feared him. "I do what I will. I am not accountable to
you, not even to you. I have never asked you to approve of me, to approve
what I do, to love me. You are free also, free to love, free to withdraw
your love. I follow the law of my own being. You must take me as you find
me or not at all."

She tried to stop him but could not. His words poured on. He leaned forward
and took her hand and his eyes were brilliant and piercing. "I love you,"
he said. "Ah, how I love you--not because you love me, not because you are
an angel, not because you are a superior being. No, not for any reason in
all this wide world but because you are you. Do what you will and I shall
love you. Whether I had to look up among the stars or down in the mire to
find you, I would look just as steadily, just as proudly."

He drew along breath and his hand trembled. "If I were a traitor, then, if
you loved me, you would say, 'What! Is he to be found among traitors? How I
love treason!' If I were a coward, liar, thief, a sum of all the vices,
then, if you ever had loved me you would love me still. I want no love with
mental reservations, no love with ifs and buts and provided-thats. I want
love, free and fearless, that adapts itself to changing human nature as the
colour of the sea adapts itself to the colour of the sky; love that does
not have to be cajoled and persuaded lest it be not there when I most need
it. I want the love that loves."

"You know you have it." She had been compelled by his mood and was herself
in a fever. She looked at him with the expression which used to make his
nerves vibrate. "You know that no human being ever was more to another than
I to you. But you can't expect me to be just the same as you are. I love
_you_--not the false, base creature you picture. I admire the way you
love, but I could not love in that way. Thank God, my love, my dear--I
shall never be put to that test. For my love for you is my--my all."

"We are very serious about a mere supposition."

Howard was laughing, but not naturally. "We take each the other far too
seriously. I'm sorry you idealise me so. Who knows--you might find me out
some day--and then--well, don't blame me."

Marian said no more, but late that evening she put her hands on his
shoulders and said: "You're not hiding something from me--something we
ought to bear together?"

"Not I." Howard smiled down into her eyes and kissed her.

His mood of reaction, of hysteria had passed. He was thinking how little in
reality she had had to do with his outburst. He had not been addressing her
at all, except as she seemed to him for the moment the embodiment of his
self-respect--or rather, of an "absurd," "extremely youthful" ideal of
self-respect which he had "outgrown."



XXV.

THE PROMISED LAND.


A woman with a powerful personality may absorb in herself a man of strong
and resolute ambition, may compel him to make her his career, to feel that
to get and to keep her is all that he asks from destiny. But Marian was not
such a woman.

She had come into Howard's life at just the time and in just the way to
arouse his latent passion for power and to give it a sufficient initial
impetus. It was love for her that set him to lifting himself from among
those who work through themselves alone to the potent few who work chiefly
by directing the labour of others.

Once in this class, once having tasted the joy of power, Howard was lost to
her. She was unable to restrain or direct, or even clearly to understand.
She became an incident in his life. As riches came with power, they pushed
him to one side in her life. Living in separate parts of a large house,
leading separate lives, rarely meeting except when others were
present--following the typical life of New Yorkers of fortune and
fashion--they gradually grew to know little and see little and think little
each of the other.

There was no abruptness in the transition. Every day had contributed its
little toward widening the gap. There was no coolness, no consciousness of
separation; simply the slow formation of the habit of complete independence
each of the other.

His ambitions absorbed his thought and his time. To them he found her very
useful. The social side--forming and keeping up friendly relations with the
families whose heads were men of influence--was a vital part of his plan.
But he used her just as he used every and any one else whom he found
capable of contributing to his advancement; and, as she never insisted upon
herself, never sought to influence or even to inquire into his course of
action, she did not find him out.

She was in a vague way an unhappy woman. A discontent, a feeling that her
life was incomplete, perpetually teased her. He was distinctly unhappy,
often gloomy, at times morose. In her rare analytic moods she attributed
their failure to prolong the happiness of their courtship to the hard work
which kept him from her, kept them from enjoying the great love which she
assumed they felt each for the other. She would not and could not see that
that love had long disappeared, leaving a mask of forms, of phrases and of
impulses of passion to conceal its departure. And to this view he outwardly
assented, when she suggested it; but he knew that she was deceiving herself
as to him, and wondered if she were not deceiving herself as to her own
feelings.

Up to the time of the "Coal Conspiracy" and his attempt to put himself
straight with her, the idea of his love for her and of her oneness with him
had at least a hold upon his imagination. He then saw how far apart they
had drifted; and he dismissed from his mind even the pretense that love
played any part in his life. After that definite break with principle and
self-respect for the sake of his coal holdings, his Wall Street friends and
his newspaper career, the development of his character continued along
strictly logical lines with accelerating speed. And it was accompanied by
an ever franker, more cynical acceptance of the change.

He could not deceive himself, nor can any man with the clearness of
judgment necessary to great achievement--although many "successful" men,
for obvious reasons of self-interest, diligently encourage the popular
theory of warped conscience. He was well aware that he had shifted from the
ideal of use _to_ his fellow-beings to the ideal of use _of_ his
fellow-beings, from the ideal of character to the ideal of reputation. And
he knew that the two ideals can not be combined and that he not only was
not attempting to combine them but had no desire so to do. He despised his
former ideals; but also he despised himself for despising them.

His quarrel with himself was that he seemed to himself a rather vulgar sort
of hypocrite. This was highly disagreeable to him, as his whole nature
tended to make him wish to be himself, to make him shrink from the part of
the truckler and the sycophant which he was playing so haughtily and so
artistically. At times it exasperated him that he could not regard his
change of front as a deliberate sale for value received, and not as the
weak and cowardly surrender which he saw that it really was.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the day after Howard's forty-fourth birthday Coulter fell dead at the
entrance to the Union Club. When Stokely heard of it he went direct to the
_News-Record_ office.

"I happen to know something about Coulter's will," he said to Howard. "The
_News-Record_ stock is to be sold and you and I are to have the first
chance to take it at three hundred and fifty--which is certainly cheap
enough."

"Why did he arrange to dispose of the most valuable part of his estate?"

"Well, we had an agreement about it. Then, too, Coulter had no faith in
newspapers as a permanent investment. You know there are only the widow,
the girl and that worthless boy. Heavens, what an ass that boy is! Coulter
has tied up his estate until the youngest grandchild comes of age. He hopes
that there will be a son among the grandchildren who will realise his
dream."

"Dream?" Howard smiled. "I didn't know that Coulter ever indulged in
dreams."

"Yes, he had the rich man's mania--the craze for founding a family. So
everything is to be put into real estate and long-term bonds. And for years
New York is to be reminded of Samuel Coulter by some incapable who'll use
his name and his money to advertise nature's contempt for family pride in
her distributions of brains. I think even a fine tomb is a wiser memorial."

"Well, how much of the stock shall you take?" Howard asked.

"Not a share," Stokely replied dejectedly. "Coulter couldn't have died at a
worse time for me. I'm tied in every direction and shall be for a year at
least. So you've got a chance to become controlling owner."

"I?" Howard laughed. "Where could I get a million and a half?"

"How much could you take in cash?"

"Well--let me see--perhaps--five hundred thousand."

"You can borrow the million with the stock as collateral."

"But how could I pay?"

"Why, your dividends at our present rate would be more than two hundred
thousand a year. Your interest charge would be under seventy-five thousand.
Perhaps I can arrange it so that it won't be more than fifty thousand. You
can let the balance go on reducing the loan. Then I may be able to put you
onto a few good things. At any rate you can't lose anything. Your stock
would bring five hundred even at forced sale. It's your chance, old man. I
want to see you take it."

"I'll think it over. I have no head for figures."

"Let me manage it for you." Stokely rose to go. Howard began thanking him,
but he cut him off with:

"You owe me no thanks. You've made money for me--big money. I owe you my
help. Besides, I don't want any outsider in here. Let me know when you're
ready." He nodded and was gone.

"What a chance!" Howard repeated again and again.

He was looking out over New York.

Twenty years before he had faced it, asking of it nothing but a living and
his freedom. For twenty years he had fought. Year by year, even when he
seemed to be standing still or going backward, he had steadily gained,
making each step won a vantage-ground for forward attack. And now--victory.
Power, wealth, fame, all his!

Yet a deep melancholy came over him. And he fell to despising himself for
the kind of exultation that filled him, its selfishness, its sordidness,
the absence of all high enthusiasm. Why was he denied the happiness of
self-deception? Why could he not forget the means, blot it out, now that
the end was attained?

His mind went out, not to Marian, but to that other--the one sleeping under
the many, many layers of autumn leaves at Asheville. And he heard a voice
saying so faintly, so timidly: "I lay awake night after night listening to
your breathing, and whispering under my breath, 'I love you, I love you.
Why can't you love me?'" And then--he flung down the cover of his desk and
rushed away home.

"Why did I think of Alice?" he asked himself. And the answer came--because
in those days, in the days of his youth, he had had beliefs, high
principles; he had been incapable of this slavery to appearances, to vain
show, incapable of this passion for reputation regardless of character. His
weaknesses were then weaknesses only, and not, as now, the laws of his
being controlling his every act.

He smiled cynically at the self of such a few years ago--yet he could not
meet those honest, fearless eyes that looked out at him from the mirror of
memory.

He was triumphant, but self-respect had gone and not all the thick
swathings of vanity covered him from the stabs of self-contempt.

"When I am really free, when the paper is paid for and I can do as I
please, why not try to be a man again? Why not? It would cost me nothing."

But a man is the sum of _all_ his past.




XXVI.

IN POSSESSION.


Stokely arranged the loan, and within six months Howard was controlling
owner of the _News-Record._ There was a debt of a million and a
quarter attached to his ownership, but he saw how that would be wiped out.
Once more he threw himself into his work with the energy of a boy. He had
to give much of his time to the business department--to the details of
circulation and advertising. He felt that the profits of the paper could be
greatly increased by improving its facilities for reaching the advertiser
and the public. He had never been satisfied with the circulation methods;
but theretofore his ignorance of business and his position as mere salaried
editor had acted in restraint upon his interference with the "ground
floor."

As he had suspected, the business office was afflicted with the twin
diseases--routine and imitativeness. It followed an old system, devised in
days of small circulation and grudgingly improved, not by thought on the
part of those who circulated the paper, but by compulsion on the part of
the public. No attempts were made to originate schemes for advertising the
paper. The only methods were wooden variations upon placards in the street
cars and the elevated stations, and cards hung up at the news-stands. As
forgetting advertising business, they thought they showed enterprise by a
little canvassing among the conspicuous merchants in Greater New York.

Howard had charts made showing the circulation by districts. With these as
a basis he ordered an elaborate campaign to "push" the paper in the
districts where it was circulated least and to increase its hold where it
was strong. "We do not reach one-third of the people who would like to take
our paper," he told Jowett, the business manager. "Let us have an army of
agents and let us take up our territory by districts."

The Sunday edition was the largest source of revenue, both because it
carried a great deal more advertising at much higher rates than did the
week-day editions, and because it sold at a price which yielded a profit on
the paper itself, while the price of the weekday editions did not. News
constituted less than one-fourth of its contents. The rest was "feature
articles," as interesting a week late to a man in Seattle as on the day of
publication within a mile of the office.

"We get out the very best magazine in the market," said Howard to Jowett.
"Are we pushing it in the east, in the west, in the south? Look at the
charts.

"We have a Sunday circulation of five hundred in Oregon, of one thousand in
Texas, of six hundred in Georgia, of two thousand in Maine. Why not ten
times as much in each of those states? Why not ten times as much as we now
have near New York?"

There was no reason except failure to "push" the paper. That reason Howard
proceeded to remove. But these enterprises involved large expenditures,
perhaps might mean postponement of the payment of the debt. Receipts must
be increased and the most promising way was an increase in the advertising
business.

Howard noted on the chart nineteen cities and large towns near New York in
each of which the daily circulation of the _News-Record_ was equal to
that of any paper published there and far exceeded the combined
circulations of all the home dailies on Sunday. This suggested a system of
local advertising pages, and for its working out he engaged one of the most
capable newspaper advertising men in the city. Within three months the idea
had "caught on" and, instead of sending useless columns of New York
"want-ads" and the like to places where they could not be useful, the
_News-Record_ was presenting to its readers in twelve cities and towns
the advertisements of their local merchants.

A year of this work, with Howard giving many hours of each day personally
to tiresome details, brought the natural results. The profits of the
_News-Record_ had risen to five hundred and forty thousand, of which
Howard's share was nearly three hundred thousand. The next year the profits
were seven hundred and fifty thousand, and Howard had reduced his debt to
eight hundred thousand.

"We shall be free and clear in less than three years," he said to Marian.

"If we have luck," she added.

"No--if we work--and we shall. Luck is a stone which envy flings at
success."

"Then you don't think you have been lucky?"

"Indeed I do not."

"Not even," she smiled, drawing herself up.

"Not even--" he said with a faint, sad answering smile. "If you only knew
how hard I worked preparing myself to be able to get you when you came; if
you only, only knew how life made me pay, pay, pay; if you only knew--"

"Go on," she said, coming closer to him.

He sighed--not for the reason of sentiment which she fancied, though he put
his arms around her. "How willingly I paid," he evaded.

He went to his desk and she stood looking at him. There was still the charm
of youth, even freshness, in her beauty--and she was not unconscious of the
fact.

And he--he was handsome, distinguished looking and certainly did not
suggest age or the approach of age; but in his hair, so grey at the
temples, in the stern, rather haughty lines of his features, in the
weariness of his eyes, there was not a vestige of youth. "How he has worked
for me and for his ideals," she thought, sadly yet proudly. "Ah, he is
indeed a great man, and _my_ husband!" And she bent over him and
kissed him on an impulse to a kind of tenderness which was now so strange
to her that it made her feel shy.

"And what a radical you'll be," she laughed, after a moment's silence.
"What a radical, what a democrat!"

"When?" He was flushing a little and avoided her eyes.

"When you're free--really the proprietor--able to express your own views,
all your own views. We shall become outcasts."

"I wonder," he replied slowly, "does a rich man own his property or does it
own him?"

For an instant he had an impulse of his old longing for sympathy, for
companionship. She was now thirty-six and, save for an expression of
experience, of self-control, seemed hardly so much as thirty. But with the
years, with the habit of self-restraint, with instinctive rather than
conscious realisation of his indifference toward her, had come a chill
perceptible at the surface and permeating her entire character. In her own
way she had become as self-absorbed, as ambitious as he.

He looked at her, felt this chill, sighed, smiled at himself. Yes, he was
alone--and he preferred to be alone.




XXVII.

THE HARVEST.


Through all his scheming and shifting Howard had kept the
_News-Record_ in the main an "organ of the people." Coulter and
Stokely had on many occasions tried to persuade him to change, but he had
stood out. He did not confess to them that his real reason was not his
alleged principles but his cold judgment that the increases in circulation
which produced increases in advertising patronage were dependent upon the
paper's reputation of fearless democracy.

In the fourth year of his ownership he felt that the time had come for the
change, that he could safely slip over to the other side--the side of
wealth and power, the winning side, the side with offices and privileges to
distribute. His debt was so far reduced that he had nothing to fear from
it. A presidential campaign was coming on and was causing unusual
confusion, a general shift of party lines. And he had put the
_News-Record_ in such a position that it could move in any direction
without shock to its readers.

The "great battle" was on--the battle he had in his younger days looked
forward to and longed for--the battle against Privilege and for a
"restoration of government by the people." The candidates were nominated,
the platforms put forward and the issue squarely joined.

The same issue had been involved in previous campaigns; but the statement
of the case by the party opposed to "government of, by and for plutocracy"
had been fantastic, extreme, entangled with social, economic and political
lunacies. And Howard had strengthened the _News-Record_ by refusing to
permit it to "go crazy." Now, however, there was in honesty no reason for
refusing support to the advocates of his professed principles.

But the _News-Record_ was silent. Howard and Marian went away to their
cottage at Newport, and he left rigid instructions that no political
editorials were to be published except those which he might send. There he
got typhoid fever and was at the point of death for two weeks.

Marian gave herself to nursing him, stayed close beside him, read books and
the newspapers to him throughout his convalescence. They were more intimate
than they had been for years. A feeling bearing a remote resemblance to the
love he had once had for her arose out of his weakness and dependence and
his seclusion from the instruments and objects of his ambition. And she
swept aside the barriers she had erected between herself and him and
returned, as nearly as one may, to the love and interest of their early
days together.

In the first week of September came Stokely with Senator Hereford, the
chairman of the "Plutocracy" campaign committee.

"I shall not annoy you with evasions," said Hereford, "as Mr. Stokely
assures me that I may speak freely to you, that you personally are with us.
The fact is, our campaign is in a bad way, especially in New York State,
and there especially in New York City."

"You surprise me," said Howard. "All my information has come from the
newspapers which my wife reads me. I had gathered that the victory was all
but won."

"We encourage that impression. You know how many weak-kneed fellows there
are who like to be on the winning side. We've been pouring out the money
and stand ready to pour it out like water. But these damned reform
ballot-laws make it hard for us to control the vote. We buy, but we fear
that the goods will not be delivered. Feeling is high against us. Even our
farmers and shopkeepers are acting queerly. And the other fellows have at
last put up a safe man on a conservative platform."

Howard turned his face away. There was still the memory, the now quickened
memory, of his former self to make him wince at being included in such an
"us."

"You can't afford to keep silent any longer," Hereford continued. "You've
done the cause a world of good by your silence thus far. You have the
reputation of being the leading popular organ, and your keeping quiet has
meant thousands of votes for us. But the time has come to attack. And you
must attack if we are to carry New York. You can turn the tide in the
state, and--well, we have a very high regard for your genius for making
your points clearly and interestingly. We need your ideas for our editors
and speakers as much as we need your influence."

"I cannot discuss it to-day," Howard answered after a moment's silence. "It
would be a grave step for the _News-Record_ to take. I am not well, as
you see. To-morrow or next day I'll decide. You'll see my answer in the
paper, I think." He closed his eyes with significant weariness.

Hereford looked at him uneasily. Just outside the door Stokely whispered,
"Don't be alarmed. You've got him. He's with us, I tell you."

"I must make sure," whispered Hereford. "I wish to speak to him alone for a
moment."

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Howard," he said as he re-entered the room. "I
forgot an important part of my mission. Our candidate authorized me to say
to you on his behalf that he felt sure you would see your duty; that he
esteemed your character and judgment too highly to have any doubts; and
that he intends to show his appreciation of the conscientious, independent
vote which is rallying to his support; in the event of his election, he
feels that he could not do so in a more satisfactory manner than by
offering you either a place in his cabinet or an ambassadorship as you may
prefer."

As soon as Howard saw Hereford returning, he knew the reason. He had never
before been offered a bribe; but he could not mistake the meaning of
Hereford's bold yet frightened expression. He kept his eyes averted during
the delivery of the long, rambling sentence. At the end, he looked at
Hereford frankly and said in his most gracious manner:

"Thank him for me, will you? And express my appreciation of so high a
compliment from such a man."

Hereford looked relieved, delighted. "I'm glad to have met you, Mr. Howard,
and to have had so satisfactory an interview."

Again outside the door, he muttered gleefully: "Yes, we've him. Otherwise
he would have had his servants kick me down stairs. Gad, no wonder ---- is
on his way to the Presidency, I had a sneaking fear that this fellow might
be sincere. But _he_ saw through him without ever having seen him. I
suppose two men of that stripe instinctively understand each other."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was on a Sunday afternoon. On the following Wednesday, as Marian came
into Howard's sitting-room with the newspapers, she laughed: "I've been
reading such a speech from your candidate, you radical! I must say I liked
to read it. It was so like you, your very phrases in many places, the
things you used to talk to me before you gave me up as hopeless. Just
listen."

And she read him the oration--a reproduction of the Howard she first saw,
the Howard she admired and loved and had never lost. "Isn't it superb?" she
asked at the end. "You must have written it for him. Don't you like it?"

"Very able," was Howard's only comment.

Marian continued to read the paper, glancing from column to column, giving
him the substance of the news. Soon she reached the editorial page. He was
stealthily watching her face. He saw her glance through a few lines of the
leader, start, read on, look in a terrified way at him, and then skip
abruptly to the next page.

"Read me the leader, won't you?" he asked.

"My voice is tired," she pleaded. "I'll read it after awhile."

"Please," he insisted. "I'm especially anxious to hear it."

"I think," she almost stammered, "that somebody has taken advantage of your
illness. I didn't want to tell you until I'd had a chance to think."

"Please read it." His tone was abrupt. She had never heard that tone
before.

She read. It was an assertion of that which her Howard most disbelieved,
most protested against; a defense of the public corruption she had heard
him denounce so often; an attack upon the ideas, the principles, the
elements she had so often heard him eulogize. It was as adroit as it was
detestable, as plausible as it was unprincipled.

When she had done, there was a long silence which he broke. "What do you
think of it?"

"Only a wretch, an enemy of yours could have written it. Who can it have
been?" Her eyes were ablaze and her voice trembled with anger.

"I wrote it," he said.

He did not dare to look at her for a few seconds. Then, with a flimsy mask
of pretended calmness only the more clearly revealing self-contempt and
cowardice, he faced her amazed eyes, her pale cheeks, her parted lips--and
dropped his gaze to the floor.

"You?" she whispered. "You?"

"Yes, I."

She sat so still that he reached over and touched her hand. It was cold.
She shivered and drew it away. They were silent for a long time--several
minutes. She was looking at his face. It was old and sad and
feeble--pitiful, contemptible. She had never seen those lines of weakness
about his mouth before. She had never before noted that his features had
lost the expression of exalted character, the light of free and independent
manhood which made her look again the first time she saw him. When had the
man she loved departed? When had the new man come? How long had she been
giving herself to a stranger--and _such_ a stranger?

"Yes--I," he repeated. "I have come over to your side." He laughed and she
shivered again. "Well--what do you think?"

"Think?--I?--Oh, I think----"

She burst into tears, flung herself down at his feet and buried her head in
his lap.

"I think nothing," she sobbed, "except that I--I love you."

He fell to smoothing her hair, slowly, gently, patronisingly. His face was
composed and he was looking down at her trembling head and agitated
shoulders with an absent-minded smile. How easily this once dreaded crisis
had passed! How he had overestimated her! How he had underestimated
himself!

His glance and his thoughts soon fastened upon the copy of his newspaper
which she had thrown aside--_his_ newspaper indeed, his creation and
his creature, the epitome of his intellect and character, of his strength
and his weakness. Half a million circulation daily, three quarters of a
million on Sunday--how mighty as a direct influence upon the people! Its
clearness and vigour, its intelligence, its truth-like sophistry--how
mighty as an indirect influence upon the minds of other editors and of
public men! "Power--Success," he repeated to himself in an exaltation of
vanity and arrogance.

Marian lifted her head and, turning, put it against his knee. She reached
out for his hand. He began to speak at once in a low persuasive voice:

"Trust me, dear, can't you? You do not--have not been reading the paper
until recently. You are not interested in politics. There have been many
changes in the few last years. And I too have changed. I am no longer
without responsibilities. They have sobered me, have given me an
appreciation of property, stability, conservatism. Youth is enthusiastic,
theoretical. I have--"

"Ah, but I do trust you," she interrupted eagerly, fearful lest his
explanations would make it the more difficult for her to convince herself
of what she felt she must believe if life were to go on. "And you--I don't
want you to excite yourself. You must be quiet--must get well."

Each avoided meeting the other's eyes as she arranged the pillows for him
before leaving him alone to rest.

The longer she juggled with her discovery the less appalling it seemed. His
line of action fitted too closely to her own ambitions of social
distinction, social leadership. If he had been her lover, the shock would
have killed love and set up contempt in its stead. But he was not her
lover, had not been for years; and to find that her husband was doing a
husband's duty, was winning position and power for himself and therefore
for his wife--that was a disclosure with mitigating aspects at least.
Besides, might she not be in part mistaken? Surely any course so
satisfactory in its results could not be wholly wrong, might perhaps be the
right in an unexpected, unaccustomed form.




XXVIII.

SUCCESS.


French had made a portrait of the new American ambassador to the Court of
St. James and it was shown at the spring exhibition of the Royal Academy.
The ambassador and his wife wished to see how it had been hung, but they
did not wish to be seen. So they chose an early hour of a chill, rainy May
morning to drive in a hansom from their place in Park Lane to Burlington
House.

They found the portrait in Room VI, on the line, in a corner, but where it
had the benefit of such light as there was. When they entered no one was
there; but, as they were standing close to the picture, admiring the energy
and simplicity of the strokes of the master's brush, a crowd swept in and
enclosed them.

"Let us go," Howard said in a low tone.

Just then a man, almost at his shoulder because of the pressure of those
behind, said: "Wonderful, isn't it? I've never seen a better example of his
work. He had a subject that suited him perfectly."

"No, let us stay," Marian whispered in reply to her husband. "They can't
see our faces and I'd like to hear."

"Yes, it is superb," came the answer to the man behind them in a voice
unmistakably American. "Now, tell me, Saverhill, what sort of a person
would you say the ambassador is from that picture? You don't know him?"

"Never heard of him until I read of his appointment," replied the first
voice.

"I've heard of him often enough," came in the American voice. "But I've
never seen him."

"You know him now," resumed the Englishman, "inside as well as out. French
always paints what he sees and always sees what he's painting."

"Well, what is it?"

"Let us go," whispered Marian. But Howard did not heed her.

"I see--a fallen man. He was evidently a real man once; but he sold
himself."

"Yes? Where does it show?"

"He's got a good mind, this fellow-countryman of yours. There are the eyes
of a thinker and a doer. Nothing could have kept him down. His face is
almost as relentless as Kitchener's and fully as aggressive, except that it
shows intellect, and Kitchener's doesn't. Now note the corners of his eyes,
Marshall, and his mouth and nostrils and chin, and you'll see why he sold
himself, and the--the consequences."

Howard and Marian, fascinated, compelled, looked where the unknown
requested.

"I think I see what you mean," came in Marshall's voice, laughingly. "But
go on."

"Ah, there it all is--hypocrisy, vanity, lack of principle, and, plainest
of all, weakness. It's a common enough type among your successful men. The
man himself is the fixed market price for a certain kind of success. But,
according to French, this ambassador of yours seems to know what he has
paid; and the knowledge doesn't make him more content with his bargain. He
has more brains than vanity; therefore he's an unhappy hypocrite instead of
a happy self-deceiver."

Howard and Marian shrunk together with their heads close in the effort to
make sure of concealing their faces. She was suffering for herself, but
more acutely for him. She knew, as if she were looking into his mind, his
frightful humiliation. "Hereafter," she thought, "whenever any one looks at
him he will feel the thought behind the look."

"How nearly did I come to him?" asked Saverhill.

Howard started and Marian caught the rail for support.

"A centre-shot," replied Marshall, "if the people who know him and have
talked to me about him tell the truth."

"Oh, they're 'on to' him, as you say, over there, are they?"

"No, not everybody. Only his friends and the few who are on the inside.
There's an ugly story going about privately as to how he got the
ambassadorship. They say he was bought with it. But--he's admired and
envied even by a good many who know or suspect that he's only an article of
commerce. He's got the cash and he's got position; and his paper gives him
tremendous power. Then too, as you say, all about him there are men like
himself. The only punishment he's likely to get is the penalty of having to
live with himself."

"A good, round price if French is not mistaken," replied Saverhill.

The two men passed on. Howard and Marian looked guiltily about, then
slipped away in the opposite direction. He helped her into the waiting
hansom. As they were driven homeward she cast a stealthy side-glance at
him.

"Yes," she thought, "the portrait is a portrait of his face; and his face
is a portrait of himself."

He caught her glance in the little mirror in the side of the hansom--caught
it and read it. And he began to hate her, this instrument to his
punishment, this constant remembrancer of his downfall.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great God Success
by John Graham (David Graham Phillips)





Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




GALLANTRY

_Dizain des Fetes Galantes_

By

JAMES BRANCH CABELL


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY LOUIS UNTERMEYER


"_Half in masquerade, playing the drawing-room or garden comedy of life,
these persons have upon them, not less than the landscape among the
accidents of which they group themselves with fittingness, a certain light
that we should seek for in vain upon anything real._"




TO

JAMES ROBINSON BRANCH

THIS VOLUME, SINCE IT TREATS OF GALLANTRY, IS DEDICATED, AS BOTH IN LIFE
AND DEATH AN EXPONENT OF THE WORD'S HIGHEST MEANING

"_A brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a fool understand this.... Shall
the throne of iniquity have fellowship with Thee, which frameth mischief by
a law?_"




INTRODUCTION


These paragraphs, dignified by the revised edition of _Gallantry_ and
spuriously designated An Introduction, are nothing more than a series of
notes and haphazard discoveries in preparation of a thesis. That thesis,
if it is ever written, will bear a title something academically like _The
Psychogenesis of a Poet; or Cabell the Masquerader_. For it is in this
guise--sometimes self-declared, sometimes self-concealed, but always as the
persistent visionary--that the author of some of the finest prose of our
day has given us the key with which (to lapse into the jargon of verse) he
has unlocked his heart.

On the technical side alone, it is easy to establish Cabell's poetic
standing. There are, first of all, the quantity of original rhymes that
are scattered through the dozen volumes which Cabell has latterly (and
significantly) classified as Biography. Besides these interjections which
do duty as mottoes, chapter-headings, tailpieces, dedications, interludes
and sometimes relevant songs, there is the volume of seventy-five
"adaptations" in verse, _From the Hidden Way_, published in 1916. Here
Cabell, even in his most natural role, declines to show his face and amuses
himself with a new set of masks labelled Alessandro de Medici, Antoine
Riczi, Nicolas de Caen, Theodore Passerat and other fabulous minnesingers
whose verses were created only in the mind of Cabell. It has pleased him to
confuse others besides the erudite reviewer of the _Boston Transcript_ by
quoting the first lines of the non-existent originals in Latin, Italian,
Provencal--thus making his skilful ballades, sestinas and the less mediaeval
narratives part of a remarkably elaborate and altogether successful hoax.

And, as this masquerade of obscure Parnassians betrayed its creator,
Cabell--impelled by some fantastic reticence--sought for more subtle
makeshifts to hide the poet. The unwritten thesis, plunging abruptly into
the realm of analytical psychology, will detail the steps Cabell has taken,
as a result of early associative disappointments, to repress or at least
to disguise, the poet in himself--and it will disclose how he has failed.
It will burrow through the latest of his works and exhume his half-buried
experiments in rhyme, assonance and polyphony. This part of the paper will
examine _Jurgen_ and call attention to the distorted sonnet printed as a
prose soliloquy on page 97 of that exquisite and ironic volume. It will
pass to the subsequent _Figures of Earth_ and, after showing how the
greater gravity of this volume is accompanied by a greater profusion of
poetry _per se_ it will unravel the scheme of Cabell's fifteen essays in
what might be called contrapuntal prose. It will unscramble all the rhymes
screened in Manuel's monologue beginning on page 294, quote the metrical
innovations with rhymed vowels on page 60, tabulate the hexameters that
leap from the solidly set paragraphs and rearrange the brilliant fooling
that opens the chapter "Magic of the Image Makers." This last is in itself
so felicitous a composite of verse and criticism--a passage incredibly
overlooked by the most meticulous of Cabell's glossarians--that it deserves
a paper for itself. For here, set down prosaically as "the unfinished Rune
of the Blackbirds" are four distinct parodies--including two insidious
burlesques of Browning and Swinburne--on a theme which is familiar to us
to-day in _les mots justes_ of Mother Goose. "It is," explains Freydis,
after the thaumaturgists have finished, "an experimental incantation in
that it is a bit of unfinished magic for which the proper words have not
yet been found: but between now and a while they will be stumbled on, and
then this rune will live perpetually." And thus the poet, speaking through
the mouth-piece of Freydis, discourses on the power of words and, in one of
Cabell's most eloquent chapters, crystallizes that high mood, presenting
the case for poetry as it has been pleaded by few of her most fervid
advocates.

Here the thesis will stop quoting and argue its main contention from
another angle. It will consider the author in a larger and less technical
sense: disclosing his characters, his settings, his plots, even the entire
genealogical plan of his works, to be the design of a poet rather than a
novelist. The persons of Cabell's imagination move to no haphazard strains;
they create their own music. And, like a set of modulated _motifs_, they
combine to form a richer and more sonorous pattern. With its interrelation
of figures and interweaving of themes, the Cabellian "Biography" assumes
the solidity and shapeliness of a fugue, a composition in which all the
voices speak with equal precision and recurring clarity.

And what, the diagnostician may inquire, of the characters themselves? They
are, it will be answered, motivated by pity and irony; the tolerant humor,
the sympathetic and not too distant regard of their Olympian designer
agitate them so sensitively that we seldom see what strings are twitched.
These puppets seem to act of their own conviction--possibly because their
director is careful not to have too many convictions of his own. It may
have been pointed out before this that there are no undeviating villains
in his masques and, as many an indignant reviewer has expostulated, few
untarnished heroes. Cabell's, it will be perceived, is a frankly pagan
poetry. It has no texts with which to discipline beauty; it lacks moral
fervor; it pretends to no divinity of dogmatism. The image-maker is willing
to let his creatures ape their living models by fluctuating between
shifting conventions and contradictory ideals; he leaves to a more positive
Author the dubious pleasure of drawing a daily line between vice and
virtue. If Cabell pleads at all, he pleads with us not to repudiate a
Villon or a Marlowe while we are reviling the imperfect man in a perfect
poet. "What is man, that his welfare be considered?" questions Cabell,
paraphrasing Scripture, "an ape who chatters to himself of kinship with the
archangels while filthily he digs for groundnuts.... Yet do I perceive that
this same man is a maimed god.... He is under penalty condemned to compute
eternity with false weights and to estimate infinity with a yardstick--and
he very often does it."

This, the thesis will contend, is the only possible attitude to the mingled
apathy and abandon of existence--and it is, in fine, the poetic attitude.
Romantic it is, without question, and I imagine Cabell would be the last
to cavil at the implication. For, mocked by a contemptuous silence gnawing
beneath the howling energy of life, what else is there for the poet but the
search for some miracle of belief, some assurance in a world of illimitable
perplexities? It is the wish to attain this dream which is more real than
reality that guides the entire Cabell _epos_--"and it is this will that
stirs in us to have the creatures of earth and the affairs of earth, not as
they are, but as 'they ought to be.'"

Such a romantic vision, which concludes that glowing testament, _Beyond
Life_, is the shining thread that binds the latest of Cabell's novels
with the earliest of his short stories. It is, in effect, one tale he is
telling, a tale in which Poictesme and the more local Lichfield are, for
all their topographical dissimilarities, the same place, and all his people
interchangeable symbols of the changeless desires of men. Whether the
allegory is told in the terms of _Gallantry_ with its perfumed lights, its
deliberate artifice and its technique of badinage, or presented in the
more high-flying mood of _Chivalry_ with its ready passions and readier
rhetoric, it prefigures the subsequent pageant in which the victories might
so easily be mistaken for defeats. In this procession, amid a singularly
ordered riot of color, the figure of man moves, none too confidently but
with stirring fortitude, to an unrealized end. Here, stumbling through the
mazes of a code, in the habiliments of Ormskirk or de Soyecourt, he passes
from the adventures of the mind (Kennaston in _The Cream of the Jest_,
Charteris in _Beyond Life_) through the adventures of the flesh (_Jurgen_)
to the darker adventures of the spirit (Manuel in _Figures of Earth_).
Even this _Gallantry_, the most candidly superficial of Cabell's works, is
alive with a vigor of imagination and irony. It is not without significance
that the motto on the new title-page is: "Half in masquerade, playing the
drawing-room or garden comedy of life, these persons have upon them, not
less than the landscape among the accidents of which they group themselves,
a certain light that we should seek for in vain upon anything real."

The genealogically inclined will be happy to discover that _Gallantry_,
for all its revulsion from reality, deals with the perpetuated life of
Manuel in a strangely altered _milieu_. The rest of us will be quicker to
comprehend how subtly this volume takes its peculiar place in its author's
record of struggling dreams, how, beneath, a surface covered with political
finery and sentimental bric-a-brac, the quest goes on, stubbornly and often
stupidly, in a forgotten world made suddenly animate and as real as our
own.

And this, the thesis will conclude, is because Cabell is not as much a
masquerader as he imagines himself to be. None but a visionary could wear
so constantly upon his sleeve the desire "to write perfectly of beautiful
happenings." None but the poet, shaken with the strength of his vision,
could cry to-day, "It is only by preserving faith in human dreams that
we may, after all, perhaps some day make them come true." For poetry, to
which all literature aspires, is not the shadow of reality but the image of
perfection, the light of disembodied beauty toward which creation gropes.
And that poetic consciousness is the key to the complex and half-concealed
art of James Branch Cabell.

LOUIS UNTERMEYER.

New York City,
_April, 1922._




CONTENTS


THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY

THE PROLOGUE

I SIMON'S HOUR

II LOVE AT MARTINMAS

III THE CASUAL HONEYMOON

IV THE RHYME TO PORRINGER

V ACTORS ALL

VI APRIL'S MESSAGE

VII IN THE SECOND APRIL

VIII HEART OF GOLD

IX THE SCAPEGOATS

X THE DUCAL AUDIENCE

LOVE'S ALUMNI: THE AFTERPIECE

THE EPILOGUE




THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY

_TO MRS. GRUNDY_


Madam,--It is surely fitting that a book which harks back to the manners
of the second George should have its dedication and its patron. And these
comedies claim naturally your protection, since it likewise appears
a custom of that era for the poet to dedicate his book to his most
influential acquaintance and the one least likely to value it.

Indeed, it is as proper that the plaudits of great persons be reserved for
great performances as it is undeniable these

      tiny pictures of that tiny time
  Aim little at the lofty and sublime.

Yet cognoscenti still esteem it an error in the accomplished Shakespeare
that he introduced a game of billiards into his portrayal of Queen
Cleopatra's court; and the impropriety had been equal had I linked the
extreme of any passion with an age and circle wherein abandonment to
the emotions was adjudged bucolic, nay, Madam, the Eumenides were very
terrifying at Delphi, no doubt, but deck them with paint, patch, and
panniers, send them howling among the _beau monde_ on the Pantiles, and
they are only figures of fun; nor may, in reason, the high woes of a second
Lear, or of a new Prometheus, be adequately lighted by the flambeaux of
Louis Quinze.

Conceive, then, the overture begun, and fear not, if the action of the play
demand a lion, but that he shall be a beast of Peter Quince's picking. The
ladies shall not be frighted, for our chief comedians will enact modish
people of a time when gallantry prevailed.

Now the essence of gallantry, I take it, was to accept the pleasures of
life leisurely and its inconveniences with a shrug. As requisites, a
gallant person will, of course, be "amorous, but not too constant, have
a pleasant voice, and possess a talent for love-letters." He will always
bear in mind that in love-affairs success is less the Ultima Thule of
desire than its _coup de grace_, and he will be careful never to admit the
fact, especially to himself. He will value ceremony, but rather for its
comeliness than for its utility, as one esteeming the lily, say, to be a
more applaudable bulb than the onion. He will prink; and he will be at his
best after sunset. He will dare to acknowledge the shapeliness of a thief's
leg, to contend that the commission of murder does not necessarily impair
the agreeableness of the assassin's conversation; and to insist that at
bottom God is kindlier than the genteel would regard as rational. He will,
in fine, sin on sufficient provocation, and repent within the moment,
quite sincerely, and be not unconscionably surprised when he repeats the
progression: and he will consider the world with a smile of toleration, and
his own doings with a smile of honest amusement, and Heaven with a smile
that is not distrustful.

This particular attitude toward life may have its merits, but it is not
conducive to meticulous morality; therefore, in advance, I warn you that my
_Dramatis Personae_ will in their display of the cardinal virtues evince a
certain parsimony. Theirs were, in effect, not virtuous days. And the great
man who knew these times _au fond_, and loved them, and wrote of them as no
other man may ever hope to do, has said of these same times, with perfect
truth:

"Fiddles sing all through them; wax-lights, fine dresses, fine jokes,
fine plate, fine equipages, glitter and sparkle: never was there such
a brilliant, jigging, smirking Vanity Fair. But wandering through that
city of the dead, that dreadfully selfish time, through those godless
intrigues and feasts, through those crowds, pushing, and eager, and
struggling,--rouged, and lying, and fawning,--I have wanted some one to be
friends with. I have said, _Show me some good person about that Court; find
me, among those selfish courtiers, those dissolute gay people, some one
being that I can love and regard._" And Thackeray confesses that, for all
his research, he could not find anybody living irreproachably, at this
especial period....

Where a giant fails one may in reason hesitate to essay. I present, then,
people who, as people normally do, accepted their times and made the best
of them, since the most estimable needs conform a little to the custom of
his day, whether it be Caractacus painting himself sky-blue or Galileo on
his knees at Santa Maria. And accordingly, many of my comedians will lie
when it seems advisable, and will not haggle over a misdemeanor when there
is anything to be gained by it; at times their virtues will get them
what they want, and at times their vices, and at other times they will
be neither punished nor rewarded; in fine, Madam, they will be just human
beings stumbling through illogical lives with precisely that lack of
common-sense which so pre-eminently distinguishes all our neighbors from
ourselves.

For the life that moved in old Manuel of Poictesme finds hereinafter in his
descendants, in these later Allonbys and Bulmers and Heleighs and Floyers,
a new _milieu_ to conform and curb that life in externes rather than in
essentials. What this life made of chivalrous conditions has elsewhere
been recorded: with its renewal in gallant circumstances, the stage is
differently furnished and lighted, the costumes are dissimilar; but the
comedy, I think, works toward the same _denouement_, and certainly the
protagonist remains unchanged. My protagonist is still the life of Manuel,
as this life was perpetuated in his descendants; and my endeavor is (still)
to show you what this life made (and omitted to make) of its tenancy of
earth. 'Tis a drama enactable in any setting.

Yet the comedy of gallantry has its conventions. There must be quite
invaluable papers to be stolen and juggled with; an involuntary
marriage either threatened or consummated; elopements, highwaymen, and
despatch-boxes; and a continual indulgence in soliloquy and eavesdropping.
Everybody must pretend to be somebody else, and young girls, in particular,
must go disguised as boys, amid much cut-and-thrust work, both ferric and
verbal. For upon the whole, the comedy of gallantry tends to unfold itself
in dialogue, and yet more dialogue, with just the notice of a change
of scene or a brief stage direction inserted here and there. All these
conventions, Madam, I observe.

A word more: the progress of an author who alternates, in turn, between
fact and his private fancies (like unequal crutches) cannot in reason be
undisfigured by false steps. Therefore it is judicious to confess, Madam,
that more than once I have pieced the opulence of my subject with the
poverty of my inventions. Indisputably, to thrust words into a dead man's
mouth is in the ultimate as unpardonable as the axiomatic offence of
stealing the pennies from his eyes; yet if I have sometimes erred in my
surmise at what Ormskirk or de Puysange or Louis de Soyecourt really said
at certain moments of their lives, the misstep was due, Madam, less to
malevolence than to inability to replevin their superior utterance; and the
accomplished shade of Garendon, at least, I have not travestied, unless it
were through some too prudent item of excision.

Remains but to subscribe myself--in the approved formula of dedicators--as,

  MADAM,

    Your ladyship's most humble and most obedient servant,

                                            THE AUTHOR.




THE PROLOGUE

SPOKEN BY LADY ALLONBY, WHO ENTERS IN A FLURRY


    _The author bade we come_--Lud, I protest!--
  _He bade me come_--and I forget the rest.
  But 'tis no matter; he's an arrant fool
  That ever bade a woman speak by rule.

    Besides, his Prologue was, at best, dull stuff,
  And of dull writing we have, sure, enough.
  A book will do when you've a vacant minute,
  But, la! who cares what is, and isn't, in it?

    And since I'm but the Prologue of a book,
  What I've omitted all will overlook,
  And owe me for it, too, some gratitude,
  Seeing in reason it cannot be good
  Whose author has as much but now confessed,--
  For, _Who'd excel when few can make a test
  Betwixt indifferent writing and the best?_
  He said but now.

                           And I:--_La, why excel,
  When mediocrity does quite as well?
  'Tis women buy the books,--and read 'em, say,
  What time a person nods, en negligee,
  And in default of gossip, cards, or dance,
  Resolves t' incite a nap with some romance._

  The fool replied in verse,--I think he said
  'Twas verses the ingenious Dryden made,
  And trust 'twill save me from entire disgrace
  To cite 'em in his foolish Prologue's place.
    _Yet, scattered here and there, I some behold,
  Who can discern the tinsel from the gold;
  To these he writes; and if by them allowed,
  'Tis their prerogative to rule the crowd,
  For he more fears, like, a presuming man,
  Their votes who cannot judge, than theirs can._




I

SIMON'S HOUR


_As Played at Stornoway Crag, March 25, 1750_

"_You're a woman--one to whom Heaven gave beauty, when it grafted roses on
a briar. You are the reflection of Heaven in a pond, and he that leaps at
you is sunk. You were all white, a sheet of lovely spotless paper, when you
first were born; but you are to be scrawled and blotted by every goose's
quill._"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

LORD ROKESLE, a loose-living, Impoverished nobleman, and loves Lady
Allonby.

SIMON ORTS, Vicar of Heriz Magna, a debauched fellow, and Rokesle's
creature.

PUNSHON, servant to Rokesle.

LADY ALLONBY, a pleasure-loving, luxurious woman, a widow, and rich.


SCENE

The Mancini Chamber at Stornoway Crag, on Usk.


SIMON'S HOUR


_PROEM:--The Age and a Product of It_

We begin at a time when George the Second was permitting Ormskirk and the
Pelhams to govern England, and the Jacobites had not yet ceased to hope
for another Stuart Restoration, and Mr. Washington was a promising young
surveyor in the most loyal colony of Virginia; when abroad the Marquise de
Pompadour ruled France and all its appurtenances, and the King of Prussia
and the Empress Maria Theresa had, between them, set entire Europe by
the ears; when at home the ladies, if rumor may be credited, were less
unapproachable than their hoop-petticoats caused them to appear,
[Footnote: "Oft have we known that sevenfold fence to fail,
Though stiff with hoops, and armed with ribs of whale."]
and gentlemen wore swords, and some of the more reckless bloods were
daringly beginning to discard the Ramillie-tie and the pigtail for their
own hair; when politeness was obligatory, and morality a matter of taste,
and when well-bred people went about the day's work with an ample leisure
and very few scruples. In fine, we begin toward the end of March, in
the year 1750, when Lady Allonby and her brother, Mr. Henry Heleigh, of
Trevor's Folly, were the guests of Lord Rokesle, at Stornoway Crag, on Usk.

As any person of _ton_ could have informed you, Anastasia Allonby was the
widow (by his second marriage) of Lord Stephen Allonby, the Marquis of
Falmouth's younger brother; and it was conceded by the most sedate that
Lord Stephen's widow, in consideration of her liberal jointure, possessed
inordinate comeliness.

She was tall for a woman. Her hair, to-night unpowdered, had the color of
amber and something, too, of its glow; her eyes, though not profound, were
large and in hue varied, as the light fell or her emotions shifted, through
a wide gamut of blue shades. But it was her mouth you remembered: the
fulness and brevity of it, the deep indentation of its upper lip, the
curves of it and its vivid crimson--these roused you to wildish speculation
as to its probable softness when Lady Allonby and Fate were beyond ordinary
lenient. Pink was the color most favorable to her complexion, and this
she wore to-night; the gown was voluminous, with a profusion of lace, and
afforded everybody an ample opportunity to appraise her neck and bosom.
Lady Allonby had no reason to be ashamed of either, and the last mode in
these matters was not prudish.

To such a person, enters Simon Orts, chaplain in ordinary to Lord Rokesle,
and Vicar of Heriz Magna, one of Lord Rokesle's livings.


I

"Now of a truth," said Simon Orts, "that is curious--undeniably that is
curious."

He stayed at the door for a moment staring back into the ill-lit corridor.
Presently he shut the door, and came forward toward the fireplace.

Lady Allonby, half-hidden in the depths of the big chair beside the
chimney-piece, a book in her lap, looked up inquiringly. "What is curious,
Mr. Orts?"

The clergyman stood upon the hearth, warming his hands, and diffusing an
odor of tobacco and stale alcohol. "Faith, that damned rascal--I beg your
pardon, Anastasia; our life upon Usk is not conducive to a mincing nicety
of speech. That rascal Punshon made some difficulty over admitting me; you
might have taken him for a sentinel, with Stornoway in a state of siege. He
ruffled me,--and I don't like it," Simon Orts said, reflectively, looking
down upon her. "No, I don't like it. Where's your brother?" he demanded on
a sudden.

"Harry and Lord Rokesle are at cards, I believe. And Mrs. Morfit has
retired to her apartments with one of her usual headaches, so that I have
been alone these two hours. You visit Stornoway somewhat late, Mr. Orts,"
Anastasia Allonby added, without any particular concealment of the fact
that she considered his doing so a nuisance.

He jerked his thumb ceilingward. "The cloth is at any rascal's beck and
call. Old Holles, my Lord's man, is dying up yonder, and the whim seized
him to have a clergyman in. God knows why, for it appears to me that one
knave might very easily make his way to hell without having another knave
to help him. And Holles?--eh, well, from what I myself know of him, the
rogue is triply damned." His mouth puckered as he set about unbuttoning his
long, rain-spattered cloak, which, with his big hat, he flung aside upon a
table. "Gad!" said Simon Orts, "we are most of us damned on Usk; and that
is why I don't like it--" He struck his hand against his thigh. "I don't
like it, Anastasia."

"You must pardon me," she languidly retorted, "but I was never good at
riddles."

He turned and glanced about the hall, debating. Lady Allonby meanwhile
regarded him, as she might have looked at a frog or a hurtless snake. A
small, slim, anxious man, she found him; always fidgeting, always placating
some one, but never without a covert sneer. The fellow was venomous; his
eyes only were honest, for even while his lips were about their wheedling,
these eyes flashed malice at you; and their shifting was so unremittent
that afterward you recalled them as an absolute shining which had not any
color. On Usk and thereabouts they said it was the glare from within of his
damned soul, already at white heat; but they were a plain-spoken lot on
Usk. To-night Simon Orts was all in black; and his hair, too, and his gross
eyebrows were black, and well-nigh to the cheek-bones of his clean-shaven
countenance the thick beard, showed black through the skin.

Now he kept silence for a lengthy interval, his arms crossed on his breast,
gnawing meanwhile at the fingernails of his left hand in an unattractive
fashion he had of meditating. When words came it was in a torrent.

"I will read you my riddle, then. You are a widow, rich; as women go, you
are not so unpleasant to look at as most of 'em. If it became a clergyman
to dwell upon such matters, I would say that your fleshly habitation is
too fine for its tenant, since I know you to be a good-for-nothing jilt.
However, you are God's handiwork, and doubtless He had His reasons for
constructing you. My Lord is poor; last summer at Tunbridge you declined to
marry him. I am in his confidence, you observe. He took your decision in
silence--'ware Rokesle when he is quiet! Eh, I know the man,--'tisn't for
nothing that these ten years past I have studied his whims, pampered his
vanity, lied to him, toadied him! You admire my candor?--faith, yes, I
am very candid. I am Rokesle's hanger-on; he took me out of the gutter,
and in my fashion I am grateful. And you?--Anastasia, had you treated me
more equitably fifteen years ago, I would have gone to the stake for you,
singing; now I don't value you the flip of a farthing. But, for old time's
sake, I warn you. You and your brother are Rokesle's guests--on Usk!
Harry Heleigh [Footnote: Henry Heleigh, thirteenth Earl of Brudenel, who
succeeded his cousin the twelfth Earl in 1759, and lived to a great age.
Bavois, writing in 1797, calls him "a very fine, strong old gentleman."]
can handle a sword, I grant you,--but you are on Usk! And Mrs. Morfit is
here to play propriety--propriety on Usk, God save the mark! And besides,
Rokesle can twist his sister about his little finger, as the phrase runs.
And I find sentinels at the door! I don't like it, Anastasia. In his way
Rokesle loves you; more than that, you are an ideal match to retrieve his
battered fortunes; and the name of my worthy patron, I regret to say, is
not likely ever to embellish the Calendar of Saints."

Simon Orts paused with a short laugh. The woman had risen to her feet,
her eyes widening and a thought troubled, though her lips smiled
contemptuously.

"La, I should have comprehended that this late in the evening you would be
in no condition to converse with ladies. Believe me, though, Mr. Orts, I
would be glad to credit your warning to officious friendliness, were it not
that the odor about your person compels me to attribute it to gin."

"Oh, I have been drinking," he conceded; "I have been drinking with a
most commendable perseverance for these fifteen years. But at present I am
far from drunk." Simon Orts took a turn about the hall; in an instant he
faced her with an odd, almost tender smile, "You adorable, empty-headed,
pink-and-white fool," said Simon Orts, "what madness induced you to come to
Usk? You know that Rokesle wants you; you know that you don't mean to marry
him. Then why come to Usk? Do you know who is king in this sea-washed scrap
of earth?--Rokesle. German George reigns yonder in England, but here, in
the Isle of Usk, Vincent Floyer is king. And it is not precisely a convent
that he directs. The men of Usk, I gather, after ten years' experience in
the administering of spiritual consolation hereabouts"--and his teeth made
their appearance in honor of the jest,--"are part fisherman, part smuggler,
part pirate, and part devil. Since the last ingredient predominates, they
have no very unreasonable apprehension of hell, and would cheerfully invade
it if Rokesle bade 'em do so. As I have pointed out, my worthy patron is
subject to the frailties of the flesh. Oh, I am candid, for if you report
me to his Lordship I shall lie out of it. I have had practice enough to do
it handsomely. But Rokesle--do you not know what Rokesle is--?"

The Vicar of Heriz Magna would have gone on, but Lady Allonby had
interrupted, her cheeks flaming. "Yes, yes," she cried;' "I know him to
be a worthy gentleman. 'Tis true I could not find it in my heart to marry
him, yet I am proud to rank Lord Rokesle among my friends." She waved her
hand toward the chimney-piece, where hung--and hangs to-day,--the sword of
Aluric Floyer, the founder of the house of Rokesle. "Do you see that old
sword, Mr. Orts? The man who wielded it long ago was a gallant gentleman
and a stalwart captain. And my Lord, as he told me but on Thursday
afternoon, hung it there that he might always have in mind the fact that
he bore the name of this man, and must bear it meritoriously. My Lord is
a gentleman. La, believe me, if you, too, were a gentleman, Mr. Orts, you
would understand! But a gentleman is not a talebearer; a gentleman does not
defame any person behind his back, far less the person to whom he owes his
daily bread."

"So he has been gulling you?" said Simon Orts; then he added quite
inconsequently: "I had not thought anything you could say would hurt me. I
discover I was wrong. Perhaps I am not a gentleman. Faith, no; I am only a
shabby drunkard, a disgrace to my cloth, am I not, Anastasia? Accordingly,
I fail to perceive what old Aluric Floyer has to do with the matter in
hand. He was reasonably virtuous, I suppose; putting aside a disastrous
appetite for fruit, so was Adam: but, viewing their descendants, I ruefully
admit that in each case the strain has deteriorated."

There was a brief silence; then Lady Allonby observed: "Perhaps I was
discourteous. I ask your forgiveness, Mr. Orts. And now, if you will pardon
the suggestion, I think you had better go to your dying parishioner."

But she had touched the man to the quick. "I am a drunkard; who made me
so? Who was it used to cuddle me with so many soft words and kisses--yes,
kisses, my Lady!--till a wealthier man came a-wooing, and then flung me
aside like an old shoe?"

This drenched her cheeks with crimson, "I think we had better not refer to
that boy-and-girl affair. You cannot blame me for your debauched manner
of living. I found before it was too late that I did not love you. I was
only a girl, and 'twas natural that at first I should be mistaken in my
fancies."

The Vicar had caught her by each wrist. "You don't understand, of course.
You never understood, for you have no more heart than one of those
pink-and-white bisque figures that you resemble. You don't love me, and
therefore I will go to the devil' may not be an all-rational deduction, but
'tis very human logic. You don't understand that, do you, Anastasia? You
don't understand how when one is acutely miserable one remembers that at
the bottom of a wineglass--or even at the bottom of a tumbler of gin,--one
may come upon happiness, or at least upon acquiescence to whatever the
niggling gods may send. You don't understand how one remembers, when the
desired woman is lost, that there are other women whose lips are equally
red and whose hearts are tenderer and--yes, whose virtue is less exigent.
No; women never understand these things: and in any event, you would not
understand, because you are only an adorable pink-and-white fool."

"Oh, oh!" she cried, struggling, "How dare you? You insult me, you coward!"

"Well, you can always comfort yourself with the reflection that it scarcely
matters what a sot like me may elect to say. And, since you understand me
now no more than formerly, Anastasia, I tell you that the lover turned
adrift may well profit by the example of his predecessors. Other lovers
have been left forsaken, both in trousers and in ripped petticoats; and
I have heard that when Chryseis was reft away from Agamemnon, the _cnax
andron_ made himself tolerably comfortable with Briseis; and that, when
Theseus sneaked off in the night, Ariadne, after having wept for a
decent period, managed in the ultimate to console herself with Theban
Bacchus,--which I suppose to be a courteous method of stating that the
daughter of Minos took to drink. So the forsaken lover has his choice of
consolation--in wine or in that dearer danger, woman. I have tried both,
Anastasia. And I tell you--"

He dropped her hands as though they had been embers. Lord Rokesle had come
quietly into the hall.

"Why, what's this?" Lord Rokesle demanded. "Simon, you aren't making love
to Lady Allonby, I hope? Fie, man! remember your cloth."

Simon Orts wheeled--a different being, servile and cringing. "Your Lordship
is pleased to be pleasant. Indeed, though, I fear that your ears must
burn, sir, for I was but now expatiating upon the manifold kindnesses your
Lordship has been so generous as to confer upon your unworthy friend. I was
admiring Lady Allonby's ruffle, sir,--Valenciennes, I take it, and very
choice."

Lord Rokesle laughed. "So I am to thank you for blowing my trumpet, am I?"
said Lord Rokesle. "Well, you are not a bad fellow, Simon, so long as you
are sober. And now be off with you to Holles--the rascal is dying, they
tell me. My luck, Simon! He made up a cravat better than any one in the
kingdom."

"The ways of Providence are inscrutable," Simon Orts considered; "and
if Providence has in verity elected to chasten your Lordship, doubtless
it shall be, as anciently in the case of Job the Patriarch, repaid by a
recompense, by a thousandfold recompense." And after a meaning glance
toward Lady Allonby,--a glance that said: "I, too, have a tongue,"--he was
mounting the stairway to the upper corridor when Lord Rokesle called to
him.

"By my conscience! I forgot," said Lord Rokesle; "don't leave Stornoway
without seeing me again, I shall want you by and by."


II

Lord Rokesle sat down upon the long, high-backed bench, beside the fire,
and facing Lady Allonby's arm-chair.

Neither he nor Lady Allonby spoke for a while.

In a sombre way Lord Rokesle was a handsome man, and to-night, in brown
and gold, very stately. His bearing savored faintly of the hidalgo; indeed,
his mother was a foreign woman, cast ashore on Usk, from a wrecked Spanish
vessel, and incontinently married by the despot of the island. For her,
Death had delayed his advent unmercifully; but her reason survived the
marriage by two years only, and there were those familiar with the late
Lord Rokesle's [Footnote: Born 1685, and accidentally killed by Sir
Piers Sabiston in 1738; an accurate account of this notorious duellist,
profligate, charlatan, and playwright is given in Ireson's _Letters_.]
peculiarities who considered that in this, at least, the crazed lady was
fortunate. Among these gossips it was also esteemed a matter deserving
comment that in the shipwrecks not infrequent about Usk the women sometimes
survived, but the men never.

Now Lord Rokesle regarded Lady Allonby, the while that she displayed
conspicuous interest in the play of the flames. But by and by, "O
vulgarity!" said Lady Allonby. "Pray endeavor to look a little more
cheerful. Positively, you are glaring at me like one of those disagreeable
beggars one so often sees staring at bakery windows."

He smiled. "Do you remember what the Frenchman wrote--_et pain ne voyent
qu'aux fenetres?_ There is not an enormous difference between me and the
tattered rascal of Chepe, for we both stare longingly at what we most
desire. And were I minded to hunt the simile to the foot of the letter,
I would liken your coquetry to the intervening window-pane,--not easily
broken through, but very, very transparent, Anastasia."

"You are not overwhelmingly polite," she said, reflectively; "but, then, I
suppose, living in the country is sure to damage a man's manners. Still, my
dear Orson, you smack too much of the forest."

"Anastasia," said Lord Rokesle, bending toward her, "will you always be
thus cruel? Do you not understand that in this world you are the only thing
I care for? You think me a boor; perhaps I am,--and yet it rests with you,
my Lady, to make me what you will. For I love you, Anastasia--"

"Why, how delightful of you!" said she, languidly.

"It is not a matter for jesting. I tell you that I love you." My Lord's
color was rising.

But Lady Allonby yawned. "Your honor's most devoted," she declared herself;
"still, you need not boast of your affection as if falling in love with me
were an uncommonly difficult achievement. That, too, is scarcely polite."

"For the tenth time I ask you will you marry me?" said Lord Rokesle.

"Is't only the tenth time? Dear me, it seems like the thousandth. Of
course, I couldn't think of it. Heavens, my Lord, how can you expect me to
marry a man who glares at me like that? Positively you look as ferocious as
the blackamoor in the tragedy,--the fellow who smothered his wife because
she misplaced a handkerchief, you remember."

Lord Rokesle had risen, and he paced the hall, as if fighting down
resentment. "I am no Othello," he said at last; "though, indeed, I think
that the love I bear you is of a sort which rarely stirs our English blood.
'Tis not for nothing I am half-Spaniard, I warn you, Anastasia, my love is
a consuming blaze that will not pause for considerations of policy nor even
of honor. And you madden me, Anastasia! To-day you hear my protestations
with sighs and glances and faint denials; to-morrow you have only taunts
for me. Sometimes, I think, 'tis hatred rather than love I bear you.
Sometimes--" He clutched at his breast with a wild gesture. "I burn!" he
said. "Woman, give me back a human heart in place of this flame you have
kindled here, or I shall go mad! Last night I dreamed of hell, and of souls
toasted on burning forks and fed with sops of bale-fire,--and you were
there, Anastasia, where the flames leaped and curled like red-blazoned
snakes about the poor damned. And I, too, was there. And through eternity I
heard you cry to God in vain, O dear, wonderful, golden-haired woman! and
we could see Him, somehow,--see Him, a great way off, with straight, white
brows that frowned upon you pitilessly. And I was glad. For I knew then
that I hated you. And even now, when I think I must go mad for love of you,
I yet hate you with a fervor that shakes and thrills in every fibre of
me. Oh, I burn, I burn!" he cried, with the same frantic clutching at his
breast.

Lady Allonby had risen.

"Positively, I must ask you to open a window if you intend to continue in
this strain. D'ye mean to suffocate me, my Lord, with your flames and your
blazes and your brimstone and so on? You breathe conflagrations, like a
devil in a pantomime. I had as soon converse with a piece of fireworks. So,
if you'll pardon me, I will go to my brother."

At the sound of her high, crisp speech his frenzy fell from him like a
mantle. "And you let me kiss you yesterday! Oh, I know you struggled, but
you did not struggle very hard, did you, Anastasia?"

"Why, what a notion!" cried Lady Allonby; "as if a person should bother
seriously one way or the other about the antics of an amorous clodhopper!
Meanwhile, I repeat, my Lord, I wish to go to my brother."

"Egad!" Lord Rokesle retorted, "that reminds me I have been notably remiss.
I bear you a message from Harry. He had to-night a letter from Job Nangle,
who, it seems, has a purchaser for Trevor's Folly at last. The fellow is
with our excellent Nangle at Peniston Friars, and offers liberal terms if
the sale be instant. The chance was too promising to let slip, so Harry
left the island an hour ago. It happened by a rare chance that some of my
fellows were on the point of setting out for the mainland,--and he knew
that he could safely entrust you to Mrs. Morfit's duennaship, he said."

"He should not have done so," Lady Allonby observed, as if in a contention
of mind. "He--I will go to Mrs. Morfit, then, to confess to her in
frankness that, after all these rockets and bonfires--"

"Why, that's the unfortunate part of the whole affair," said Lord Rokesle.
"The same boat brought Sabina a letter which summoned her to the bedside
of her husband, [Footnote: Archibald Morfit, M.P. for Salop, and in 1753
elected Speaker, which office he declined on account of ill-health. He was
created a baronet in 1758 through the Duke of Ormskirk's influence.] who,
it appears, lies desperately ill at Kuyper Manor. It happened by a rare
chance that some of my fellows were on the point of setting out for the
mainland--from Heriz pier yonder, not from the end of the island whence
Harry sailed,--so she and her maid embarked instanter. Of course, there was
your brother here to play propriety, she said. And by the oddest misfortune
in the world," Lord Rokesle sighed, "I forgot to tell her that Harry
Heleigh had left Usk a half-hour earlier. My memory is lamentably
treacherous."

But Lady Allonby had dropped all affectation. "You coward! You planned
this!"

"Candidly, yes. Nangle is my agent as well as Harry's, you may remember.
I have any quantity of his letters, and of course an equal number
of Archibald's. So I spent the morning in my own apartments,
Anastasia,--tracing letters against the window-pane, which was, I suppose,
a childish recreation, but then what would you have? As you very justly
observe, country life invariably coarsens a man's tastes; and accordingly,
as you may now recall, I actually declined a game of _ecarte_ with you in
order to indulge in these little forgeries. Decidedly, my dear, you must
train your husband's imagination for superior flights--when you are Lady
Rokesle."

She was staring at him as though he had been a portent. "I am alone," she
said. "Alone--in this place--with you! Alone! you devil!"

"Your epithets increase in vigor. Just now I was only a clodhopper. Well,
I can but repeat that it rests with you to make me what you will. Though,
indeed, you are to all intent alone upon Usk, and upon Usk there are many
devils. There are ten of them on guard yonder, by the way, in case your
brother should return inopportunely, though that's scarcely probable.
Obedient devils, you observe, Anastasia,--devils who exert and check their
deviltry as I bid 'em, for they esteem me Lucifer's lieutenant. And I grant
the present situation is an outrage to propriety, yet the evil is not
incurable. Lady Allonby may not, if she value her reputation, pass to-night
at Stornoway; but here am I, all willingness, and upstairs is the parson.
Believe me, Anastasia, the most vinegarish prude could never object to Lady
Rokesle's spending to-night at Stornoway."

"Let me think, let me think!" Lady Allonby said, and her hands plucked now
at her hair, now at her dress. She appeared dazed. "I can't think!" she
wailed on a sudden. "I am afraid. I--O Vincent, Vincent, you cannot do
this thing! I trusted you, Vincent. I know I let you make love to me, and
I relished having you make love to me. Women are like that. But I cannot
marry you, Vincent. There is a man, yonder in England, whom I love. He does
not care for me any more,--he is in love with my step-daughter. That is
very amusing, is it not, Vincent? Some day I may be his mother-in-law. Why
don't you laugh, Vincent? Come, let us both laugh--first at this and then
at the jest you have just played on me. Do you know, for an instant, I
believed you were in earnest? But Harry went to sleep over the cards,
didn't he? And Mrs. Morfit has gone to bed with one of her usual headaches?
Of course; and you thought you would retaliate upon me for teasing you. You
were quite right, 'Twas an excellent jest. Now let us laugh at it. Laugh,
Vincent! Oh!" she said now, more shrilly, "for the love of God, laugh,
laugh!--or I shall go mad!"

But Lord Rokesle was a man of ice, "Matrimony is a serious matter,
Anastasia; 'tis not becoming in those who are about to enter it to exhibit
undue levity. I wonder what's keeping Simon?"

"Simon Orts!" she said, in a half-whisper. Then she came toward Lord
Rokesle, smiling. "Why, of course, I teased you, Vincent, but there was
never any hard feeling, was there? And you really wish me to marry you?
Well, we must see, Vincent. But, as you say, matrimony is a serious matter.
D'ye know you say very sensible things, Vincent?--not at all like those
silly fops yonder in London. I dare say you and I would be very happy
together. But you wouldn't have any respect for me if I married you on a
sudden like this, would you? Of course not. So you will let me consider it.
Come to me a month from now, say,--is that too long to wait? Well, I think
'tis too long myself. Say a week, then. I must have my wedding-finery,
you comprehend. We women are such vain creatures--not big and brave and
sensible like you men. See, for example, how much bigger your hand is
than mine--mine's quite lost in it, isn't it? So--since I am only a vain,
chattering, helpless female thing,--you are going to indulge me and let me
go up to London for some new clothes, aren't you, Vincent? Of course you
will; and we will be married in a week. But you will let me go to London
first, won't you?--away from this dreadful place, away--I didn't mean that.
I suppose it is a very agreeable place when you get accustomed to it. And
'tis only for clothes--Oh, I swear it is only for clothes, Vincent! And you
said you would--yes, only a moment ago you distinctly said you would let me
go. 'Tis not as if I were not coming back--who said I would not come back?
Of course I will. But you must give me time, Vincent dear,--you must, you
must, I tell you! O God!" she sobbed, and flung from her the loathed hand
she was fondling, "it's no use!"

"No," said Lord Rokesle, rather sadly. "I am not Samson, nor are you
Delilah to cajole me. It's of no use, Anastasia. I would have preferred
that you came to me voluntarily, but since you cannot, I mean to take you
unwilling. Simon," he called, loudly, "does that rascal intend to spin out
his dying interminably? Charon's waiting, man."

From above, "Coming, my Lord," said Simon Orts.


III

The Vicar of Heriz Magna descended the stairway with deliberation. His
eyes twitched from the sobbing woman to Lord Rokesle, and then back again,
in that furtive way Orts had of glancing about a room, without moving his
head; he seemed to lie in ambush under his gross brows; and whatever his
thoughts may have been, he gave them no utterance.

"Simon," said Lord Rokesle, "Lady Allonby is about to make me the happiest
of men. Have you a prayer-book about you, Master Parson?--for here's a
loving couple desirous of entering the blessed state of matrimony."

"The match is somewhat of the suddenest," said Simon Orts. "But I have
known these impromptu marriages to turn out very happily--very happily,
indeed." he repeated, rubbing his hands together, and smiling horribly. "I
gather that Mr. Heleigh will not grace the ceremony with his presence?"

They understood each other, these two. Lord Rokesle grinned, and in a few
words told the ecclesiastic of the trick which had insured the absence of
the other guests; and Simon Orts also grinned, but respectfully,--the grin,
of the true lackey wearing his master's emotions like his master's clothes,
at second-hand.

"A very pretty stratagem," said Simon Orts; "unconventional, I must
confess, but it is proverbially known that all's fair in love."

At this Lady Allonby came to him, catching his hand. "There is only you,
Simon. Oh, there is no hope in that lustful devil yonder. But you are not
all base, Simon. You are a man,--ah, God! if I were a man I would rip out
that devil's heart--his defiled and infamous heart! I would trample upon
it, I would feed it to dogs--!" She paused. Her impotent fury was jerking
at every muscle, was choking her. "But I am only a woman. Simon, you used
to love me. You cannot have forgotten, Simon. Oh, haven't you any pity on a
woman? Remember, Simon--remember how happy we were! Don't you remember how
the night-jars used to call to one another when we sat on moonlit evenings
under the elm-tree? And d'ye remember the cottage we planned, Simon?--where
we were going to live on bread and cheese and kisses? And how we quarrelled
because I wanted to train vines over it? You said the rooms would be too
dark. You said--oh, Simon, Simon! if only I had gone to live with you in
that little cottage we planned and never builded!" Lady Allonby was at his
feet now. She fawned upon him in somewhat the manner of a spaniel expectant
of a thrashing.

The Vicar of Heriz Magna dispassionately ran over the leaves of his
prayer-book, till he had found the marriage service, and then closed the
book, his forefinger marking the place. Lord Rokesle stood apart, and with
a sly and meditative smile observed them.

"Your plea is a remarkable one," said Simon Orts. "As I understand it, you
appeal to me to meddle in your affairs on the ground that you once made
a fool of me. I think the obligation is largely optional. I remember
quite clearly the incidents to which you refer; and it shames even an
old sot like me to think that I was ever so utterly at the mercy of a
good-for-nothing jilt. I remember every vow you ever made to me, Anastasia,
and I know they were all lies. I remember every kiss, every glance, every
caress--all lies, Anastasia! And gad! the only emotion it rouses in me is
wonder as to why my worthy patron here should want to marry you. Of course
you are wealthy, but, personally, I would not have you for double the
money. I must ask you to rise, Lady Rokesle.--Pardon me if I somewhat
anticipate your title."

Lady Allonby stumbled to her feet. "Is there no manhood in the world?" she
asked, with a puzzled voice. "Has neither of you ever heard of manhood,
though but as distantly as men hear summer thunder? Had neither of you a
woman for a mother--a woman, as I am--or a father who was not--O God!--not
as you are?"

"These rhetorical passages," said Lord Rokesle, "while very elegantly
expressed, are scarcely to the point. So you and Simon went a-philandering
once? Egad, that lends quite a touch of romance to the affair. But
despatch, Parson Simon,--your lady's for your betters now."

"Dearly beloved,--" said Simon Orts.

"Simon, you are not all base. I am helpless, Simon, utterly helpless. There
was a Simon once would not have seen me weep. There was a Simon--"

"--we are gathered together here in the sight of God--"

"You cannot do it, Simon,--do I not know you to the marrow? Remember--not
me--not the vain folly of my girlhood!--but do you remember the man you
have been, Simon Orts!" Fiercely Lady Allonby caught him by the shoulder.
"For you do remember! You do remember, don't you, Simon?"

The Vicar stared at her. "The man I have been," said Simon Orts, "yes!--the
man I have been!" Something clicked in his throat with sharp distinctness.

"Upon my word," said Lord Rokesle, yawning, "this getting married appears
to be an uncommonly tedious business."

Then Simon Orts laid aside his prayer-book and said: "I cannot do it, my
Lord. The woman's right."

She clapped her hands to her breast, and stood thus, reeling upon her
feet. You would have thought her in the crisis of some physical agony;
immediately she breathed again, deeply but with a flinching inhalation, as
though the contact of the air scorched her lungs, and, swaying, fell. It
was the Vicar who caught her as she fell.

"I entreat your pardon?" said Lord Rokesle, and without study of Lady
Allonby's condition. This was men's business now, and over it Rokesle's
brow began to pucker.

Simon Orts bore Lady Allonby to the settie. He passed behind it to arrange
a cushion under her head, with an awkward, grudging tenderness; and then
rose to face Lord Rokesle across the disordered pink fripperies.

"The woman's right, my Lord. There is such a thing as manhood. Manhood!"
Simon Orts repeated, with a sort of wonder; "why, I might have boasted it
once. Then came this cuddling bitch to trick me into a fool's paradise--to
trick me into utter happiness, till Stephen Allonby, a marquis' son,
clapped eyes on her and whistled,--and within the moment she had flung me
aside. May God forgive me, I forgot I was His servant then! I set out to go
to the devil, but I went farther; for I went to you, Vincent Floyer. You
gave me bread when I was starving,--but 'twas at a price. Ay, the price was
that I dance attendance on you, to aid and applaud your knaveries, to be
your pander, your lackey, your confederate,--that I puff out, in effect,
the last spark of manhood in my sot's body. Oh, I am indeed beholden to you
two! to her for making me a sot, and to you for making me a lackey. But I
will save her from you, Vincent Floyer. Not for her sake"--Orts looked down
upon the prostrate woman and snarled. "Christ, no! But I'll do it for the
sake of the boy I have been, since I owe that boy some reparation. I have
ruined his nimble body, I have dulled the wits he gloried in, I have made
his name a foul thing that honesty spits out of her mouth; but, if God yet
reigns in heaven, I cleanse that name to-night!"

"Oh, bless me," Lord Rokesle observed; "I begin to fear these heroics are
contagious. Possibly I, too, shall begin to rant in a moment. Meanwhile, as
I understand it, you decline to perform the ceremony. I have had to warn
you before this, Simon, that you mustn't take too much gin when I am apt
to need you. You are very pitifully drunk, man. So you defy me and my evil
courses! You defy me!" Rokesle laughed, genially, for the notion amused
him. "Wine is a mocker, Simon. But come, despatch, Parson Tosspot, and
let's have no more of these lofty sentiments."

"I cannot do it. I--O my Lord, my Lord! You wouldn't kill an unarmed man!"
Simon Orts whined, with a sudden alteration of tone; for Lord Rokesle had
composedly drawn his sword, and its point was now not far from the Vicar's
breast.

"I trust that I shall not be compelled to. Egad, it is a very ludicrous
business when the bridegroom is forced to hold a sword to the parson's
bosom all during the ceremony; but a ceremony we must have, Simon, for Lady
Allonby's jointure is considerable. Otherwise--Harkee, my man, don't play
the fool! there are my fellows yonder, any one of whom would twist your
neck at a word from me. And do you think I would boggle at a word? Gad,
Simon, I believed you knew me better!"

The Vicar of Heriz Magna kept silence for an instant; his eyes were
twitching about the hall, in that stealthy way of his. Finally, "It is
no use," said he. "A poor knave cannot afford the luxury of honesty. My
life is not a valuable one, perhaps, but even vermin have an aversion to
death. I resume my lackeyship, Lord Rokesle. Perhaps 'twas only the gin.
Perhaps--In any event, I am once more at your service. And as guaranty of
this I warn you that you are exhibiting in the affair scant forethought.
Mr. Heleigh is but three miles distant. If he, by any chance, get wind of
this business, Denstroude will find a boat for him readily enough--ay, and
men, too, now that the Colonel is at feud with you. Many of your people
visit the mainland every night, and in their cups the inhabitants of Usk
are not taciturn. An idle word spoken over an inn-table may bring an armed
company thundering about your gates. You should have set sentinels, my
Lord."

"I have already done so," Rokesle said; "there are ten of 'em yonder. Still
there is something in what you say. We will make this affair certain."

Lord Rokesle crossed the hall to the foot of the stairway and struck thrice
upon the gong hanging there. Presently the door leading to the corridor was
opened, and a man came into the hall.

"Punshon," said Lord Rokesle, "have any boats left the island to-night?"

"No, my Lord."

"You will see that none do. Also, no man is to leave Stornoway to-night,
either for Heriz Magna or the mainland; and nobody is to enter Stornoway.
Do you understand, Punshon?"

"Yes, my Lord."

"If you will pardon me," said Simon Orts, with a grin, "I have an
appointment to-night. You'd not have me break faith with a lady?"

"You are a lecherous rascal, Simon. But do as you are bid and I indulge
you. I am not afraid of your going to Harry Heleigh--after performing the
ceremony. Nay, my lad, for you are thereby _particeps criminis_. You will
pass Mr. Orts, Punshon, to the embraces of his whore. Nobody else."

Simon Orts waved his hand toward Lady Allonby. "'Twere only kindness to
warn Mr. Punshon there may be some disturbance shortly. A lamentation or
so."

At this Lord Rokesle clapped him upon the shoulder and heartily laughed.
"That's the old Simon--always on the alert. Punshon, no one is to enter
this wing of the castle, on any pretext--no one, you understand. Whatever
noises you may hear, you will pay no attention. Now go."

He went toward Lady Allonby and took her hand. "Come, Anastasia!" said he.
"Hold, she has really swooned! Why, what the devil, Simon--!"

Simon Orts had flung the gong into the fire. "She will be sounding that
when she comes to," said Simon Orts. "You don't want a rumpus fit to vex
the dead yonder in the Chapel." Simon Orts stood before the fire, turning
the leaves of his prayer-book. He seemed to have difficulty in finding
again the marriage service. You heard the outer door of the corridor
closing, heard chains dragged ponderously, the heavy falling of a bolt.
Orts dropped the book and, springing into the arm-chair, wrested Aluric
Floyer's sword from its fastening. "Tricked, tricked!" said Simon Orts.
"You were always a fool, Vincent Floyer."

Lord Rokesle blinked at him, as if dazzled by unexpected light. "What d'ye
mean?"

"I have the honor to repeat--you are a fool, I did not know the place was
guarded--you told me. I needed privacy; by your orders no one is to enter
here to-night. I needed a sword--you had it hanging here, ready for the
first comer. Oh, beyond doubt, you are a fool, Vincent Floyer!" Standing
in the arm-chair, Simon Orts bowed fantastically, and then leaped to the
ground with the agility of an imp.

"You have tricked me neatly," Lord Rokesle conceded, and his tone did not
lack honest admiration. "By gad, I have even given them orders to pass
you--after you have murdered me! Exceedingly clever, Simon,--but one thing
you overlooked. You are very far from my match at fencing. So I shall
presently kill you. And afterward, ceremony or no ceremony, the woman's
mine."

"I am not convinced of that," the Vicar observed. "'Tis true I am no
swordsman; but there are behind my sword forces superior to any which
skill might muster. The sword of your fathers fights against you, my
Lord--against you that are their disgrace. They loved honor and truth; you
betrayed honor, you knew not truth. They revered womanhood; you reverence
nothing, and your life smirches your mother's memory. Ah, believe me,
they all fight against you! Can you not see them, my Lord?--yonder at my
back?--old Aluric Floyer and all those honest gentlemen, whose blood now
blushes in your body--ay, blushes to be confined in a vessel so ignoble!
Their armament fights against you, a host of gallant phantoms. And my
hatred, too, fights against you--the cur's bitter hatred for the mastering
hand it dares not bite. I dare now. You made me your pander, you slew my
manhood; in return, body and soul, I demolish you. Even my hatred for that
woman fights against you; she robbed me of my honor--is it not a tragical
revenge to save her honor, to hold it in my hand, mine, to dispose of as
I elect,--and then fling it to her as a thing contemptible? Between you,
you have ruined me; but it is Simon's hour to-night. I shame you both, and
past the reach of thought, for presently I shall take your life--in the
high-tide of your iniquity, praise God!--and presently I shall give my life
for hers. Ah, I a fey, my Lord! You are a dead man, Vincent Floyer, for the
powers of good and the powers of evil alike contend against you."

He spoke rather sadly than otherwise; and there was a vague trouble in Lord
Rokesle's face, though he shook his head impatiently. "These are fine words
to come from the dirtiest knave unhanged in England."

"Great ends may be attained by petty instruments, my Lord; a filthy turtle
quenched the genius of AEschylus, and they were only common soldiers who
shed the blood that redeemed the world."

Lord Rokesle pished at this. Yet he was strangely unruffled. He saluted
with quietude, as equal to equal, and the two crossed blades.

Simon Orts fought clumsily, but his encroachment was unwavering. From the
first he pressed his opponent with a contained resolution. The Vicar was
as a man fighting in a dream--with a drugged obstinacy, unswerving. Lord
Rokesle had wounded him in the arm, but Orts did not seem aware of this.
He crowded upon his master. Now there were little beads of sweat on Lord
Rokesle's brow, and his tongue protruded from his mouth, licking at it
ravenously. Step by step Lord Rokesle drew back; there was no withstanding
this dumb fanatic, who did not know when he was wounded, who scarcely
parried attack.

"Even on earth you shall have a taste of hell," said Simon Orts. "There is
terror in your eyes, my worthy patron."

Lord Rokesle flung up his arms as the sword dug into his breast. "I am
afraid! I am afraid!" he wailed. Then he coughed, and seemed with his
straining hands to push a great weight from him as the blood frothed about
his lips and nostrils. "O Simon, I am afraid! Help me, Simon!"

Old custom spoke there. Followed silence, and presently the empty body
sprawled upon the floor. Vincent Floyer had done with it.


IV

Simon Orts knelt, abstractedly wiping Aluric Floyer's sword upon the corner
of a rug. It may be that he derived comfort from this manual employment
which necessitated attention without demanding that it concentrate his
mind; it may have enabled him to forget how solitary the place was, how
viciously his garments rustled when he moved: the fact is certain that he
cleaned the sword, over and over again.

Then a scraping of silks made him wince. Turning, he found Lady Allonby
half-erect upon the settle. She stared about her with a kind of Infantile
wonder; her glance swept, over Lord Rokesle's body, without to all
appearance finding it an object of remarkable interest. "Is he dead?"

"Yes," said Simon Orts; "get up!" His voice had a rasp; she might from his
tone have been a refractory dog. But Lady Allonby obeyed him.

"We are in a devil of a mess," said Simon Orts; "yet I see a way out of
it--if you can keep your head. Can you?"

"I am past fear," she said, dully. "I drown, Simon, in a sea of feathers. I
can get no foothold, I clutch nothing that is steadfast, and I smother. I
have been like this in dreams. I am very tired, Simon."

He took her hand, collectedly appraising her pulse. He put his own hand
upon her bared bosom, and felt the beat of her heart. "No," said Simon
Orts, "you are not afraid. Now, listen: You lack time to drown in a sea of
feathers. You are upon Usk, among men who differ from beasts by being a
thought more devilish, and from devils by being a little more bestial; it
is my opinion that the earlier you get away the better. Punshon has orders
to pass Simon Orts. Very well; put on this."

He caught up his long cloak and wrapped it about her. Lady Allonby stood
rigid. But immediately he frowned and removed the garment from her
shoulders.

"That won't do. Your skirts are too big. Take 'em off."

Submissively she did so, and presently stood before him in her
under-petticoat.

"You cut just now a very ludicrous figure, Anastasia. I dare assert that
the nobleman who formerly inhabited yonder carcass would still be its
tenant if he had known how greatly the beauty he went mad for was beholden
to the haberdasher and the mantua-maker, and quite possibly the chemist.
_Persicos odi_, Anastasia; 'tis a humiliating reflection that the hair of a
dead woman artfully disposed about a living head should have the power
to set men squabbling, and murder be at times engendered in a paint-pot.
However, wrap yourself in the cloak. Now turn up the collar,--so. Now pull
down the hatbrim. Um--a--pretty well. Chance favors us unblushingly. You
may thank your stars it is a rainy night and that I am a little man. You
detest little men, don't you? Yes, I remember." Simon Orts now gave his
orders, emphasizing each with a not over-clean forefinger. "When I open
this door you will go out into the corridor. Punshon or one of the others
will be on guard at the farther end. Pay no attention to him. There is
only one light--on the left. Keep to the right, in the shadow. Stagger as
you go; if you can manage a hiccough, the imitation will be all the more
lifelike. Punshon will expect something of the sort, and he will not
trouble you, for he knows that when I am fuddled I am quarrelsome. 'Tis a
diverting world, Anastasia, wherein, you now perceive, habitual drunkenness
and an unbridled temper may sometimes prove commendable,--as they do
to-night, when they aid persecuted innocence!" Here Simon Orts gave an
unpleasant laugh.

"But I do not understand--"

"You understand very little except coquetry and the proper disposition
of a ruffle. Yet this is simple. My horse is tied at the postern.
Mount--astride, mind. You know the way to the Vicarage, so does the horse;
you will find that posturing half-brother of mine at the Vicarage. Tell
Frank what has happened. Tell him to row you to the mainland; tell him to
conduct you to Colonel Denstroude's. Then you must shift for yourself; but
Denstroude is a gentleman, and Denstroude would protect Beelzebub if he
came to him a fugitive from Vincent Floyer. Now do you understand?"

"Yes," said Lady Allonby, and seated herself before the fire,--"yes, I
understand. I am to slip away in the darkness and leave you here to answer
for Lord Rokesle's death--to those devils. La, do you really think me as
base as that?"

Now Simon Orts was kneeling at her side. The black cloak enveloped her from
head to foot, and the turned-up collar screened her sunny hair; in the
shadow of the broad hatbrim you could see only her eyes, resplendent and
defiant, and in them the reflection of the vaulting flames. "You would
stay, Anastasia?"

"I will not purchase my life at the cost of yours. I will be indebted to
you for nothing, Simon Orts."

The Vicar chuckled. "Nor appeared Less than archangel ruined," he said.
"No, faith, not a whit less! We are much of a piece, Anastasia. Do you
know--if affairs had fallen out differently--I think I might have been a
man and you a woman? As it is--" Kneeling still, his glance devoured her.
"Yes, you would stay. And you comprehend what staying signifies. 'Tis
pride, your damnable pride, that moves you,--but I rejoice, for it proves
you a brave woman. Courage, at least, you possess, and this is the first
virtue I have discovered in you for a long while. However, there is no
necessity for your staying. The men of Usk will not hurt Simon Orts."

She was very eager to believe this. Lady Allonby had found the world a
pleasant place since her widowhood. "They will not kill you? You swear it,
Simon?"

"Why, the man was their tyrant. They obeyed him--yes, through fear. I am
their deliverer, Anastasia. But if they found a woman here--a woman not
ill-looking--" Simon Orts snapped his fingers. "Faith, I leave you to
conjecture," said he.

They had both risen, he smiling, the woman in a turbulence of hope and
terror. "Swear to it, Simon!"

"Anastasia, were affairs as you suppose them, I would have a curt while to
live. Were affairs as you suppose them, I would stand now at the threshold
of eternity. And I swear to you, upon my soul's salvation, that I have
nothing to fear. Nothing will ever hurt me any more."

"No, you would not dare to lie in the moment of death," she said, after
a considerable pause. "I believe you. I will go. Good-bye, Simon." Lady
Allonby went toward the door opening into the corridor, but turned there
and came back to him. "I shall never see you again. And, la, I think that
I rather hate you than otherwise, for you remind me of things I would
willingly forget. But, Simon, I wish we had gone to live in that little
cottage we planned, and quarrelled over, and never built! I think we would
have been happy."

Simon Orts raised her hand to his lips. "Yes," said he, "we would have been
happy. I would have been by this a man doing a man's work in the world, and
you a matron, grizzling, perhaps, but rich in content, and in love opulent.
As it is, you have your flatterers, your gossip, and your cards; I have my
gin. Good-bye, Anastasia."

"Simon, why have you done--this?"

The Vicar of Heriz Magna flung out his hands in a gesture of impotence. "I
dare confess now that which even to myself I have never dared confess. I
suppose the truth of it is that I have loved you all my life."

"I am sorry. I am not worth it, Simon."

"No; you are immeasurably far from being worth it. But one does not justify
these fancies by mathematics. Good-bye, Anastasia."


V

Holding the door ajar, the Vicar of Heriz Magna heard a horse's hoofs slap
their leisurely way down the hillside. Presently the sound died and he
turned back into the hall.

"A brave woman, that! Oh, a trifling, shallow-hearted jilt, but a brave
creature!

"I had to lie to her. She would have stayed else. And perhaps it is true
that, in reality, I have loved her all my life,--or in any event, have
hankered after the pink-and-white flesh of her as any gentleman might.
Pschutt! a pox on all lechery says the dying man,--since it is now
necessary to put that strapping yellow-haired trollop out of your mind,
Simon Orts--yes, after all these years, to put her quite out of your mind.
Faith, she might wheedle me now to her heart's content, and my pulse would
never budge; for I must devote what trivial time there is to hoping they
will kill me quickly. He was their god, that man!"

Simon Orts went toward the dead body, looking down into the distorted face.
"And I, too, loved him. Yes, such as he was, he was the only friend I
had. And I think he liked me," Simon Orts said aloud, with a touch of shy
pride. "Yes, and you trusted me, didn't you, Vincent? Wait for me, then,
my Lord,--I shall not be long. And now I'll serve you faithfully. I had to
play the man's part, you know,--you mustn't grudge old Simon his one hour
of manhood. You wouldn't, I think. And in any event, I shall be with you
presently, and you can cuff me for it if you like--just as you used to do."

He covered the dead face with his handkerchief, but in the instant he drew
it away. "No, not this coarse cambric. You were too much of a fop, Vincent.
I will use yours--the finest linen, my Lord. You see old Simon knows your
tastes."

He drew himself erect exultantly.

"They will come at dawn to kill me; but I have had my hour. God, the man I
might have been! And now--well, perhaps He would not be offended if I said
a bit of a prayer for Vincent."

So the Vicar of Heriz Magna knelt beside the flesh that had been Lord
Rokesle, and there they found him in the morning.




II

LOVE AT MARTINMAS
_As Played at Tunbridge Wells, April 1, 1750_

    "_He to love an altar built
  Of twelve vast French romances, neatly gilt.
  There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves,
  And all the trophies of his former loves;
  With tender billet-doux he lights the pyre,
  And breathes three amorous sighs to raise the fire;
  Then prostrate falls, and begs with ardent eyes
  Soon to obtain, and long possess the prize._"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

MR. ERWYN, a gentleman of the town, ceremonious and a
    coxcomb, but a man of honor.
LADY ALLONBY, a woman of fashion, and widow to
    Lord Stephen Allonby.
MISS ALLONBY, daughter to Lord Stephen by a former
    marriage, of a considerable fortune in her own hands.
FOOTMEN to Lady Allonby; and in the Proem FRANCIS
    ORTS, commonly know as FRANCIS VANBINGHAM, a
    dissolute play-actor.


SCENE

A drawing-room In Lady Allonby's villa at Tunbridge Wells.


LOVE AT MARTINMAS


_PROEM:--To be Filed for Reference Hereafter_

Lady Allonby followed in all respects the Vicar's instructions; and
midnight found her upon the pier of Bishops Onslow, Colonel Denstroude's
big and dilapidated country-residence. Frank Orts had assisted her from the
rowboat without speaking; indeed, he had uttered scarcely a word, save to
issue some necessary direction, since the woman first came to him at the
Vicarage with her news of the night's events. Now he composedly stepped
back into the boat.

"You've only to go forward," said Frank Orts. "I regret that for my own
part I'm no longer an acceptable visitor here, since the Colonel and I
fought last summer over one Molly Yates. Nay, I beseech you, put up your
purse, my Lady."

"Then I can but render you my heartfelt thanks," replied Lady Allonby, "and
incessantly remember you in daily prayers for the two gallant men who have
this night saved a woman from great misery. Yet there is that in your voice
which is curiously familiar, Mr. Orts, and I think that somewhere you and I
have met before this."

"Ay," he responded, "you have squandered many a shilling on me here in
England, where Francis Vanringham bellows and makes faces with the rest of
the Globe Company. On Usk, you understand, I'm still Frank Orts, just as I
was christened; but elsewhere the name of Vanringham was long ago esteemed
more apt to embellish and adorn the bill of a heroic play. Ay, you've been
pleased to applaud my grimaces behind the footlights, more than once; your
mother-in-law, indeed, the revered Marchioness-Dowager of Falmouth, is
among my staunchest patrons."

"Heavens! then we shall all again see one another at Tunbridge!" said Lady
Allonby, who was recovering her spirits; "and I shall have a Heaven-sent
opportunity, to confirm my protestations that I am not ungrateful. Mr.
Vanringham, I explicitly command you to open in _The Orphan_, since: as
Castalio in that piece you are the most elegant and moving thing in the
universal world." [Footnote: This was the opinion of others as well.
Thorsby (_Roscius Anglicanus_) says, "Mr. Vanringham was good in tragedy,
as well as in comedy, especially as Castalio in Otway's _Orphan_, and the
more famous Garrick came, in that part, far short of him." Vanringham was
also noted for his Valentine in _Love for Love_ and for his Beaugard in
_The Soldier's Fortune_.]

"Your command shall be obeyed," said the actor. "And meantime, my Lady,
I bid you an _au revoir_, with many millions of regrets for the
inconveniences to which you've been subjected this evening, Oho, we are
lamentably rustic hereabout."

And afterward as he rowed through the dark the man gave a grunt of
dissatisfaction.

"I was too abrupt with her. But it vexes me to have Brother Simon butchered
like this.... These natural instincts are damnably inconvenient,--and
expensive, at times, Mr. Vanringham,--beside being ruinous to one's sense
of humor, Mr. Vanringham. Why, to think that she alone should go scot-free!
and of her ordering a stage-box within the hour of two men's destruction
on her account! Upon reflection, I admire the woman to the very tips of my
toes. Eh, well! I trust to have need of her gratitude before the month is
up."


I

Since Colonel Denstroude proved a profane and dissolute and helpful person,
Lady Allonby was shortly re-established in her villa at Tunbridge Wells, on
the Sussex side, where she had resolved to find a breathing-space prior to
the full season in London. And thereupon she put all thoughts of Usk quite
out of her mind: it had been an unhappy business, but it was over. In the
meanwhile her wardrobe needed replenishing now that spring was coming
in; the company at the Wells was gay enough; and Lady Allonby had always
sedulously avoided anything that was disagreeable.

Mr. Erwyn Lady Allonby was far from cataloguing under that head. Mr. George
Erwyn had been for years a major-general, at the very least, in Fashion's
army, and was concededly a connoisseur of all the elegancies.

Mr. Erwyn sighed as he ended his recital--half for pity of the misguided
folk who had afforded Tunbridge its latest scandal, half for relief that,
in spite of many difficulties, the story had been set forth in discreet
language which veiled, without at all causing you to miss, the more
unsavory details.

"And so," said he, "poor Harry is run through the lungs, and Mrs.
Anstruther has recovered her shape and is to be allowed a separate
maintenance."

"'Tis shocking!" said Lady Allonby.

"'Tis incredible," said Mr. Erwyn, "to my mind, at least, that the bonds of
matrimony should be slipped thus lightly. But the age is somewhat lax and
the world now views with complaisance the mad antics of half-grown lads and
wenches who trip toward the altar as carelessly as if the partnership were
for a country-dance."

Lady Allonby stirred her tea and said nothing. Notoriously her marriage had
been unhappy; and her two years of widowhood (dating from the unlamented
seizure, brought on by an inherited tendency to apoplexy and French
brandy, which carried off Lord Stephen Allonby of Prestonwoode) had to all
appearance never tempered her distrust of the matrimonial state. Certain it
was that she had refused many advantageous offers during this period, for
her jointure was considerable, and, though in candid moments she confessed
to thirty-three, her dearest friends could not question Lady Allonby's
good looks. She was used to say that she would never re-marry, because she
desired to devote herself to her step-daughter, but, as gossip had it at
Tunbridge, she was soon to be deprived of this subterfuge; for Miss Allonby
had reached her twentieth year, and was nowadays rarely seen in public save
in the company of Mr. Erwyn, who, it was generally conceded, stood high in
the girl's favor and was desirous of rounding off his career as a leader of
fashion with the approved comoedic _denouement_ of marriage with a young
heiress.

For these reasons Lady Allonby heard with interest his feeling allusion to
the laxity of the age, and through a moment pondered thereon, for it seemed
now tolerably apparent that Mr. Erwyn had lingered, after the departure of
her other guests, in order to make a disclosure which Tunbridge had for
many months expected.

"I had not thought," said she, at length, "that you, of all men, would ever
cast a serious eye toward marriage. Indeed, Mr. Erwyn, you have loved women
so long that I must dispute your ability to love a woman--and your amours
have been a byword these twenty years."

"Dear lady," said Mr. Erwyn, "surely you would not confound amour with
love? Believe me, the translation is inadequate. Amour is but the summer
wave that lifts and glitters and laughs in the sunlight, and within the
instant disappears; but love is the unfathomed eternal sea itself. Or--to
shift the metaphor--Amour is a general under whom youth must serve:
Curiosity and Lustiness are his recruiting officers, and it is well to
fight under his colors, for it is against Ennui that he marshals his
forces. 'Tis a resplendent conflict, and young blood cannot but stir and
exult as paradoxes, marching and countermarching at the command of their
gay generalissimo, make way for one another in iridescent squadrons, while
through the steady musketry of epigram one hears the clash of contending
repartees, or the cry of a wailing sonnet. But this lord of laughter may be
served by the young alone; and by and by each veteran--scarred, it may be,
but not maimed, dear lady--is well content to relinquish the glory and
adventure of such colorful campaigns for some quiet inglenook, where, with
love to make a third, he prattles of past days and deeds with one that goes
hand in hand with him toward the tomb."

Lady Allonby accorded this conceit the tribute of a sigh; then glanced,
in the direction of four impassive footmen to make sure they were out of
earshot.

"And so--?" said she.

"Split me!" said Mr. Erwyn, "I thought you had noted it long ago."

"Indeed," she observed, reflectively, "I suppose it is quite time."

"I am not," said Mr. Erwyn, "in the heyday of my youth, I grant you; but
I am not for that reason necessarily unmoved by the attractions of an
advantageous person, a fine sensibility and all the graces."

He sipped his tea with an air of resentment; and Lady Allonby, in view of
the disparity of age which existed between Mr. Erwyn and her step-daughter,
had cause to feel that she had blundered into _gaucherie_; and to await
with contrition the proposal for her step-daughter's hand that the man was
(at last) about to broach to her, as the head of the family.

"Who is she?" said Lady Allonby, all friendly interest.

"An angel," said Mr. Erwyn, fencing.

"Beware," Lady Allonby exhorted, "lest she prove a recording angel; a wife
who takes too deep an interest in your movements will scarcely suit you."

"Oh, I am assured," said Mr. Erwyn, smiling, "that on Saturdays she will
allow me the customary half-holiday."

Lady Allonby, rebuffed, sought consolation among the conserves.

"Yet, as postscript," said Mr. Erwyn, "I do not desire a wife who will
take her morning chocolate with me and sup with Heaven knows whom. I have
seen, too much of _mariage a la mode_, and I come to her, if not with the
transports of an Amadis, at least with an entire affection and respect."

"Then," said Lady Allonby, "you love this woman?"

"Very tenderly," said Mr. Erwyn; "and, indeed, I would, for her sake, that
the errors of my past life were not so numerous, nor the frailty of my
aspiring resolutions rendered apparent--ah, so many times!--to a gaping
and censorious world. For, as you are aware, I cannot offer her an untried
heart; 'tis somewhat worn by many barterings. But I know that this heart
beats with accentuation in her presence; and when I come to her some day
and clasp her in my arms, as I aspire to do, I trust that her lips may not
turn away from mine and that she may be more glad because I am so near and
that her stainless heart may sound an echoing chime. For, with a great and
troubled adoration, I love her as I have loved no other woman; and this
much, I submit, you cannot doubt."

"I?" said Lady Allonby, with extreme innocence. "La, how should I know?"

"Unless you are blind," Mr. Erwyn observed--"and I apprehend those spacious
shining eyes to be more keen than the tongue of a dowager,--you must have
seen of late that I have presumed to hope--to think--that she whom I love
so tenderly might deign to be the affectionate, the condescending friend
who would assist me to retrieve the indiscretions of my youth--"

The confusion of his utterance, his approach to positive agitation as he
waved his teaspoon, moved Lady Allonby. "It is true," she said, "that I
have not been wholly blind--"

"Anastasia," said Mr. Erwyn, with yet more feeling, "is not our friendship
of an age to justify sincerity?"

"Oh, bless me, you toad! but let us not talk of things that happened
under the Tudors. Well, I have not been unreasonably blind,--and I do not
object,--and I do not believe that Dorothy will prove obdurate."

"You render me the happiest of men," Mr. Erwyn stated, rapturously. "You
have, then, already discussed this matter with Miss Allonby?"

"Not precisely," said she, laughing; "since I had thought it apparent to
the most timid lover that the first announcement came with best grace from
him."

"O' my conscience, then, I shall be a veritable Demosthenes," said Mr.
Erwyn, laughing likewise; "and in common decency she will consent."

"Your conceit." said Lady Allonby, "is appalling."

"'Tis beyond conception," Mr. Erwyn admitted; "and I propose to try
marriage as a remedy. I have heard that nothing so takes down a man."

"Impertinent!" cried Lady Allonby; "now of whatever can the creature be
talking!"

"I mean that, as your widowship well knows, marrying puts a man in his
proper place. And that the outcome is salutary for proud, puffed-up fellows
I would be the last to dispute. Indeed, I incline to dispute nothing, for I
find that perfect felicity is more potent than wine. I am now all pastoral
raptures, and were it not for the footmen there, I do not know to what
lengths I might go."

"In that event," Lady Allonby decided, "I shall fetch Dorothy, that the
crown may be set upon your well-being. And previously I will dismiss the
footmen." She did so with a sign toward those lordly beings.

"Believe me," said Mr. Erwyn, "'tis what I have long wished for. And
when Miss Allonby honors me with her attention I shall, since my life's
happiness depends upon the issue, plead with all the eloquence of a
starveling barrister, big with the import of his first case. May I, indeed,
rest assured that any triumph over her possible objections may be viewed
with not unfavorable eyes?"

"O sir," said Lady Allonby, "believe me, there is nothing I more earnestly
desire than that you may obtain all which is necessary for your welfare. I
will fetch Dorothy."

The largest footman but one removed Mr. Erwyn's cup.


II

Mr. Erwyn, left alone, smiled at his own reflection in the mirror;
rearranged his ruffles with a deft and shapely hand; consulted his watch;
made sure that the padding which enhanced the calves of his most notable
legs was all as it should be; seated himself and hummed a merry air, in
meditative wise; and was in such posture when the crimson hangings that
shielded the hall-door quivered and broke into tumultuous waves and yielded
up Miss Dorothy Allonby.

Being an heiress, Miss Allonby was by an ancient custom brevetted a great
beauty; and it is equitable to add that the sourest misogynist could hardly
have refused, pointblank, to countersign the commission. They said of
Dorothy Allonby that her eyes were as large as her bank account, and nearly
as formidable as her tongue; and it is undeniable that on provocation there
was in her speech a tang of acidity, such (let us say) as renders a salad
none the less palatable. In a word, Miss Allonby pitied the limitations of
masculine humanity more readily than its amorous pangs, and cuddled her
women friends as she did kittens, with a wary and candid apprehension of
their power to scratch; and decision was her key-note; continually she knew
to the quarter-width of a cobweb what she wanted, and invariably she got
it.

Such was the person who, with a habitual emphasis which dowagers found
hoydenish and all young men adorable, demanded without prelude:

"Heavens! What can it be, Mr. Erwyn, that has cast Mother into this
unprecedented state of excitement?"

"What, indeed?" said he, and bowed above her proffered hand.

"For like a hurricane, she burst into my room and cried, 'Mr. Erwyn
has something of importance to declare to you--why did you put on that
gown?--bless you, my child--' all in one eager breath; then kissed me, and
powdered my nose, and despatched me to you without any explanation. And
why?" said Miss Allonby.

"Why, indeed?" said Mr. Erwyn.

"It is very annoying," said she, decisively.

"Sending you to me?" said Mr. Erwyn, a magnitude of reproach in his voice.

"That," said Miss Allonby, "I can pardon--and easily. But I dislike all
mysteries, and being termed a child, and being--"

"Yes?" said Mr. Erwyn.

"--and being powdered on the nose," said Miss Allonby, with firmness. She
went to the mirror, and, standing on the tips of her toes, peered anxiously
into its depths. She rubbed her nose, as if in disapproval, and frowned,
perhaps involuntarily pursing up her lips,--which Mr. Erwyn intently
regarded, and then wandered to the extreme end of the apartment, where he
evinced a sudden interest in bric-a-brac.

"Is there any powder on my nose?" said Miss Allonby.

"I fail to perceive any," said Mr. Erwyn.

"Come closer," said she.

"I dare not," said he.

Miss Allonby wheeled about. "Fie!" she cried; "one who has served against
the French, [Footnote: This was not absolutely so. Mr. Erwyn had, however,
in an outburst of patriotism, embarked, as a sort of cabin passenger, with
his friend Sir John Morris, and possessed in consequence some claim to
share such honor as was won by the glorious fiasco of Dungeness.] and
afraid of powder!"

"It is not the powder that I fear."

"What, then?" said she, in sinking to the divan beside the disordered
tea-table.

"There are two of them," said Mr. Erwyn, "and they are so red--"

"Nonsense!" cried Miss Allonby, with heightened color.

"'Tis best to avoid temptation," said Mr. Erwyn, virtuously.

"Undoubtedly," she assented, "it is best to avoid having your ears boxed."

Mr. Erwyn sighed as if in the relinquishment of an empire. Miss Allonby
moved to the farther end of the divan.

"What was it," she demanded, "that you had to tell me?"

"'Tis a matter of some importance--" said Mr. Erwyn.

"Heavens!" said Miss Allonby, and absent-mindedly drew aside her skirts;
"one would think you about to make a declaration."

Mr. Erwyn sat down beside her, "I have been known," said he, "to do such
things."

The divan was strewn with cushions in the Oriental fashion. Miss Allonby,
with some adroitness, slipped one of them between her person and the
locality of her neighbor. "Oh!" said Miss Allonby.

"Yes," said he, smiling over the dragon-embroidered barrier; "I admit that
I am even now shuddering upon the verge of matrimony."

"Indeed!" she marvelled, secure in her fortress. "Have you selected an
accomplice?"

"Split me, yes!" said Mr. Erwyn.

"And have I the honor of her acquaintance?" said Miss Allonby.

"Provoking!" said Mr. Erwyn; "no woman knows her better."

Miss Allonby smiled. "Dear Mr. Erwyn," she stated, "this is a disclosure I
have looked for these six months."

"Split me!" said Mr. Erwyn.

"Heavens, yes!" said she. "You have been a rather dilatory lover--"

"I am inexpressibly grieved, that I should have kept you waiting--"

"--and in fact, I had frequently thought of reproaching you for your
tardiness--"

"Nay, in that case," said Mr. Erwyn, "the matter could, no doubt, have been
more expeditiously arranged."

"--since your intentions have been quite apparent."

Mr. Erwyn removed the cushion. "You do not, then, disapprove," said he, "of
my intentions?"

"Indeed, no," said Miss Allonby; "I think you will make an excellent
step-father."

The cushion fell to the floor. Mr. Erwyn replaced it and smiled.

"And so," Miss Allonby continued, "Mother, believing me in ignorance, has
deputed you to inform me of this most transparent secret? How strange is
the blindness of lovers! But I suppose," sighed Miss Allonby, "we are all
much alike."

"We?" said Mr. Erwyn, softly.

"I meant--" said Miss Allonby, flushing somewhat.

"Yes?" said Mr. Erwyn. His voice sank to a pleading cadence. "Dear child,
am I not worthy of trust?"

There was a microscopic pause.

"I am going to the Pantiles this afternoon," declared Miss Allonby, at
length, "to feed the swans."

"Ah," said Mr. Erwyn, and with comprehension; "surely, he, too, is rather
tardy."

"Oh," said she, "then you know?"

"I know," he announced, "that there is a tasteful and secluded summer-house
near the Fountain of Neptune."

"I was never allowed," said Miss Allonby, unconvincingly, "to go into
secluded summer-houses with any one; and, besides, the gardeners keep their
beer jugs there--under the biggest bench."

Mr. Erwyn beamed upon her paternally. "I was not, till this, aware," said
he, "that Captain Audaine was so much interested in ornithology. Yet what
if, even when he is seated upon that biggest bench, your Captain does not
utterly lose the head he is contributing to the _tete-a-tete_?"

"Oh, but he will," said Miss Allonby, with confidence; then she
reflectively added: "I shall have again to be painfully surprised by his
declaration, for, after all, it will only be his seventh."

"Doubtless," Mr. Erwyn considered, "your astonishment will be extreme when
you rebuke him, there above hortensial beer jugs--"

"And I shall be deeply grieved that he has so utterly misunderstood my
friendly interest in his welfare; and I shall be highly indignant after he
has--in effect, after he has--"

"But not until afterward?" said Mr. Erwyn, holding up a forefinger. "Well,
I have told you their redness is fatal to good resolutions."

"--after he has astounded me by his seventh avowal. And I shall behave
in precisely the same manner the eighth time he recurs to the repugnant
subject."

"But the ninth time?" said Mr. Erwyn.

"He has remarkably expressive eyes," Miss Allonby stated, "and really,
Mr. Erwyn, it is the most lovable creature when it raves about my
flint-heartedness and cutting its poor throat and murdering every man I
ever nodded to!"

"Ah, youth, youth!" sighed Mr. Erwyn. "Dear child, I pray you, do not
trifle with the happiness that is within your grasp! _Si jeunesse
savait_--the proverb is somewhat musty. But we who have attained the St.
Martin's summer of our lives and have grown capable of but a calm and
tempered affection at the utmost--we cannot but look wistfully upon the
raptures and ignorance of youth, and we would warn you, were it possible,
of the many dangers whereby you are encompassed. For Love is a deity that
must not be trifled with; his voice may chaunt the requiem of all which
is bravest in our mingled natures, or sound a stave of such nobility as
heartens us through life. He is kindly, but implacable; beneficent, a
bestower of all gifts upon the faithful, a bestower of very terrible
gifts upon those that flout him; and I who speak to you have seen my
own contentment blighted, by just such flippant jesting with Love's
omnipotence, before the edge of my first razor had been dulled. 'Tis true,
I have lived since in indifferent comfort; yet it is but a dreary banquet
where there is no platter laid for Love, and within the chambers of my
heart--dust-gathering now, my dear!--he has gone unfed these fifteen years
or more."

"Ah, goodness!" sighed Miss Allonby, touched by the ardor of his speech.
"And so, you have loved Mother all of fifteen years?"

"Nay, split me--!" said Mr. Erwyn.

"Your servant, sir," said the voice of Lady Allonby; "I trust you young
people have adjusted matters to your satisfaction?"


III

"Dear madam," cried Miss Allonby, "I am overjoyed!" then kissed her
step-mother vigorously and left the room, casting in passage an arch glance
at Mr. Erwyn.

"O vulgarity!" said Lady Allonby, recovering her somewhat rumpled dignity,
"the sweet child is yet unpolished. But, I suppose, we may regard the
matter as settled?"

"Yes," said Mr. Erwyn, "I think, dear lady, we may with safety regard the
matter as settled."

"Dorothy is of an excitable nature," she observed, and seated herself upon
the divan; "and you, dear Mr. Erwyn, who know women so thoroughly, will
overlook the agitation of an artless girl placed in quite unaccustomed
circumstances. Nay, I myself was affected by my first declaration,"'

"Doubtless," said Mr. Erwyn, and sank beside her. "Lord Stephen was very
moving."

"I can assure you," said she, smiling, "that he was not the first."

"I' gad," said he, "I remember perfectly, in the old days, when you were
betrothed to that black-visaged young parson--"

"Well, I do not remember anything of the sort," Lady Allonby stated; and
she flushed.

"You wore a blue gown," he said.

"Indeed?" said she.

"And--"

"La, if I did," said Lady Allonby, "I have quite forgotten it, and it is
now your manifest duty to do likewise."

"Never in all these years," said Mr. Erwyn, sighing, "have I been able to
forget it."

"I was but a girl, and 'twas natural that at first I should be mistaken in
my fancies," Lady Allonby told him, precisely as she had told Simon Orts:
"and at all events, there is nothing less well-bred than a good memory. I
would decline to remain in the same room with one were it not that Dorothy
has deserted you in this strange fashion. Whither, pray, has she gone?"

Mr. Erwyn smiled. "Her tender heart," said Mr. Erwyn, "is affected by the
pathetic and moving spectacle of the poor hungry swans, pining for their
native land and made a raree-show for visitors in the Pantiles; and she has
gone to stay them with biscuits and to comfort them with cakes."

"Really!" said Lady Allonby.

"And," Mr. Erwyn continued, "to defend her from the possible ferocity
of the gold-fish, Captain Audaine had obligingly afforded service as an
escort."

"Oh," said Lady Allonby; then added, "in the circumstances she might
permissibly have broken the engagement."


"But there is no engagement," said Mr. Erwyn--"as yet."

"Indeed?" said she.

"Harkee," said he; "should he make a declaration this afternoon she will
refuse him."

"Why, but of course!" Lady Allonby marveled.

"And the eighth time," said he.

"Undoubtedly," said she; "but at whatever are you hinting?"

"Yet the ninth time--"

"Well, what is it, you grinning monster?"

Mr. Erwyn allowed himself a noiseless chuckle. "After the ninth time," Mr.
Erwyn declared, "there will be an engagement."

"Mr. Erwyn!" cried Lady Allonby, with widened eyes, "I had understood that
Dorothy looked favorably upon your suit."

"Anastasia!" cried he; and then his finger-tips lightly caressed his brow.
"'Tis the first I had heard of it," said Mr. Erwyn.

"Surely--" she began.

"Nay, but far more surely," said he, "in consideration of the fact that,
not a half-hour since, you deigned to promise me your hand in marriage--"

"O la now!" cried Lady Allonby; and, recovering herself, smiled
courteously. "'Tis the first I had heard of it," said she.

They stared at each other in wonderment. Then Lady Allonby burst into
laughter.

"D'ye mean--?" said she.

"Indeed," said Mr. Erwyn, "so unintentional was I of aspiring to Miss
Allonby's affections that all my soul was set upon possessing the heart and
person of a lady, in my humble opinion, far more desirable."

"I had not dreamed--" she commenced.

"Behold," said Mr. Erwyn, bitterly, "how rightly is my presumption
punished. For I, with a fop's audacity, had thought my love for you of
sufficient moment to have been long since observed; and, strong in my
conceit, had scorned a pleasing declaration made up of faint phrases and
whining ballad-endings. I spoke as my heart prompted me; but the heart has
proven a poor counsellor, dear lady, and now am I rewarded. For you had
not even known of my passion, and that which my presumption had taken for
a reciprocal tenderness proves in the ultimate but a kindly aspiration to
further my union with another."

"D'ye love me, toad?" said Lady Allonby, and very softly.

"Indeed," said Mr. Erwyn, "I have loved you all my life, first with a
boyish inclination that I scarce knew was love, and, after your marriage
with an honorable man had severed us, as I thought, irrevocably, with such
lore as an ingenuous person may bear a woman whom both circumstances and
the respect in which he holds her have placed beyond his reach,--a love
that might not be spoken, but of which I had considered you could never be
ignorant."

"Mr. Erwyn," said she, "at least I have not been ignorant--"

"They had each one of them some feature that reminded me of you. That was
the truth of it, a truth so patent that we will not discuss it. Instead,
dear madam, do you for the moment grant a losing gamester the right to rail
at adverse fate! for I shall trouble you no more. Since your widowhood I
have pursued you with attentions which, I now perceive, must at many times
have proven distasteful. But my adoration had blinded me; and I shall
trouble you no more. I have been too serious, I did not know that our
affair was but a comedy of the eternal duel between man and woman; nor am
I sorry, dear opponent, that you have conquered. For how valorously you
fought! Eh, let it be! for you have triumphed in this duel, O puissant
lady, and I yield the victor--a devoted and, it may be, a rather heavy
heart; and I shall trouble you no more."

"Ah, sir," said Lady Allonby, "you are aware that once--"

"Indeed," said Mr. Erwyn, "'twas the sand on which I builded. But I am
wiser now, and I perceive that the feeling you entertain toward me is but
the pallid shadow of a youthful inclination. I shall not presume upon it.
Oh, I am somewhat proud, dear Anastasia; I have freely given you my heart,
such as it is; and were you minded to accept it, even at the eleventh hour,
through friendship or through pity only, I would refuse. For my love of you
has been the one pure and quite unselfish, emotion of my life, and I may
not barter it for an affection of lesser magnitude either in kind or in
degree. And so, farewell!"

"Yet hold, dear sir--" said Lady Allonby. "Lord, but will you never let me
have the woman's privilege of talking!"

"Nay, but I am, as ever, at your service," said Mr. Erwyn, and he paused in
transit for the door.

"--since, as this betokens--"

"'Tis a tasteful handkerchief," said Mr. Erwyn--"but somewhat moist!"

"And--my eyes?"

"Red," said Mr. Erwyn.

"I have been weeping, toad, with my head on the pin-cushion, and the maid
trying to tipsify me with brandy."

"Why?" said Mr. Erwyn.

"I thought you were to marry Dorothy."

Mr. Erwyn resumed his seat. "You objected?" he said.

"I think, old monster," Lady Allonby replied, "that I would entertain the
same objection to seeing any woman thus sacrificed--"

"Well?" said Mr. Erwyn.

"--except--"

"Incomparable Anastasia!" said Mr. Erwyn.


IV

Afterward these two sat long in the twilight, talking very little, and with
their eyes rarely meeting, although their hands met frequently at quite
irrelevant intervals. Just the graze of a butterfly to make it certain that
the other was there: but all the while they both regarded the tiny fire
which had set each content of the room a-dancing in the companionable
darkness. For each, I take it, preferred to think of the other as being
still the naive young person each remembered; and the firelight made such
thinking easier.

"D'ye remember--?" was woven like a refrain through their placid duo....

It was, one estimates, their highest hour. Frivolous and trivial persons
you might have called them and have justified the accusation; but even to
the fop and the coquette was granted an hour wherein all human happenings
seemed to be ordered by supernal wisdom lovingly. Very soon they would
forget this hour; meanwhile there was a wonderful sense of dreams come
true.




III

THE CASUAL HONEYMOON

_As Played at Tunbridge Wells, April 1, 1750_

"_But this is the most cruel thing, to marry one does not know how, nor
why, nor wherefore.--Gad, I never liked anybody less in my life. Poor
woman!--Gad, I'm sorry for her, too; for I have no reason to hate her
neither; but I wish we could keep it secret! why, I don't believe any of
this company would speak of it._"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


CAPTAIN AUDAINE, of a pompous and handsome person, and loves Miss Allonby.

LORD HUMPHREY DEGGE, younger son to the Marquis of Venour, makes love to
Miss Allonby.

GERALD ALLONBY, brother to Miss Allonby, a true raw Squire.

MR. ERWYN, betrothed to Lady Allonby.

VANRINGHAM, an impudent tragedian of the Globe Company.

QUARMBY, Vanringham's associate.

Miss ALLONBY, an heiress, of a petulant humor, in love with Audaine.

MARCHIONESS OF FALMOUTH, an impertinent affected dowager, and grandmother
to Miss Allonby.

LADY ALLONBY, step-mother to Miss Allonby and Gerald.

POSTILIONS, SERVANTS, Etc.


SCENE

Tunbridge Wells, thence shifting to Chetwode Lodge, Mr. Babington-Herle's
house, on Rusthall Common, within two miles of the town.


THE CASUAL HONEYMOON


_PROEM:--Introductive of Captain Francis Audaine_

It appears convenient here to pursue Miss Allonby on her stroll about the
Pantiles in company with Captain Audaine. The latter has been at pains to
record the events of the afternoon and evening, so that I give you his own
account of them, though I abridge in consideration of his leisured style.
Pompous and verbose I grant the Captain, even in curtailment; but you are
to remember these were the faults of his age, ingrained and defiant of
deletion; and should you elect to peruse his memoirs [Footnote: There
appears to have been no American edition since that, in 1836, printed in
Philadelphia, "for Thomas Wardle, No. 15 Minor Street." In England the
memoirs of Lord Garendon are to all appearance equally hard to come by,
and seem to have been out of print since 1907.] you will find that I have
considerately spared you a majority of the digressions to which the future
Earl of Garendon was lamentably addicted.

For the purpose of my tale you are to view him as Tunbridge did at this
particular time: as a handsome and formal person, twenty-eight years old
or thereabouts, of whom nobody knew anything quite definite--beyond the
genealogic inference to be drawn from a smatch of the brogue--save that
after a correspondence of gallantries, of some three weeks' duration, he
was the manifest slave of Miss Dorothy Allonby, and had already fought
three duels behind Ormerod House,--with Will Pratchet, Lord Humphrey Degge,
and Sir Eugene Harrabie, respectively, each one of whom was a declared
suitor for her hand.

And with this prelude I begin on my transcription.


I

Miss Allonby (says Captain Audaine) was that afternoon in a mighty cruel
humor. Though I had omitted no reasonable method to convince her of the
immensity of my passion, 'twas without the twitch of an eyelash she endured
the volley of my sighs and the fusillade of my respectful protestations;
and candor compels me to admit that toward the end her silvery laughter
disrupted the periods of a most elegant and sensible peroration. And when
the affair was concluded, and for the seventh time I had implored her to
make me the happiest of men, the rogue merely observed: "But I don't want
to marry you. Why on earth should I?"

"For the sake of peace," I replied, "and in self-protection, since as long
as you stay obdurate I shall continue to importune, and by and by I shall
pester you to death."

"Indeed, I think it more than probable," she returned; "for you dog me
like a bailiff. I am cordially a-weary, Captain Audaine, of your incessant
persecutions; and, after all, marrying you is perhaps the civilest way to
be rid of both them and you."

But by this I held each velvet-soft and tiny hand. "Nay," I dissented; "the
subject is somewhat too sacred for jest. I am no modish lover, dearest and
best of creatures, to regard marriage as the thrifty purchase of an estate,
and the lady as so much bed-furniture thrown in with the mansion. I love
you with completeness: and give me leave to assure you, madam, with a
freedom which I think permissible on so serious an occasion that, even as
beautiful as you are, I could never be contented with your person without
your heart."

She sat with eyes downcast, all one blush. Miss Dorothy Allonby was in the
bloom of nineteen, and shone with every charm peculiar to her sex. But I
have no mind to weary you with poetical rhodomontades till, as most lovers
do, I have proven her a paragon and myself an imbecile: it suffices to say
that her face, and shape, and mien, and wit, alike astounded and engaged
all those who had the happiness to know her; and had long ago rendered her
the object of my entire adoration and the target of my daily rhapsodies.
Now I viewed her with a dissension of the liveliest hopes and fears; for
she had hesitated, and had by this hesitation conceded my addresses to be
not irretrievably repugnant; and within the instant I knew that any life
undevoted to her service and protection could be but a lingering disease.

But by and by, "You shall have your answer this evening," she said, and so
left me.

I fathomed the meaning of "this evening" well enough. For my adored Dorothy
was all romance, and by preference granted me rendezvous in the back
garden, where she would tantalize me nightly, from her balcony, after the
example of the Veronese lady in Shakespeare's spirited tragedy, which she
prodigiously admired. As concerns myself, a reasonable liking for romance
had been of late somewhat tempered by the inclemency of the weather and
the obvious unfriendliness of the dog; but there is no resisting a lady's
commands; and clear or foul, you might at any twilight's death have found
me under her window, where a host of lyric phrases asserted the devotion
which a cold in the head confirmed.

This night was black as a coal-pit. Strolling beneath the casement, well
wrapt in my cloak (for it drizzled), I meditated impartially upon the
perfections of my dear mistress and the tyrannic despotism of love. Being
the source of our existence, 'tis not unreasonably, perhaps, that this
passion assumes the proprietorship of our destinies and exacts of all
mankind a common tribute. To-night, at least, I viewed the world as a brave
pavilion, lighted by the stars and swept by the clean winds of heaven,
wherein we enacted varied roles with God as audience; where, in turn, we
strutted or cringed about the stage, where, in turn, we were beset and
rent by an infinity of passions; but where every man must play the part
of lover. That passion alone, I said, is universal; it set wise Solomon
a-jigging in criminal byways, and sinewy Hercules himself was no stranger
to its inquietudes and joys. And I cried aloud with the Roman, _Parce
precor!_ and afterward upon high Heaven to make me a little worthier of
Dorothy.


II

Engrossed in meditations such as these, I was fetched earthward by the
clicking of a lock, and, turning, saw the door beneath her balcony unclose
and afford egress to a slender and hooded figure. My amazement was
considerable and my felicity beyond rhetoric.

"Dorothy--!" I whispered.

"Come!" was her response; and her finger-tips rested upon my arm the while
that she guided me toward the gateway opening into Jervis Lane. I followed
with a trepidation you may not easily conceive; nor was this diminished
when I found awaiting us a post-chaise, into which my angel hastily
tripped.

I babbled I know not what inarticulate nonsense. But, "Heavens!" she
retorted, "d'ye mean to keep the parson waiting all night?"

This was her answer, then. Well, 'twas more than I could have hoped for,
though to a man of any sensibility this summary disposal of our love-affair
could not but vaguely smack of the distasteful. Say what you will, every
gentleman has about him somewhere a tincture of that venerable and artless
age when wives were taken by capture and were retained by force; he
prefers to have the lady hold off until the very last; and properly, her
tongue must sound defiance long after melting eyes have signalled that the
traitorous heart of her, like an anatomical Tarpeia, is ready to betray the
citadel and yield the treasury of her charms.

Nevertheless, I stepped into the vehicle. The postilion was off in
a twinkling, as the saying is, over the roughest road in England.
Conversation was impossible, for Dorothy and I were jostling like two pills
in a box; and as the first observation I attempted resulted in a badly
bitten tongue, I prudently held my peace.

This endured for, perhaps, a quarter of an hour, at the end of which period
the post-chaise on a sudden stopped, and I assisted my companion to alight.
Before us was a villa of considerable dimension, and situate, so far as I
could immediately detect, in the midst of a vast and desolate moor; there
was no trace of human habitation within the radius of the eye; and the
house itself presented not a glimpse of tenancy or illumination.

"O Lord, madam--" I began.

"Hasten!" spoke a voice from within the Parsonage. And Dorothy drew me
toward a side door, overhung with ivy, where, sure enough, a dim light
burned, 'Twas but a solitary candle stuck upon a dresser at the remoter end
of a large and low-ceiled apartment; and in this flickering obscurity we
found a tremulous parson in full canonicals, who had united our hands and
gabbled half-way through the marriage service before I had the slightest
notion of what was befalling me.

And such is the unreasonable disposition of mankind that the attainment
of my most ardent desires aroused a feeling not altogether unakin to
irritation. This skulking celerity, this hole-and-corner business, I
thought, was in ill-accord with the respect due to a sacrament; and I could
have wished my marriage to have borne a less striking resemblance to the
conference of three thieves in a cellar. But 'twas over in two twos. Within
scantier time than it takes to tell of it, Francis and Dorothy were made
one, and I had turned to salute my wife.

She gave a shriek of intolerable anguish. "Heavens!" said she, "I have
married the wrong man!"


III

Without delay I snatched up the guttering candle and held it to my wife's
countenance. You can conceive that 'twas with no pleasurable emotion
I discovered I had inadvertently espoused the Dowager Marchioness of
Falmouth, my adored Dorothy's grandmother; and in frankness I can't deny
that the lady seemed equally dissatisfied: words failed us; and the newly
wedded couple stared at each other in silence.

"Captain Audaine," said she, at last, "the situation is awkward."

"Sure, madam," I returned, "and that is the precise thought which has just
occurred to me."

"And I am of the opinion," she continued, "that you owe me some sort of
explanation. For I had planned to elope with Mr. Vanringham--"

"Do I understand your Ladyship to allude to Mr. Francis Vanringham, the
play-actor, at present the talk of Tunbridge?"

She bowed a grave response.

"This is surprising news," said I. "And grant me leave to tell you that a
woman of mature years, possessed of an abundant fortune and unassailable
gentility, does not by ordinary sneak out of the kitchen door to meet a
raddle-faced actor in the middle of the night. 'Tis, indeed, a circumstance
to stagger human credulity. Oh, believe me, madam, for a virtuous woman the
back garden is not a fitting approach to the altar, nor is a comedian an
appropriate companion there at eleven o'clock in the evening."

"Hey, my fine fellow," says my wife, "and what were you doing in the back
garden?"

"Among all true lovers," I returned, "it is an immemorial custom to prowl
like sentinels beneath the windows of the beauteous adored. And I,
madam, had the temerity to aspire toward an honorable union with your
granddaughter."

She wrung her withered hands. "That any reputable woman should have
nocturnal appointments with gentlemen in the back garden, and beguile her
own grandmother into an odious marriage! I protest, Captain Audaine, the
degenerate world of to-day is no longer a suitable residence for a lady!"

"Look you, sir, this is a cruel bad business," the Parson here put in.
He was pacing the apartment in an altercation of dubiety and amaze. "Mr.
Vanringham will be vexed."

"You will pardon me," I retorted, "if I lack pity to waste upon your Mr.
Vanringham. At present I devote all funds of compassion to my own affairs.
Am I, indeed, to understand that this lady and I are legally married?"

He rubbed his chin. "By the Lord Harry," says he, "'tis a case that lacks
precedents! But the coincidence of the Christian names is devilish awkward;
the service takes no cognizance of surnames; and I have merely united a
Francis and a Dorothy."

"O Lord, Mr. What-d'ye-call-um," said I, "then there is but one remedy and
that is an immediate divorce."

My wife shrieked. "Have you no sense of decency, Captain Audaine? Never has
there been a divorce in my family. And shall I be the first to drag that
honored name into a public court,--to have my reputation worried at the bar
by a parcel of sniggering lawyers, while the town wits buzz about it like
flies around carrion? I pray you, do not suggest any such hideous thing."

"Here's the other Francis," says the Parson, at this point. And it was,--a
raffish, handsome, slender, red-haired fellow, somewhat suggestive of the
royal duke, yet rather more like a sneak-thief, and with a whiff somewhere
of the dancing-master. At first glance you recognized in the actor a
personage, for he compelled the eye with a monstrous vividness of color and
gesture. To-night he had missed his lady at their rendezvous, owing to my
premature appearance, and had followed us post-haste.

"My Castalio!" she screamed. "My Beaugard!" [Footnote: I never saw the
rascal act, thank Heaven, since in that event, report assures me, I might
conceivably have accredited him with the possession of some meritorious
qualities, however trivial; but, it appears, these two above-mentioned
roles were the especial puppetry in which Mr. Vanringham was most
successful in wringing tears and laughter from the injudicious.--F.A.] She
ran to him, and with disjointed talk and quavering utterance disclosed the
present lamentable posture of affairs.

And I found the tableau they presented singular. My wife had been a toast,
they tell me, in Queen Anne's time, and even now the lean and restless
gentlewoman showed as the abandoned house of youth and wit and beauty, with
here and there a trace of the old occupancy; always her furtive eyes shone
with a cold and shifting glitter, as though a frightened imp peeped through
a mask of Hecuba; and in every movement there was an ineffable touch of
something loosely hinged and fantastic. In a word, the Marchioness was
not unconscionably sane, and was known far and wide as a gallant woman
resolutely oblivious to the batterings of time, and so avid of flattery
that she was ready to smile on any man who durst give the lie to her
looking-glass. Demented landlady of her heart, she would sublet that
antiquated chamber to the first adventurer who came prepared to pay his
scot in the false coin of compliment; and 'twas not difficult to comprehend
how this young Thespian had acquired its tenancy.

But now the face of Mr. Vanringham was attenuated by her revelations, and
the wried mouth of Mr. Vanringham suggested that the party be seated, in
order to consider more at ease the unfortunate _contretemps_. Fresh lights
were kindled, as one and all were past fear of discovery by this; and we
four assembled about a table which occupied the centre of the apartment.


IV

"The situation," Mr. Vanringham, began, "may reasonably be described as
desperate. Here we sit, four ruined beings. For Dr. Quarmby has betrayed
an unoffending couple into involuntary matrimony, an act of which his
Bishop can scarcely fail to take official notice; Captain Audaine and
the Marchioness are entrapped into a loveless marriage, than which there
mayn't be a greater misery in life; and my own future, I needn't add, is
irrevocably blighted by the loss of my respected Dorothy, without whom
continued animation must necessarily be a hideous and hollow mockery. Yet
there occurs to me a panacea for these disasters."

"Then, indeed, Mr. Vanringham," said I, "there is one of us who will be
uncommonly glad to know the name of it."

He faced me with a kind of compassion in his wide-set brown eyes, "You,
sir, have caused a sweet and innocent lady to marry you against her
will--Oho, beyond doubt, your intentions were immaculate; but the outcome
remains in its stark enormity, and the hand of an inquisitive child is not
ordinarily salved by its previous ignorance as to the corrosive properties
of fire. You have betrayed confiding womanhood, an act abhorrent to
all notions of gentility. There is but one conclusive proof of your
repentance.--Need I mention that I allude to self-destruction?"

"O Lord, sir," I observed, "suicide is a deadly sin, and I would not
willingly insult any gentlewoman by evincing so marked a desire for the
devil's company in preference to hers."

"Your argument is sophistry," he returned, "since 'tis your death alone
that can endear you to your bride. Death is the ultimate and skilled
assayer of alloyed humanity: and by his art our gross constituents--our
foibles, our pettinesses, nay, our very crimes--are precipitated into the
coffin, the while that his crucible sets free the volatile pure essence,
and shows as undefiled by all life's accidents that part of divinity which
harbors in the vilest bosom. This only is remembered: this only mounts,
like an ethereal spirit, to hallow the finished-with blunderer's renown,
and reverently to enshrine his body's resting-place. Ah, no, Captain
Audaine! death alone may canonize the husband. Once you're dead, your wife
will adore you; once you're dead, your wife and I have before us an open
road to connubial felicity, a road which, living, you sadly encumber; and
only when he has delivered your funeral oration may Dr. Quarmby be exempt
from apprehension lest his part in your marriage ceremony bring about his
defrockment. I urge the greatest good for the greatest number, Captain;
living, you plunge all four of us into suffering; whereas the nobility of
an immediate _felo-de-se_ will in common decency exalt your soul to Heaven
accompanied and endorsed by the fervent prayers of three grateful hearts."

"And by the Lord Harry," says the Parson, "while no clergyman extant has
a more cordial aversion to suicide, I cannot understand why a prolonged
existence should tempt you. You love Miss Dorothy Allonby, as all Tunbridge
knows; and to a person of sensibility, what can be more awkward than
to have thrust upon him grandfathership of the adored one? You must in
this position necessarily be exposed to the committal of a thousand
_gaucheries_; and if you insist upon your irreligious project of procuring
a divorce, what, I ask, can be your standing with the lady? Can she smile
upon the suit of an individual who has publicly cast aside the sworn love
and obedience of the being to whom she owes her very existence? or will
any clergyman in England participate in the union of a woman to her
ex-grandfather? Nay, believe me, sir, 'tis less the selfishness than the
folly of your clinging to this vale of tears which I deplore. And I protest
that this rope"--he fished up a coil from the corner--"appears to have
been deposited here by a benign and all-seeing Providence to Suggest
the manifold advantages of hanging yourself as compared with the untidy
operation of cutting one's throat."

"And conceive, sir," says my wife, "what must be the universal grief
for the bridegroom so untimelily taken off in the primal crescence of
his honeymoon! Your funeral will be unparalleled both for sympathy and
splendor; all Tunbridge will attend in tears; and 'twill afford me a
melancholy but sincere pleasure to extend to you the hospitality of the
Allonby mausoleum, which many connoisseurs have accounted the finest in the
three kingdoms."

"I must venture," said I, "to terminate this very singular conversation.
You have, one and all, set forth the advantages of my immediate demise;
your logic is unassailable and has proven suicide my plain duty; and my
rebuttal is confined to the statement that I will see every one of you
damned before I'll do it."

Mr. Francis Vanringham rose with a little bow. "You have insulted both
womanhood and the Established Church by the spitting out of that ribald
oath; and me you have with equal levity wronged by the theft of my
affianced bride. I am only a play-actor, but in inflicting an insult a
gentleman must either lift his inferior to his own station or else forfeit
his gentility. I wear a sword, Captain Audaine. Heyho, will you grant me
the usual satisfaction?"

"My fascinating comedian," said I, "if 'tis a fight you are desirous of,
I can assure you that in my present state I would cross swords with a
costermonger, or the devil, or the Archbishop of Canterbury, with equal
impartiality. But scarcely in the view of a lady, and, therefore, as you
boast the greater influence in that quarter, will you kindly advise the
withdrawal of yonder unexpected addition to my family?"

"There's an inner room," says he, pointing to the door behind me; and I
held it open as my wife swept through.

"You are the epitome of selfishness," she flung out, in passing; "for had
you possessed an ounce of gallantry, you would long ago have freed me from
this odious marriage."

"Sure, madam," I returned, with a _congee_; "and is it not rather a
compliment that I so willingly forfeit a superlunar bliss in order to
retain the pleasure of your society?"

She sniffed, and I closed the door; and within the moment the two men fell
upon me, from the rear, and presently had me trussed like a fowl and bound
with that abominable Parson's coil of rope.


V

"Believe me," says Mr. Vanringham, now seated upon the table and indolently
dangling his heels,--the ecclesiastical monstrosity, having locked the
door upon Mrs. Audaine, had occupied a chair and was composedly smoking
a churchwarden,--"believe me, I lament the necessity of this uncouth
proceeding. But heyho! man is a selfish animal. You take me, sir, my
affection for yonder venerable lady does not keep me awake o' nights; yet
is a rich marriage the only method to amend my threadbare fortunes, so that
I cheerfully avail myself of her credulity. By God!" cried he, with a quick
raising of the voice, "to-morrow I had been a landed gentleman but for you,
you blundering omadhaun! And is a shabby merry-andrew from the devil knows
where to pop in and spoil the prettiest plot was ever hatched?"

'Twas like a flare of lightning, this sudden outburst of malignity; for
you saw in it, quintessentialized, the man's stark and venomous hatred of
a world which had ill-used him; and 'twas over with too as quickly as the
lightning, yielding to the pleasantest smile imaginable. Meanwhile you are
to picture me, and my emotions, as I lay beneath his oscillating toes,
entirely helpless. "'Twas not that I lacked the courage to fight you," he
continues, "nor the skill, either. But there is always the possibility
that by some awkward thrust or other you might deprive the stage of a
distinguished ornament; and as a sincere admirer of my genius, I must,
in decency, avoid such risks. 'Twas necessary to me, of course, that you
be got out of this world speedily, since a further continuance of your
blunderings would interfere with my plans for the future; having gone thus
far, I cannot reasonably be expected to cede my interest in the Marchioness
and her estate. Accordingly I decide upon the handiest method and tip the
wink to Quarmby here; the lady quits the apartment in order to afford us
opportunity to settle our pretensions, with cutlery as arbiter; and she
will return to find your perforated carcass artistically displayed in
yonder extremity of the room. Slain in an affair of honor, my dear Captain!
The disputed damsel will think none the worse of me, a man of demonstrated
valor and affection; Quarmby and I'll bury you in the cellar; and being
freed from her recent and unfortunate alliance, my esteemed Dorothy will
seek consolation in the embraces of a more acceptable spouse. Confess, sir,
is it not a scheme of Arcadian simplicity?"

'Twas the most extraordinary sensation to note the utterly urbane and
cheerful countenance with which Mr. Vanringham disclosed the meditated
atrocity. This unprincipled young man was about to run me through with no
more compunction than a naturalist in the act of pinning a new beetle among
his collection may momentarily be aware of.

Then my quickened faculties were stirred on a sudden, and for the first
time I opened my mouth. Whatever claim I had upon Vanringham, there was no
need to advance it now.

"You were about to say--?" he queried.

"I was about to relieve a certain surplusage of emotion," I retorted, "by
observing that I regret to find you, sir, a chattering, lean-witted fool--a
vain and improvident fool!"

"Harsh words, my Captain," says he, with lifted eyebrows.

"O Lord, sir, but not of an undeserved asperity!" I returned, "D'ye think
the Marchioness, her flighty head crammed with scraps of idiotic romance,
would elope without regard for the canons of romance? Not so; depend upon
it, a letter was left upon her pin-cushion announcing her removal with
you, and in the most approved heroic style arraigning the obduracy of her
unsympathetic grandchildren. D'ye think Gerald Allonby will not follow
her? Sure, and he will; and the proof is," I added, "that you may hear his
horses yonder on the heath, as I heard them some moments ago."

Vanringham leaped to the floor and stood thus, all tension. He raised
clenched, quivering hands toward the ceiling. "O King of Jesters!" he
cried, in horrid blasphemy; and then again, "O King of Jesters!"

And by this time men were shouting without, and at the door there was a
prodigious and augmenting hammering. And the Parson wrung his hands and
began to shake like a dish of jelly in a thunder-storm.

"Captain Audaine," Mr. Vanringham resumed, with more tranquillity, "you are
correct. Clidamira and Parthenissa would never have fled into the night
without leaving a note upon the pin-cushion. The folly I kindled in your
wife's addled pate has proven my ruin. Remains to make the best of Hobson's
choice." He unlocked the door. "Gentlemen, gentlemen!" says he, with
deprecating hand, "surely this disturbance is somewhat _outre_, a trifle
misplaced, upon the threshold of a bridal-chamber?"

Then Gerald Allonby thrust into the room, followed by Lord Humphrey Degge,
[Footnote: I must in this place entreat my reader's profound discredit of
any aspersions I may rashly seem to cast upon this honest gentleman, whose
friendship I to-day esteem as invaluable; but I wrote, as always, _currente
calamo_, and the above was penned in an amorous misery, _sub Venire_, be
it remembered; and in such cases a wrong bias is easily hung upon the
mind.--F.A.] my abhorred rival for Dorothy's affection, and two attendants.

"My grandmother!" shrieks Gerald. "Villain, what have you done with my
grandmother?"

"The query were more fitly put," Vanringham retorts, "to the lady's
husband." And he waves his hand toward me.

Thereupon the new-comers unbound me with various exclamations of wonder.
"And now," I observed, "I would suggest that you bestow upon Mr. Vanringham
and yonder blot upon the Church of England the bonds from which I have been
recently manumitted, or, at the very least, keep a vigilant watch upon
those more than suspicious characters, the while that I narrate the
surprising events of this evening."


VI

Subsequently I made a clean breast of affairs to Gerald and Lord Humphrey
Degge. They heard me with attentive, even sympathetic, countenances; but by
and by the face of Lord Humphrey brightened as he saw a not unformidable
rival thus jockeyed from the field; and when I had ended, Gerald rose and
with an oath struck his open palm upon the table.

"This is the most fortunate coincidence," he swears, "that I have ever
known of. I come prepared to find my grandmother the wife of a beggarly
play-actor, and I discover that, to the contrary, she has contracted an
alliance with a gentleman for whom I entertain sincere affection."

"Surely," I cried, aghast, "you cannot deliberate acceptance of this
iniquitous and inadvertent match!"

"What is your meaning, Captain Audaine?" says the boy, sharply. "What other
course is possible?"'

"O Lord!" said I, "after to-night's imbroglio I have nothing to observe
concerning the possibility of anything; but if this marriage prove a legal
one, I am most indissuadably resolved to rectify matters without delay in
the divorce court."

Now Gerald's brows were uglily compressed. "A divorce," said he, with an
extreme of deliberation, "means the airing of to-night's doings in the
open. I take it, 'tis the duty of a man of honor to preserve the reputation
of his grandmother stainless; whether she be a housemaid or the Queen
of Portugal, her frailties are equally entitled to endurance, her
eccentricities to toleration: can a gentleman, then, sanction any
proceeding of a nature calculated to make his grandmother the
laughing-stock of England? The point is a nice one."

"For, conceive," said Lord Humphrey, with the most knavish grin I ever knew
a human countenance to pollute itself with, "that the entire matter will be
convoyed by the short-hand writers to the public press, and after this will
be hawked about the streets; and that the venders will yell particulars of
your grandmother's folly under your very windows; and that you must hear
them in impotence, and that for some months the three kingdoms will hear of
nothing else. Gad, I quite feel for you, my dear."

"I have fallen into a nest of madmen," I cried. "You know, both of you, how
profoundly I adore Mr. Gerald's sister, the accomplished and bewitching
Miss Allonby; and in any event, I demand of you, as rational beings, is
it equitable that I be fettered for life to an old woman's apron-strings
because a doctor of divinity is parsimonious of his candles?"

But Gerald had drawn with a flourish. "You have repudiated my kinswoman,"
says he, "and you cannot deny me the customary satisfaction. Harkee, my
fine fellow, Dorothy will marry my friend Lord Humphrey if she will be
advised by me; or if she prefer it, she may marry the Man in the Iron Mask
or the piper that played before Moses, so far as I am concerned: but as for
you, I hereby offer you your choice between quitting this apartment as my
grandfather or as a corpse."

"I won't fight you!" I shouted. "Keep the boy off, Degge!" But when the
infuriate lad rushed upon me, I was forced, in self-protection, to draw,
and after a brief engagement to knock his sword across the room.

"Gerald," I pleaded, "for the love of reason, consider! I cannot fight you.
Heaven knows this tragic farce hath robbed me of all pretension toward your
sister, and that I am just now but little better than a madman; yet 'tis
her blood which exhilarates your veins, and with such dear and precious
fluid I cannot willingly imbrue my hands. Nay, you are no swordsman,
lad,--keep off!"

And there I had blundered irretrievably.

"No swordsman! By God, I fling the words in your face, Frank Audaine! must
I send the candlestick after them?" And within the instant he had caught
up his weapon and had hurled himself upon me, in an abandoned fury. I had
not moved. The boy spitted himself upon my sword and fell with a horrid
gasping.

"You will bear me witness, Lord Humphrey," said I, "that the quarrel was
not of my provokement."

But at this juncture the outer door reopened and Dorothy tripped into the
room, preceding Lady Allonby and Mr. George Erwyn. They had followed in the
family coach to dissuade the Marchioness from her contemplated match by
force or by argument, as the cat might jump; and so it came about that my
dear mistress and I stared at each other across her brother's lifeless
body.

And 'twas in this poignant moment I first saw her truly. In a storm you
have doubtless had some utterly familiar scene leap from the darkness,
under the lash of lightning, and be for the instant made visible and
strange; and I beheld her with much that awful clarity. Formerly 'twas her
beauty had ensnared me, and this I now perceived to be a fortuitous and
happy medley of color and glow and curve, indeed, yet nothing more. 'Twas
the woman I loved, not her trappings; and her eyes were no more part of her
than were the jewels in her ears. But the sweet mirth of her, the brave
heart, the clean soul, the girl herself, how good and generous and kind
and tender,--'twas this that I now beheld, and knew that this, too, was
lost;--and, in beholding, the little love of yesterday fled whimpering
before the sacred passion which had possessed my being. And I began to
laugh.

"My dear," said I, "'twas to-night that you promised me your answer, and
to-night you observe in me alike your grandfather and your brother's
murderer."


VII

Lady Allonby fell to wringing her hands, but Dorothy had knelt beside the
prostrate form and was inspecting the ravages of my fratricidal sword. "Oh,
fy! fy!" says she immediately, and wrinkles her saucy nose; "had none of
you the sense to perceive that Gerald was tipsy? And as for the wound, 'tis
only a scratch here on the left shoulder. Get water, somebody." And her
command being obeyed, she cleansed the hurt composedly and bandaged it with
the ruffle of her petticoat.

Meanwhile we hulking men stood thick about her, fidgeting and foolishly
gaping like a basket of fish; and presently a sibilance of relief went
about our circle as Gerald opened his eyes. "Sister," says he, with a
profoundly tragic face, "remember--remember that I perished to preserve the
honor of our family."

"To preserve a fiddlestick!" said my adored Dorothy. And, rising, she
confronted me, a tinted statuette of decision. "Now, Frank," says she, "I
would like to know the meaning of this nonsense."

And thereupon, for the second time, I recounted the dreadful and huddled
action of the night.

When I had ended, "The first thing," says she, "is to let Grandmother out
of that room. And the second is to show me the Parson." This was done; the
Dowager entered in an extremity of sulkiness, and the Parson, on being
pointed out, lowered his eyes and intensified his complexion.

"As I anticipated," says my charmer, "you are, one and all, a parcel of
credulous infants. 'Tis a parson, indeed, but merely the parson out of
Vanbrugh's _Relapse_; only last Friday, sir, we heartily commended your
fine performance. Why, Frank, the man is one of the play-actors."

"I fancy," Mr. Vanringham here interpolates, "that I owe the assembled
company some modicum of explanation. 'Tis true that at the beginning of
our friendship I had contemplated matrimony with our amiable Marchioness,
but, I confess, 'twas the lady's property rather than her person which was
the allure. And reflection dissuaded me; a legal union left me, a young
and not unhandsome man, irrevocably fettered to an old woman; whereas a
mock-marriage afforded an eternal option to compound the match--for a
consideration--with the lady's relatives, to whom, I had instinctively
divined, her alliance with me would prove distasteful. Accordingly I
had availed myself of my colleague's skill [Footnote: I witnessed this
same Quarmby's hanging in 1754, and for a burglary, I think, with an
extraordinary relish.--F.A.] in the portrayal of clerical parts rather than
resort to any parson whose authority was unrestricted by the footlights.
And accordingly--"

"And accordingly my marriage," I interrupted, "is not binding?"

"I can assure you," he replied, "that you might trade your lawful right in
the lady for a twopenny whistle and not lose by the bargain."

"And what about my marriage?" says the Marchioness--"the marriage which was
never to be legalized?--'twas merely that you might sell me afterward, like
so much mutton, was it, you jumping-jack--!"

But I spare you her ensuing gloss upon this text.

The man heard her through, without a muscle twitching. "It is more than
probable," he conceded, "that I have merited each and every fate your
Ladyship is pleased to invoke. Indeed, I consider the extent of your
distresses to be equaled only by that of your vocabulary. Yet by ordinary
the heart of woman is not obdurate, and upon one lady here I have some
claim--"

Dorothy had drawn away from him, with an odd and frightened cry. "Not upon
me, sir! I never saw you except across the footlights. You know I never saw
you except across the footlights, Mr. Vanringham!"

Fixedly he regarded her, with a curious yet not unpleasing smile. "I am
the more unfortunate," he said, at last. "Nay, 'twas to Lady Allonby I
addressed my appeal."

The person he named had been whispering with George Erwyn, but now she
turned toward the actor. "Heavens!" said Lady Allonby, "to think I should
be able to repay you this soon! La, of course, you are at liberty, Mr.
Vanringham, and we may treat the whole series of events as a frolic
suited to the day. For I am under obligations to you, and, besides, your
punishment would breed a scandal, and, above all, anything is preferable to
being talked about in the wrong way."

Having reasons of my own, I was elated by the upshot of this rather
remarkable affair. Yet in justice to my own perspicacity, I must declare
that it occurred to me, at this very time, that Mr. Vanringham had proven
himself not entirely worthy of unlimited confidence, I reflected, however,
that I had my instructions, and that, if a bad king may prove a good
husband, a knave may surely carry a letter with fidelity, the more so if it
be to his interest to do it.


VIII

I rode back to Tunbridge in the coach, with Dorothy at my side and with
Gerald recumbent upon the front seat,--where, after ten minutes' driving
the boy very philanthropically fell asleep.

"And you have not," I immediately asserted--"after all, you have not given
me the answer which was to-night to decide whether I be of all mankind the
most fortunate or the most miserable. And 'tis nearing twelve."

"What choice have I?" she murmured; "after to-night is it not doubly
apparent that you need some one to take care of you? And, besides, this is
your eighth proposal, and the ninth I had always rather meant to accept,
because I have been in love with you for two whole weeks."

My heart stood still. And shall I confess that for an instant my wits,
too, paused to play the gourmet with my emotions? She sat beside me in the
darkness, you understand, waiting, mine to touch. And everywhere the world
was filled with beautiful, kind people, and overhead God smiled down upon
His world, and a careless seraph had left open the door of Heaven, so that
quite a deal of its splendor flooded the world about us. And the snoring
of Gerald was now inaudible because of a stately music which was playing
somewhere.

"Frank--!" she breathed. And I noted that her voice was no less tender than
her lips.




IV

THE RHYME TO PORRINGER


_As Played at Tunbridge Wells, April 2, 1750_

    "_Ye gods, why are not hearts first paired above,
  But still some interfere in others' love,
  Ere each for each by certain marks are known?
  You mould them up in haste, and drop them down,
  And while we seek what carelessly you sort,
  You sit in state, and make our pains your sport._"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

CAPTAIN AUDAINE, an ingenious, well-accomplished gentleman.
LORD HUMPHREY DEGGE, an airy young gentleman, loves Miss Allonby for her
money.
VANRINGHAM, emissary and confederate of Audaine.
MISS ALLONBY, a young lady of wit and fortune.

ATTENDANTS to Lord Humphrey, Etc.


SCENE

Tunbridge Wells, first in and about Lord Humphrey's lodgings, then shifting
to a drawing-room in Lady Allonby's villa.


THE RHYME TO PORRINGER


PROEM:--_Merely to Serve as Intermezzo_

Next morning Captain Audaine was closeted with Mr. Vanringham in the
latter's apartments at the _Three Gudgeons_. I abridge the Captain's
relation of their interview, and merely tell you that it ended in the
actor's looking up, with a puzzled face, from a certain document.

"You might have let me have a whiff of this," Mr. Vanringham began. "You
might have breathed, say, a syllable or two last night--"

"I had my instructions, sir, but yesterday," replied the Captain; "and
surely, Mr. Vanringham, to have presumed last night upon my possession of
this paper, so far as to have demanded any favor of you, were unreasonable,
even had it not savored of cowardice. For, as it has been very finely
observed, it is the nicest part of commerce in the world, that of doing and
receiving benefits. O Lord, sir! there are so many thousand circumstances,
with respect to time, person, and place, which either heighten or allay the
value of the obligation--"

"I take your point," said the other, with some haste, "and concede that you
are, beyond any reasonable doubt, in the right. Within the hour I am off."

"Then all is well," said Captain Audaine.

But he was wrong in this opinion, so wrong that I confute him by subjoining
his own account of what befell, somewhat later in the day.


I

'Twas hard upon ten in the evening (the Captain estimates) when I left
Lady Culcheth's, [Footnote: Sir Henry Muskerry's daughter, of whom I have
already spoken, and by common consent an estimable lady and a person of
fine wit; but my infatuation for Lady Betty had by this time, after three
nights with her, been puffed out; and this fortunate extinction, through
the affair of the broken snuffbox, had left me now entirely indifferent to
all her raptures, panegyrics, and premeditated artlessnesses.--F. A.] and I
protest that at the time there was not a happier man in all Tunbridge than
Francis Audaine.

"You haven't the king?" Miss Allonby was saying, as I made my adieus to the
company. "Then I play queen, knave, and ace, which gives me the game, Lord
Humphrey."

And afterward she shuffled the cards and flashed across the room a glance
whose brilliance shamed the tawdry candles about her, and, as you can
readily conceive, roused a prodigious trepidation in my adoring breast.

"Dorothy!--O Dorothy!" I said over and over again when I had reached the
street; and so went homeward with constant repetitions of her dear name.

I suppose it was an idiotic piece of business; but you are to remember
that I loved her with an entire heart, and that, as yet, I could scarcely
believe the confession of a reciprocal attachment, which I had wrung from
her overnight, to the accompaniment of Gerald's snoring, had been other
than an unusually delectable and audacious dream upon the part of Frank
Audaine.

I found it, then, as I went homeward, a heady joy to ponder on her
loveliness. Oh, the wonder of her voice, that is a love-song! cried my
heart. Oh, the candid eyes of her, more beautiful than the June heavens,
more blue than the very bluest speedwell-flower! Oh, the tilt of her tiny
chin, and the incredible gold of her hair, and the quite unbelievable
pink-and-white of her little flower-soft face! And, oh, the scrap of
crimson that is her mouth.

In a word, my pulses throbbed with a sort of divine insanity, and Frank
Audaine was as much out of his senses as any madman now in Bedlam, and as
deliriously perturbed as any lover is by ordinary when he meditates upon
the object of his affections.

But there was other work than sonneting afoot that night, and shortly I
set about it. Yet such was my felicity that I went to my nocturnal labors
singing. Yes, it rang in my ears, somehow, that silly old Scotch song, and
under my breath I hummed odd snatches of it as I went about the night's
business.

Sang I:

    "Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  King James the Seventh had ae daughter,
  And he gave her to an Oranger.

    "Ken ye how he requited him?
  Ken ye how he requited him?
  The dog has into England come,
  And ta'en the crown in spite of him!

    "The rogue he salna keep it lang,
  To budge we'll make him fain again;
  We'll hang him high upon a tree,
  And King James shall hae his ain again!"


II

Well! matters went smoothly enough at the start. With a diamond Vanringham
dexterously cut out a pane of glass, so that we had little difficulty in
opening the window; and I climbed into a room black as a pocket, leaving
him without to act as a sentinel, since, so far as I could detect, the
house was now untenanted.

But some twenty minutes later, when I had finally succeeded in forcing the
escritoire I found in the back room upon the second story, I heard the
street door unclose. And I had my candle extinguished in that self same
instant. You can conceive that 'twas with no pleasurable anticipation I
peered into the hall, for I was fairly trapped. I saw some five or six men
of an ugly aspect, who carried among them a burden, the nature of which I
could not determine in the uncertain light. But I heaved a sigh of relief
as they bore their cargo past me, to the front room, (which opened on the
one I occupied), without apparent recognition of my presence.

"Now," thinks I, "is the time for my departure." And having already
selected the papers I had need of from the rifled desk, I was about to run
for it, when I heard a well-known voice.

"Rat the parson!" it cried; "he should have been here an hour ago. Here's
the door left open for him, endangering the whole venture, and whey-face
han't plucked up heart to come! Do some of you rogues fetch him without
delay; and do all of you meet me to-morrow at the _Mitre_, to be paid in
full for this business, before reporting to his Grace."

"Here," thinks I, "is beyond doubt a romance." And as the men tumbled
down-stairs and into the street, I resolved to see the adventure through,
by the light of those candles which were now burning in the next room.

I waited for perhaps ten minutes, during which period I was aware of divers
movements near at hand; and, judging that in any case there was but one
man's anger to be apprehended, I crept toward the intervening door and
found it luckily ajar.

So I peered through the crack into the adjoining room, and there, as I had
anticipated, discovered Lord Humphrey Degge, whom I had last seen at Lady
Culcheth's wrangling over a game of _ecarte_ with the fairest antagonist
the universe could afford.

Just now my Lord was in a state of high emotion, and the cause of it was
evident when I perceived his ruffians had borne into the house a swooning
lady, whom merciful unconsciousness had rendered oblivious to her present
surroundings, and whose wrists his Lordship was vigorously slapping in the
intervals between his frequent applications to her nostrils of a flask,
which, as I more lately learned, contained sal volatile.

Here was an unlucky turn, since I had no desire to announce my whereabouts,
my business in the house being of a sort that necessitated secrecy;
whereas, upon the other hand, I could not but misdoubt my Lord's intention
toward the unknown fair was of discreditable kinship, and such as a
gentleman might not countenance with self-esteem.

Accordingly I devoted the moments during which the lady was recovering
from her swoon, to serious reflection concerning the course that I should
preferably adopt. But now, Miss came to, and, as is the custom of all
females similarly situated, rubbed her eyes and said, "Where am I?"

And when she rose from the divan I saw that 'twas my adored Dorothy.

"In the presence of your infatuated slave," says my Lord. "Ah, divine Miss
Allonby--!"

But being now aware of her deplorable circumstances, she began to weep,
and, in spite of the amorous rhetoric with which his Lordship was prompt to
comfort her, rebuked him for unmanly conduct, with sublimity and fire, and
depicted the horrors of her present predicament in terms that were both
just and elegant.

From their disjointed talk I soon determined that, Lord Humphrey's suit
being rejected by my angel, he had laid a trap for her (by bribing her
coachman, as I subsequently learned), and had so far succeeded in his
nefarious scheme that she, on leaving Lady Culcheth's, had been driven
to this house, in the conviction she rode homeward; and this course my
Lord endeavored to justify, with a certain eloquence, and attributed the
irregularity of his behavior solely to the colossal vehemence of his
affection.

His oratory, however, was of little avail, for Dorothy told him plainly
that she had rather hear the protestations of a toad than listen to his far
more nauseous flattery; and bade him at once restore her to her natural
guardians.

"_Ma charmante_," said he, "to-morrow your good step-mother may, if you
will, share with your husband the privilege of saluting Lady Humphrey
Degge; but as for Miss Allonby, I question if in the future her dearest
friends are likely to see much of her."

"What do you mean?" cries she.

"That the parson will be here directly," said he.

"Infamous!" she observes; "and is the world run mad, that these extempore
weddings should be foisted upon every woman in the Allonby connection!"

"Ah, but, my dear," he answered airily, "'twas those two fiascos which
begot my notion, and yet hearten me. For in every approved romance the
third adventurer gets the victory; so that I am, I take it, predestinate to
win where Vanringham and Rokesle failed."

She did not chop logic with him, but instead retorted in a more primitive
fashion by beginning to scream at the top of her voice.

I doubt if any man of honor was ever placed under a more great embarrass.
Yonder was the object of my devotion, exposed to all the diabolical
machinations of a heartless villain; and here was I concealed in my Lord's
bedroom, his desk broken open, and his papers in my pocket. To remain quiet
was impossible, since 'twas to expose her to a fate worse than death; yet
to reveal myself was to confess Frank Audaine a thief, and to lose her
perhaps beyond redemption.

Then I thought of the mask which I had brought in case of emergency; and,
clapping it on, resolved to brazen out the affair. Meanwhile I saw all
notions of gallantry turned topsy-turvy, for my Lord was laughing quietly,
while my adored Dorothy called aloud upon the name of her Maker.

"The neighborhood is not unaccustomed to such sounds," said he, "and I
hardly think we need fear any interruption. I must tell you, my dear
creature, you have, by an evil chance, arrived in a most evil locality, for
this quarter of the town is the devil's own country, and he is scarcely
like to make you free of it."

"O Lord, sir!" said I, and pushed the door wide open, "surely you forget
that the devil is a gentleman?"


III

Had I dropped a hand-grenade into the apartment the astonishment of its
occupants would not have been excessive. My Lord's face, as he clapped
his hand to his sword, was neither tranquil nor altogether agreeable to
contemplate; but as for Dorothy, she gave a frightened little cry, and ran
toward the masked intruder with a piteous confidence which wrung my heart.

"The devil!" says my Lord.

"Not precisely," I amended, and bowed in my best manner, "though 'tis
undeniable I come to act as his representative."

"Oh, joy to your success!" his Lordship sneered.

"Harkee, sir," said I, "as you, with perfect justice, have stated, this is
the devil's stronghold, and hereabouts his will is paramount; and, as I
have had the honor to add, the devil is a gentleman. Sure, and as such, he
cannot be expected to countenance your present behavior? Nay, never fear!
Lucifer, already up to the ears in the affairs of this mundane sphere,
lacks leisure to express his disapproval in sulphuric person. He tenders
his apologies, sir, and sends in his stead your servant, with whose
capabilities he is indifferently acquainted."

"To drop this mummery," says Lord Humphrey, "what are you doing in my
lodgings?"

"O Lord, sir!" I responded, "I came thither, I confess, without invitation.
And with equal candor I will admit that my present need is of your
Lordship's banknotes and jewels, and such-like trifles, rather than--you
force me, sir, to say it,--rather than of your company."

Thus speaking, I drew and placed myself on guard, while my Lord gasped.

"You're the most impudent rogue," says he, after he had recovered himself a
little, "that I have had the privilege of meeting--"

"Your Lordship is all kindness," I protested.

"--but your impudence is worth the price of whatever you may have pilfered.
Go, my good man--or devil, if you so prefer to style yourself! Tell Lucifer
that he is well served; and obligingly return to the infernal regions
without delay. For, as you have doubtless learned, Miss and I have many
private matters to discuss. And, gad, Mr. Moloch, [Footnote: A deity of,
I believe, Ammonitish origin. His traditional character as represented
by our immortal Milton is both taking to the fancy and finely romantic;
and is, I am informed, no less remarkable for many happy turns of speech
than for conformity throughout to the most famous legends of Talmudic
fabrication.--F.A.] pleasant as is your conversation, you must acknowledge
I can't allow evil spirits about the house without getting it an ill
reputation. So pardon me if I exorcise you with this."

He spoke boldly, and, as he ended, tossed me a purse. I let it lie where it
fell, for I had by no means ended my argument.

"Yet, sir," said I, "my errand, which began with the acquisition of your
pins, studs and other jewelry, now reaches toward treasure far more
precious--"

"Enough!" he cried, impatiently, "Begone! and do you render thanks--that my
present business is so urgent as to prevent my furnishing the rope which
will one day adorn your neck."

"That's as may be," quoth I; "and, indeed, I doubt if I could abide
drowning, for 'tis a damp, unwholesome, and very permanent sort of death.
But my fixed purpose, to cut short all debate, is to escort Miss Allonby
homeward."

"Come," sneers my Lord,--"come, Mr. Moloch, I have borne with your
insolence for a quarter of an hour--"

"Twenty minutes," said I, after consulting my watch.

"--but I mean to put up with it no longer; and in consequence I take the
boorish liberty of suggesting that this is none of your affair."

"Good sir," I conceded, "your Lordship speaks with considerable justice,
and we must leave the final decision to Miss here."

I bowed toward her. In her face there was a curious bewilderment that
made me fear lest, for all my mask, for all my unnatural intonations, and
for all the room's half-light, my worshipped mistress had come near to
recognizing this caught thief.

"Miss Allonby," said I, in a falsetto voice which trembled, "since I am
unknown to you, may I trust you will permit me to present myself? My
name--though, indeed, I have a multitude of names--is for the occasion
Frederick Thomasson. With my father's appellation and estates I cannot
accommodate you, for the reason that a mystery attaches to his identity.
As for my mother, let it suffice to say that she was a vivacious brunette
of a large acquaintance, and generally known to the public as Black Moll
O'Reilly. I began life as a pickpocket. Since then I have so far improved
my natural gifts that the police are flattering enough to value my person
at several hundred pounds. My rank in society, as you perceive, is not
exalted; yet, if my luck by any chance should fail, I do not question that
I shall, upon some subsequent Friday, move in loftier circles than any
nobleman who happens at the time to be on Tyburn Hill.--So much for my poor
self. And since by this late hour Lady Allonby is beyond doubt beginning to
grow uneasy, let us have done with further exposition, and remember that
'tis high time you selected an escort to her residence. May I implore that
you choose between the son of the Marquis of Venour and Black Molly's
bastard?"

She looked us over,--first one, then the other. More lately she laughed;
and if I had never seen her before, I could have found it in my heart to
love her for the sweet insolence of her demeanor.

"After all," said my adored Dorothy, "I prefer the rogue who when he goes
about his knaveries has at least the decency to wear a mask."

"That, my Lord," said I, "is fairly conclusive; and so we will be
journeying."

"Over my dead body!" says he.

"Sure, and what's beneath the feet," I protested, "is equally beneath
consideration."

The witticism stung him like a wasp, and, with an oath, he drew, as I was
heartily glad to observe, for I cannot help thinking that when it comes to
the last pinch, and one gentleman is excessively annoyed by the existence
of another, steel is your only arbiter, and charitable allowances for the
dead make the one rational peroration. So we crossed blades; and, pursuing
my usual tactics, I began upon a flow of words, which course, as I have
learned by old experience, is apt to disconcert an adversary far more than
any trick of the sword can do.

I pressed him sorely, and he continued to give way, but clearly for
tactical purposes, and without permitting the bright flash of steel that
protected him to swerve an instant from the proper line.

"Miss Allonby," said I, growing impatient, "have you never seen a venomous
insect pinned to the wall? In that case, I pray you to attend more closely.
For one has only to parry--thus! And to thrust--in this fashion! And
behold, the thing is done!"

In fact, having been run through the chest, my Lord was for the moment
affixed to the panelling at the extreme end of the apartment, where he
writhed, much in the manner of a cockchafer which mischievous urchins have
pinned to a card,--his mien and his gesticulations, however, being rather
more suggestive of the torments of the damned, as they are so strikingly
depicted by the Italian Dante. [Footnote: I allude, of course, to the
famous Florentine, who excels no less in his detailed depictions of
infernal anguish than in his eloquent portrayal of the graduated and
equitable emoluments of an eternal glorification.--F.A.] He tumbled in a
heap, though, when I sheathed my sword and bowed toward my charmer.

"Miss Allonby," said I, "thus quickly ends this evil quarter of an hour;
and with, equal expedition, I think, should we be leaving this evil quarter
of the town."

She had watched the combat with staring and frightened eyes. Now she had
drawn nearer, and she looked curiously at her over-presumptuous lover where
he had fallen.

"Have you killed him?" she asked, in a hushed voice.

"O Lord, no!" I protested. "The life of a peer's son is too valuable a
matter; he will be little the worse for it in a week."

"The dog!" cries she, overcome with pardonable indignation at the affront
which the misguided nobleman had put upon her; and afterward, with a
ferocity the more astounding in an individual whose demeanor was by
ordinary of an aspect so amiable and so engaging, she said, "Oh, the lewd
thieving dog!"

"My adorable Miss Allonby," said I, "do not, I pray you, thus slander the
canine species! Meanwhile, permit me to remind you that 'tis inexpedient
to loiter in these parts, for the parson will presently be at hand; and if
it be to inter rather than to marry Lord Humphrey--well, after all, the
peerage is a populous estate! But, either way, time presses."

"Come!" said she, and took my arm; and together we went down-stairs and
into the street.


IV

On the way homeward she spoke never a word. Vanringham had made a hasty
flitting when my Lord's people arrived, so that we saw nothing of him. But
when we had come safely to Lady Allonby's villa, Dorothy began to laugh.

"Captain Audaine," says she, in a wearied and scornful voice, "I know that
the hour is very late, yet there are certain matters to be settled between
as which will, I think, scarcely admit of delay. I pray you, then, grant me
ten minutes' conversation."

She had known me all along, you see. Trust the dullest woman to play
Oedipus when love sets the riddle. So there was nothing to do save clap my
mask into my pocket and follow her, sheepishly enough, toward one of the
salons, where at Dorothy's solicitation a gaping footman made a light for
us.

She left me there to kick my heels through a solitude of some moments'
extent. But in a while my dear mistress came into the room, with her arms
full of trinkets and knick-knacks, which she flung upon a table.

"Here's your ring, Captain Audaine," says she, and drew it from her finger.
"I did not wear it long, did I? And here's the miniature you gave me, too.
I used to kiss it every night, you know. And here's a flower you dropped at
Lady Pevensey's. I picked it up--oh, very secretly!--because you had worn
it, you understand. And here's--"

But at this point she fairly broke down; and she cast her round white arms
about the heap of trinkets, and strained them close to her, and bowed her
imperious golden head above them in anguish.

"Oh, how I loved you--how I loved you!" she sobbed. "And all the while you
were only a common thief!"

"Dorothy--!" I pleaded.

"You shame me--you shame me past utterance!" she cried, in a storm of
mingled tears and laughter. "Here's this bold Captain Audaine, who comes to
Tunbridge from nobody knows where, and wins a maid's love, and proves in
the end a beggarly house-breaker! Mr. Garrick might make a mirthful comedy
of this, might he not?" Then she rose to her feet very stiffly. "Take your
gifts, Mr. Thief," says she, pointing,--"take them. And for God's sake let
me not see you again!"

So I was forced to make a clean breast of it.

"Dorothy," said I, "ken ye the rhyme to porringer?" But she only stared at
me through unshed tears.

Presently, though, I hummed over the old song:

    "Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  King James the Seventh had ae daughter,
  And he gave her to an Oranger.

"And the Oranger filched his crown," said I, "and drove King James--God
bless him!--out of his kingdom. This was a while and a half ago, my dear;
but Dutch William left the stolen crown to Anne, and Anne, in turn, left it
to German George. So that now the Elector of Hanover reigns at St. James's,
while the true King's son must skulk in France, with never a roof to
shelter him. And there are certain gentlemen, Dorothy, who do not consider
that this is right."

"You are a Jacobite?" said she. "Well! and what have your politics to do
with the matter?"

"Simply that Lord Humphrey is not of my way of thinking, my dearest dear.
Lord Humphrey--pah!--this Degge is Ormskirk's spy, I tell you! He followed
Vanringham to Tunbridge on account of our business. And to-day, when
Vanringham set out for Avignon, he was stopped a mile from the Wells by
some six of Lord Humphrey's fellows, disguised as highwaymen, and all his
papers were stolen. Oho, but Lord Humphrey is a thrifty fellow: so when
Ormskirk puts six bandits at his disposal he employs them in double infamy,
to steal you as well as Vanringham's despatches. To-morrow they would have
been in Ormskirk's hands. And then--" I paused to allow myself a whistle.

She came a little toward me, in the prettiest possible glow of
bewilderment, "I do not understand," she murmured. "Oh, Frank, Frank, for
the love of God, beware of trusting Vanringham in anything! And you are not
a thief, after all? Are you really not named Thomasson?"

"I am most assuredly not Frederick Thomasson," said I, "nor do I know if
any such person exists, for I never heard the name before to-night. Yet, in
spite of this, I am an unmitigated thief. Why, d'ye not understand? What
Vanringham carried was a petition from some two hundred Scotch and English
gentlemen that our gracious Prince Charlie be pleased to come over and
take back his own from the Elector. 'Twas rebellion, flat rebellion, and
the very highest treason! Had Ormskirk seen the paper, within a month our
heads had all been blackening over Temple Bar. So I stole it,--I, Francis
Audaine, stole it in the King's cause, God bless him! 'Twas burglary, no
less, but it saved two hundred lives, my own included; and I look to be a
deal older than I am before I regret the deed with any sincerity."

Afterward I showed her the papers, and then burned them one by one over a
candle. She said nothing. So by and by I turned toward her with a little
bow.

"Madam," said I, "you have forced my secret from me. I know that your
family is staunch on the Whig side; and yet, ere the thief goes, may he not
trust you will ne'er betray him?"

And now she came to me, all penitence and dimples.

"But it was you who said you were a thief," my dear mistress pointed out.

"O Lord, madam!" said I, "'twas very necessary that Degge should think me
so. A house-breaker they would have only hanged, but a Jacobite they would
have hanged and quartered afterward."

"Ah, Frank, do not speak of such fearful matters, but forgive me
instantly!" she wailed.

And I was about to do so in what I considered the most agreeable and
appropriate manner when the madcap broke away from me, and sprang upon a
footstool and waved her fan defiantly.

"Down with the Elector!" she cried, in her high, sweet voice. "Long live
King James!"

And then, with a most lovely wildness of mien, she began to sing:

    "Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  Ken ye the rhyme to porringer?
  King James the Seventh had ae daughter--"

until I interrupted her. For, "Extraordinary creature!" I pleaded, "you
will rouse the house."

"I don't care! I intend to be a Jacobite if you are one!"

"Eh, well," said I, "Frank Audaine is not the man to coerce his wife in a
political matter. Nevertheless, I know of a certain Jacobite who is not
unlikely to have a bad time of it if by any chance Lord Humphrey recognized
him to-night. Nay, Miss, you may live to be a widow yet."

"But he didn't recognize you. And if he did"--she snapped her
fingers,--"why, we'll fight him again, you and I. Won't we, my dear? For
he stole our secret, you know. And he stole me, too. Very pretty behavior,
wasn't it?" And here Miss, Allonby stamped the tiniest, the most
infinitesimal of red-heeled slippers.

  "The rogue he didna keep me lang,
  To budge we made him fain again--

"that's you, Frank, and your great, long sword. And now:

  "We'll hang him high, upon a tree,
  And King Frank shall hae his ain again!"

Afterward my adored Dorothy jumped from the footstool, and came toward me,
lifting up the crimson trifle that she calls her mouth, "So take your own,
my king," she breathed, with a wonderful gesture of surrender.

And a gentleman could do no less.




V

ACTORS ALL


_As Played at Tunbridge Wells, April 3, 1750_

"_I am thinking if some little, filching, inquisitive poet should get my
story, and represent it to the stage, what those ladies who are never
precise but at a play would say of me now,--that I were a confident, coming
piece, I warrant, and they would damn the poor poet for libelling the
sex._"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

DUKE OF ORMSKIRK.

COLONEL DENSTROUDE,  }
SIR GRESLEY CARNE,   } Gentlemen of the town.
MR. BABINGTON-HERLE, }

VANRINGHAM, a play-actor and a Jacobite emissary.

MR. LANGTON, secretary to Ormskirk.

MISS ALLONBY, an heiress, loves Captain Audaine.

LOTTRUM, maid to Miss Allonby.

BENYON, MINCHIN, and OTHER SERVANTS to Ormskirk.


SCENE

Tunbridge Wells, shifting from Ormskirk's lodgings at the _Mitre_ to
Vanringham's apartments in the _Three Gudgeons_.




ACTORS ALL


_PROEM.--To Explain Why the Heroine of This Comedy Must Wear Her Best_

I quit pilfering from the writings of Francis Audaine, since in the
happenings which now concern us he plays but a subsidiary part. The Captain
had an utter faith in decorum, and therefore it was, as he records, an
earth-staggering shock when the following day, on the Pantiles, in full
sight of the best company at the Wells, Captain Audaine was apprehended. He
met disaster like an old acquaintance, and hummed a scrap of song--"_O, gin
I were a bonny bird_,"--and shrugged; but when Miss Allonby, with whom he
had been chatting, swayed and fell, the Captain caught her in his arms, and
standing thus, turned angrily upon the emissaries of the law.

"Look you, you rascals," said he, "you have spoiled a lady's afternoon with
your foolish warrant!"

He then relinquished the unconscious girl to her brother's keeping,
tenderly kissed one insensate hand, and afterward strolled off to jail
_en route_ for a perfunctory trial and a subsequent traffic with the
executioner that Audaine did not care to think of.

Tunbridge buzzed like a fly-trap with the ensuing rumors. The Captain
was at the head of a most heinous Jacobitical uprising. The great Duke
of Ormskirk was come hastily from London on the business. Highlanders
were swarming over the Border, ten thousand French troops had landed at
Pevensey, commanded by the Chevalier St. George in person, and twenty
thousand friars and pilgrims from Coruna had sailed for Milford Haven,
under the admiralty of young Henry Stuart. The King was locked in the
Tower; the King had been assassinated that morning by a Spanish monk, with
horse-pistols and a cast in his left eye; and the King and the Countess of
Yarmouth had escaped three days ago, in disguise, and were now on their way
to Hanover.

These were the reports which went about Tunbridge, while Dorothy Allonby
wept a little and presently called for cold water and a powder-puff, and
afterward for a sedan chair.


I

Miss Allonby found my Lord Duke of Ormskirk deep in an infinity of papers.
But at her entrance he rose and with a sign dismissed his secretary.

It appears appropriate here to afford you some notion of Ormskirk's
exterior. I pilfer from Loewe's memoir of him, where Horace Calverley, who
first saw Ormskirk at about this time, is quoted:

"His Grace was in blue-and-silver, which became him, though he is somewhat
stomachy for such conspicuous colors. A handsome man, I would have said,
honest but not particularly intelligent.... Walpole, in a fit of spleen,
once called him 'a porcelain sphinx,' and the phrase sticks; but,
indeed, there is more of the china-doll about him. He possesses the
same too-perfect complexion, his blue eyes have the same spick-and-span
vacuity; and the fact that the right orb is a trifle larger than its fellow
gives his countenance, in repose, much the same expression of placid
astonishment.... Very plump, very sleepy-looking, immaculate as a cat, you
would never have accorded him a second glance: covert whisperings that the
stout gentleman yonder is the great Duke of Ormskirk have, I think, taxed
human belief more than once during these ten years past."

They said of Ormskirk that he manifested a certain excitement on the
day after Culloden, when he had seventy-two prisoners shot _en masse_,
[Footnote: But for all that, when, near Rossinish (see Loewe), he captured
Flora Macdonald and her ostensibly female companion, Ormskirk flatly
declined to recognize Prince Charles. "They may well call you the
Pretender, madam," he observed to "Bettie Burke,"--"since as concerns my
party you are the most desirable Pretender we could possibly imagine." And
thereupon he gave the Prince a pass out of Scotland.] but this was doubted;
and in any event, such _battues_ being comparatively rare, he by ordinary
appeared to regard the universe with a composed and feline indifference.


II

"Child, child!" Ormskirk began, and made a tiny gesture of deprecation, "I
perceive you are about to appeal to my better nature, and so I warn you in
advance that the idiotic business has worked me into a temper absolutely
ogreish."

"The Jacobite conspiracy, you mean?" said Miss Allonby. "Oh, I suppose
so. I am not particularly interested in such matters, though; I came, you
understand, for a warrant, or an order, or whatever you call it, for them
to let Frank out of that horrid filthy gaol."

The Duke's face was gravely humorous as he gazed at her for a moment or two
in silence, "You know quite well," he said at last, "that I can give you
nothing of the sort."

Miss Allonby said: "Upon my word, I never heard of such nonsense! How else
is he to take me to Lady Mackworth's ball to-night?"

"It is deplorable," his Grace of Ormskirk conceded, "that Captain Audaine
should be thus snatched from circles which he, no doubt, adorns. Still, I
fear you must look for another escort; and frankly, child, if you will be
advised by me, you will permit us to follow out our present intentions and
take off his head--not a great deprivation when you consider he has so
plainly demonstrated its contents to be of such inferior quality."

She had drawn close to him, with widening, pitiable eyes. "You mean, then,"
she demanded, "that Frank's very life is in danger?"

"This is unfair," the Duke complained. "You are about to go into hysterics
forthwith and thus bully me into letting the man escape. You are a minx.
You presume upon the fact that in the autumn I am to wed your kinswoman and
bosom companion, and that my affection for her is widely known to go well
past the frontier of common-sense; and also upon the fact that Marian will
give me the devil if I don't do exactly as you ask. I consider you to abuse
your power unconscionably, I consider you to be a second Delilah. However,
since you insist upon it, this Captain Audaine must, of course, be spared
the fate he very richly merits."

Miss Allonby had seated herself beside a table and was pensively looking
up at him. "Naturally," she said, "Marian and I, between us, will badger
you into saving Frank. I shall not worry, therefore, and I must trust to
Providence, I suppose, to arrange matters so that the poor boy will not
catch his death of cold in your leaky gaol yonder. And now I would like to
be informed of what he has been most unjustly accused."

"His crime," the Duke retorted, "is the not unusual one of being a fool.
Oh, I am candid! All Jacobites are fools. We gave the Stuarts a fair trial,
Heaven knows, and nobody but a fool would want them back."

"I am not here to discuss politics," a dignified Miss Allonby stated, "but
simply to find out in what way Frank has been slandered."

Ormskirk lifted one eyebrow. "It is not altogether a matter of politics.
Rather, as I see it, it is a matter of common-sense. Under the Stuarts
England was a prostitute among the nations, lackey in turn to Spain and
France and Italy; under the Guelph the Three-per-cents. are to-day at par.
The question as to which is preferable thus resolves itself into a choice
between common-sense and bedlamite folly. But, unhappily, you cannot argue
with a Jacobite: only four years ago Cumberland and Hawley and I rode from
Aberdeen to the Highlands and left all the intervening country bare as the
palm of your hand; I forget how many Jacobites we killed, but evidently not
enough to convince the others. Very well: we intend to have no more such
nonsense, and we must settle this particular affair by the simple device
of hanging or beheading every man-Jack concerned in it." He spoke without
vehemence--rather regretfully than otherwise.

Miss Allonby was patient, yet resolute to keep to the one really important
point. "But what has Frank been accused of doing when it never even entered
his head?"

"He has been conspiring," said the Duke, "and with conspicuous clumsiness.
It appears, child, that it was their common idiocy which of late brought
together some two hundred gentlemen in Lancashire. Being every one of them
most unmitigated fools, they desired that sot at Avignon to come over once
more and 'take back his own,' as the saying is. He would not stir without
definite assurances. So these men drew up a petition pledging their all to
the Chevalier's cause and--God help us!--signed it. I protest," the Duke
sighed, "I cannot understand these people! A couple of penstrokes, you
observe, and there is your life at the mercy of chance, at the disposal of
a puff of wind or the first blunderer who stumbles on the paper."

"Doubtless that is entirely true," said Miss Allonby, "but what about
Frank?"

Ormskirk shrugged his shoulders and began to laugh. "You are an
incomparable actress, you rogue you. But let us be candid, for all that,
since as it happens Lord Humphrey is not the only person in my employ. What
occurred last night I now partly know, and in part guess, Degge played a
bold game, and your Captain gambled even more impudently,--only the stakes,
as it to-day transpires, were of somewhat less importance than either of
them surmised. For years Mr. Vanringham has been a Jacobite emissary; now
he tires of it; and so he devoted the entire morning, yesterday to making a
copy of this absurd petition."

"I do not understand," said Miss Allonby; and in appearance, at least, she
was no whit disconcerted.

"He carried only the copy. You burned only the copy. Mr. Vanringham, it
develops, knew well enough what that bungling Degge had been deputed to
do, and he preferred to treat directly with Lord Humphrey's principal. Mr.
Vanringham is an intelligent fellow. I dare make this assertion, because
I am fresh from an interview with Mr. Vanringham," his Grace of Ormskirk
ended, and allowed himself a reminiscent chuckle.

She had risen. "O ungenerous! this Vanringham has been bribed!"

"I pray you," said the Duke, "give vent to no such scandal. Vanringham's
life would not be worth a farthing if he had done such a thing, and he
knows it. Nay, I have planned it more neatly. To-night Mr. Vanringham will
be arrested--merely on suspicion, mind you,--and all his papers will be
brought to me; and it is possible that among them we may find the petition.
And it is possible that, somehow, when he is tried with the others, Mr.
Vanringham alone may be acquitted. And it is possible that an aunt--in
Wales, say,--may die about this time and leave him a legacy of some five
thousand pounds. Oh, yes, all this is quite possible," said the Duke;
"but should we therefore shriek _Bribery_? For my own part, I esteem Mr.
Vanringham, as the one sensible man in the two hundred."

"He has turned King's evidence," she said, "and his papers will be brought
to you--" Miss Allonby paused. "All his papers!" said Miss Allonby.

"And very curious they will prove, no doubt," said his Grace. "So many
love-sick misses write to actors. I can assure you, child, I look
forward with a deal of interest to my inspection of Mr. Vanringham's
correspondence."

"Eh?--Oh, yes!" Miss Allonby assented--"all his papers! Yes, they should be
diverting, I must be going home though, to make ready for Lady Mackworth's
ball. And if I have nobody to dance with me, I shall know quite well whose
fault it is. How soon will Frank be freed, you odious tyrant?"

"My child, but in these matters we are all slaves to red tape! I can
promise you, however, that your Captain will be released from prison before
this month is out, so you are not to worry."


III

When she had left him the Duke sat for a while in meditation.

"That is an admirable girl, I would I could oblige her in the matter and
let this Audaine live. But such folly is out of the question. The man is
the heart of the conspiracy.

"No, Captain Audaine, I am afraid we must have that handsome head of yours,
and set your spirit free before this month is out. And your head also, Mr.
Vanringham, when we are done with using your evidence. This affair must be
the last; hitherto we have tried leniency, and it has failed; now we will
try extermination. Not one of these men must escape.

"I shall have trouble with Marian, since the two girls are inseparable.
Yes, this Audaine will cause me some trouble with Marian. I heartily wish
the fellow had never been born."

Ormskirk took a miniature from his pocket and sat thus in the dusk
regarding it. It was the portrait of a young girl with hazel eyes and
abundant hair the color of a dead oak-leaf. And now his sleepy face was
curiously moved.

"I shall have to lie to you. And you will believe me, for you are not
disastrously clever. But I wish it were not necessary, my dear. I wish it
were possible to make you understand that my concern is to save England
rather than a twopenny captain. As it is, I shall lie to you, and you will
believe. And Dorothy will get over it in time, as one gets over everything
in time. But I wish it were not necessary, sweetheart.

"I wish.... I wish that I were not so happy when I think of you. I become
so happy that I grow afraid. It is not right that anyone should be so
happy.

"Bah! I am probably falling into my dotage."

Ormskirk struck upon the gong. "And now, Mr. Langton, let us get back to
business."


IV

Later in the afternoon Miss Allonby demanded of her maid if Gerald Allonby
were within, and received a negative response. "Nothing could be better,"
said Miss Allonby. "You know that new suit of Master Gerald's, Lottrum--the
pink-and-silver? Very well; then you will do thus, and thus, and thus--"
And she poured forth a series of directions that astonished her maid not a
little.

"Law you now!" said Lottrum, "whatever--?"

"If you ask me any questions," said Dorothy, "I will discharge you on the
spot. And if you betray me, I shall probably kill you."

Lottrum said, "O Gemini!" and did as her mistress ordered.

Miss Allonby made a handsome boy, and such was her one comfort. Her mirror
showed an epicene denizen of romance,--Rosalind or Bellario, a frail
and lovely travesty of boyhood; but it is likely that the girl's heart
showed stark terror. Here was imminent no jaunt into Arden, but into the
gross jaws of even bodily destruction. Here was probable dishonor, a
guaranteeable death. She could fence well enough, thanks to many bouts with
Gerald; but when the foils were unbuttoned, there was a difference which
the girl could appreciate.

"In consequence," said Dorothy, "I had better hurry before I am still more
afraid."


V

So there came that evening, after dusk, to Mr. Francis Vanringham's
apartments, at the _Three Gudgeons_, a young spark in pink-and-silver. He
appeared startled at the sight of so much company, recovered his composure
with a gulp, and presented himself to the assembled gentlemen as Mr.
Osric Allonby, unexpectedly summoned from Cambridge, and in search of
his brother, Squire Gerald. At his step-mother's villa they had imagined
Gerald might be spending the evening with Mr. Vanringham. Mr. Osric
Allonby apologized for the intrusion; was their humble servant; and with a
profusion of _congees_ made as though to withdraw.

Mr. Vanringham lounged forward. The comedian had a vogue among the younger
men, since at all games of chance they found him untiring and tolerably
honest; and his apartments were, in effect, a gambling parlor.

Vanringham now took the boy's hand very genially. "You have somewhat the
look of your sister," he observed, after a prolonged appraisal; "though, in
nature, 'tis not expected of us trousered folk to be so beautiful. And by
your leave, you'll not quit us thus unceremoniously, Master Osric. I am by
way of being a friend of your brother's, and 'tis more than possible that
he may during the evening honor us with his presence. Will you not linger
awhile on the off-chance?" And Osric Allonby admitted he had no other
engagements.

He was in due form made known to the three gentlemen--Colonel Denstroude,
[Footnote: He and Vanringham had just been reconciled by Molly Yates'
elopement with Tom Stoach, the Colonel's footman. Garendon has a curious
anecdote concerning this lady, apropos of his notorious duel with
Denstroude, in '61.] Mr. Babington-Herle, and Sir Gresley Carne--who sat
over a bowl of punch. Sir Gresley was then permitted to conclude the
narrative which Mr. Allonby's entrance had interrupted: the evening
previous, being a little tipsy, Sir Gresley had strolled about Tunbridge in
search of recreation and, with perhaps excessive playfulness, had slapped
a passer-by, broken the fellow's nose, and gouged both thumbs into the
rascal's eyes. The young baronet conceded the introduction of these London
pastimes into the rural quiet of Tunbridge to have been an error in taste,
especially as the man proved upon inquiry to be a respectable haberdasher
and the sole dependence of four children; and having thus unfortunately
blinded the little tradesman, Sir Gresley wished to ask of the assembled
company what in their opinion was a reasonable reparation. "For I sincerely
regret the entire affair," Sir Gresley concluded, "and am desirous to
follow a course approvable by all men of honor."

"Heyho!" said Mr. Vanringham, "I'm afraid the rape of both eyes was a
trifle extreme; for by ordinary a haberdasher is neither a potato nor an
Argus, and, remembering that, even the high frivolity of brandy-and-water
should have respected his limitations."

The hands of Mr. Allonby had screened his face during the recital, "Oh, the
poor man!" he said, "I cannot bear--" And then, with swift alteration,
he tossed back his head, and laughed. "Are we gentlemen to be denied all
amusement? Sir Gresley acted quite within his privilege, and in terming him
severe you have lied, Mr. Vanringham. I repeat, sir, you have lied!"

Vanringham was on his feet within the instant, but Colonel Denstroude, who
sat beside him, laid a heavy hand upon Vanringham's arm. "'Oons, man," says
the Colonel, "infanticide is a crime."

The actor shrugged his shoulders, "Doubtless you are in the right, Mr.
Allonby," he said; "though, as you were of course going on to remark, you
express yourself somewhat obscurely. Your meaning, I take it, is that I
mayn't criticise the doings, of my guests? I stand corrected, and concede
Sir Gresley acted with commendable moderation, and that Cambridge is,
beyond question, the paramount expositor of morals and manners."

The lad stared about him: with a bewildered face. "La, will he not fight me
now?" he demanded of Colonel Denstroude,--"now, after I have called him a
liar?"

"My dear," the Colonel retorted, "he may possibly deprive you of your
nursing-bottle, or he may even birch you, but he will most assuredly not
fight you, so long as I have any say in the affair. I' cod, we are all
friends here, I hope. D'ye think Mr. Vanringham has so often enacted
Richard III. that to strangle infants is habitual with him? Fight you,
indeed! 'Sdeath and devils!" roared the Colonel, "I will cut the throat of
any man who dares to speak of fighting in this amicable company! Gi'me some
more punch," said the Colonel.

And thereupon in silence Mr. Allonby resumed his seat.

Now, to relieve the somewhat awkward tension, Mr. Vanringham cried: "So
being neighborly again, let us think no more of the recent difference in
opinion. Pay your damned haberdasher what you like, Gresley; or, rather,
let Osric here fix the remuneration. I confess to all and sundry," he
added, with a smile, "that I daren't say another word in the matter.
Frankly, I'm afraid of this youngster. He breathes fire like AEtna."

"He is a lad of spirit," said Mr. Babington-Herle, with an extreme
sobriety. "He's a lad eshtrornary spirit. Let's have game hazard."

"Agreed, good sir," said Vanringham, "and I warn you, you will find me a
daring antagonist. I had to-day an extraordinary--the usual prejudice,
my dear Herle, is, I believe, somewhat inclined to that pronunciation of
the word,--the most extraordinary windfall. I am rich, and I protest King
Croesus himself sha'n't intimidate me to-night. Come!" he cried, and he
drew from his pocket a plump purse and emptied its contents upon the table;
"come, lay your wager!"

"Hell and furies," the Colonel groaned, "there's that tomfool boy again!
Gi'me some more punch."

For Osric Allonby had risen to his feet and had swept the littered gold
and notes toward him. He stood thus, his pink-tipped fingers caressing
the money, while his eyes fixed those of Mr. Vanringham. "And the chief
priests," observed Osric Allonby, "took the silver pieces and said, 'It is
not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood.' Are they, then, fit to be touched by gentlemen, Mr.--ah, but I
forget your given name?"

Vanringham, too, had risen, his face changed. "My sponsors in baptism were
pleased to christen me Francis."

"I entreat your pardon," the boy drawled, "but I have the oddest fancies.
I had thought it was Judas." And so they stood, warily regarding each the
other, very much as strange dogs are wont to do at meeting.

"Boy is drunk," Mr. Babington-Herle explained at large, "and presents to
pitying eye of disinterested spectator most deplorable results incidental
to combination of immaturity and brandy. As to money, now, in Suetonius--"
And he launched upon a hiccough-punctuated anecdote of Vespasian, which to
record here is not convenient. "And moral of it is," Mr. Babington-Herle
perorated, "that all money is always fine thing to have. _Non olet!_
Classical scholar, by Jove! Now let's have game hazard."

Meanwhile those two had stood like statues. Vanringham seemed
half-frightened, half persuaded that this unaccountable boy spoke at
random. Talk, either way, the actor knew, was dangerous....

"I ask your forgiveness, gentlemen," said Francis Vanringham, "but I'm
suddenly ill. If you'll permit me to retire--"

"Not at all," said. Mr. Babington-Herle; "late in evening, as it is. We
will go,--Colonel and old Carne and I will go kill watchman. Persevorate
him, by Jove,--like sieve."

"I thank you," said Mr. Vanringham, withdrawing up the stairway toward his
bedroom. "I thank you. Mr. Allonby," he called, in a firmer tone, "you and
I have had some words together and you were the aggressor. Oho, I think we
may pass it over. I think--"

Below, the four gentlemen were unhooking their swords from the wall. Mr.
Allonby now smiled with cherubic sweetness. "I, too," said he, "think that
all our differences might be arranged by ten minutes' private talk." He
came back, came up the stairs. "You had left your sword," he said to Mr.
Vanringham, "but I fetched it, you see."

Vanringham stared, his lips working oddly. "I am no Siegfried," said he,
"and ordinarily my bedfellow is not cold and--deplorable defect in such
capacity!--somewhat unsympathetic steel."

"But you forget," the boy urged, "that the room is public. And see, the
hilt is set with jewels. Ah, Mr. Vanringham, let us beware how we lead
others into temptation--" The door closed behind them.


VI

Said Mr. Babington-Herle, judicially, "That's eshtrornary boy--most
eshtrornary boy, and precisely unlike brother."

"You must remember," the Colonel pointed out, "that since his marriage
Gerald is a reformed man; he has quite given up punks and hazard, they say,
for beer and cattle-raising."

"Well, but it is a sad thing to have a spirited tall rogue turn pimp to
balls and rams, and Mrs. Lascelles will be inconsolable," Sir Gresley
considered.--"Hey, what's that? Did you not hear a noise up-stairs?"

"I do not think," said the Colonel, "that Mallison finds her so.--Yes,
i'cod! I suppose that tipsy boy has turned over a table."

"But you astound me," Sir Gresley interrupted. "The constant Mallison, of
all persons!"

"Nevertheless, my dear, they assure me that he has made over to her the
heart and lodgings until lately occupied by Mrs. Roydon--Oh, the devil!"
cried Colonel Denstroude, "they are fighting above!"

"Good for Frank!" observed Mr. Babington-Herle. "Hip-hip! Stick young
rascal! Persevorate him, by Jove!"

But the other men had run hastily up the stairway and were battering at
the door of Vanringham's chamber. "Locked!" said the Colonel. "Oh, the
unutterable cur! Open, open, I tell you, Vanringham! By God, I'll have your
blood for this if you have hurt the boy!"

"Break in the door!" said a voice from below. The Colonel paused in h